MONTCLAIR MUNICIPAL CODE 1999 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of Montclair, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 16, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
PREFACE 
The Montclair, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1999, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement 16, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Margaret A. Crawford, city clerk. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 16, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 19-986, passed September 3, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
There is adopted a document entitled "Montclair Municipal Code." 
(Ord. 99-791 § 1)  
1.01.020 - Title—Reference. 
This Code shall be known as the "Montclair Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said Code as the "Montclair Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provisions of this Code or in any proceeding at law or equity. It is sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion of this Code as an addition to, amendment to, correction, or repeal of the "Montclair Municipal Code." References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Montclair Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to those titles, chapter, sections or subsections as they appear in the Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 § 2)  
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the "Montclair Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of Montclair, California, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additional heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 99-791 § 3)  
1.01.040 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section in this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 § 4)  
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 § 5)  
1.01.060 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the Code. 
The last ordinance included in this Code is Ordinance No. 98-785, adopted on January 19, 1999. 
(Ord. 99-791 § 6)  
1.01.070 - Effect of Code on past actions and obligations. 
The adoption of this Code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this Code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this Code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 99-791 § 7)  
1.01.080 - Exclusions. 
Ordinances related to matters of a special or temporary nature only are excluded from this Code and are unaffected by the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 § 8)  
1.01.090 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code or any part thereof. The City Council declares that it would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 99-791 § 9)  
1.01.100 - References to prior code. 
References in City forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former "Montclair Municipal Code" shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 § 10)  
1.01.110 - Posting. 
The city clerk shall certify to the passage of this ordinance and cause the same to be posted pursuant to Government Code Section 36933. 
(Ord. 99-791 § 11)  
Chapter 1.02 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.02.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this Code: 
Administrative decision means any decision made by any official of the City pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code. Such decision may be in the form of a Notice to Correct, Notice to Abate, Notice to Comply, or any other written notice related to an alleged public nuisance or other alleged violation of this Code. Such decision shall include any denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit applied for or held. 
Calendar year means the period from January 1st through December 31st of any given year. 
City means the City of Montclair. 
Council means the City Council of the City of Montclair. 
Enforcement Officer means any employee of the City or agent for the City authorized to enforce the provisions of this Code. 
Fiscal year means the period from July 1st of any given year through June 30th of the following year. 
Hearing Officer means a person designated by the City Manager to determine the validity of a violation or complaint. 
Legally responsible person means a natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, firm, partnership or corporation, its heirs or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid, responsible for the creation, existence, commission and/or maintenance of a violation of this Code or any applicable State statute. 
May . May shall be permissive. 
Month means a calendar month unless otherwise expressed. 
Occupant , when applied to a building or land, means and includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Person means any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, public corporation, political subdivision, city (excepting the City of Montclair), County of San Bernardino, district in the County of San Bernardino, the State of California, or the United States of America, or any department or agency of any thereof, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. 
Personal property means money, goods, chattels, things in action, and evidences of debt. 
Property means both real and personal property. 
Property owner means the person(s) or entity(ies) listed on the San Bernardino County Current Equalized Assessment Roll as the owner(s) of the subject property. 
Quarterly , when used to designate a period of time, means the first three calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three months. 
Real property means lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall . Shall means something is mandatory. 
State means the State of California. 
Street means a street within the corporate limits of the City. 
(Ord. 02-815 § 1; Ord. 00-800 § 2; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 1-6.02)  
Chapter 1.04 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Applicability. 
This chapter provides for administrative citations that are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the City to address any violation of this Code. 
(Prior code § 1-6.01)  
1.04.020 - Administrative citation. 
A.  Whenever an Enforcement Officer charged with the enforcement of any provision of this Code determines that a violation of that provision has occurred, the Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to any person responsible for causing, creating, maintaining, suffering, or permitting the violation (whether as an owner or tenant, or agent, manager, or representative of the owner or tenant, or otherwise). 
B.  In the event the Enforcement Officer determines that a violation constitutes a continuing violation that pertains to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues which do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the person responsible for such continuing violation shall be given a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 calendar days, to correct or otherwise remedy the violation prior to the imposition of administrative fines or penalties. 
C.  Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: 
1.  The date of the violation(s); 
2.  The name and address of the responsible person; 
3.  The address or a definite description of the location where the violation(s) occurred; 
4.  The section(s) of this Code or any other applicable State statute(s) violated and a brief description of the violation(s); 
5.  A description of the action(s) required to correct the violation(s), and, if applicable, any deadlines or time limitations for commencing and completing such actions; 
6.  The amount of the fine for each of the code violation(s); 
7.  A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine shall be paid; 
8.  An order prohibiting the continuation or the repeated occurrence of the Code violation(s) described in the administrative citation; 
9.  A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place from which a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation may be obtained; 
10.  A statement that the failure to timely tender the fine(s) and other fees, costs, and/or charges imposed pursuant to this chapter may result in the recordation of a lien and/or the delay in issuance or renewal of any City license and/or permit; 
11.  The name and signature of the citing Enforcement Officer. 
(Prior code § 1-6.03) 
(Ord. No. 09-910, § 1, 11-16-09)  
1.04.030 - Imposition of administrative fine, late fees, interest charges, and reinspection fees. 
A.  The amount of the fine for Code violations imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the schedule of fines established by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  The schedule of fines shall specify any increased fines for repeat violations of the same code provision by the same responsible person within a 36-month period of time, or, for those violations that would otherwise have constituted infractions, within a 12-month period of time. 
C.  The schedule of fines shall specify the amount of any late payment charges imposed for the payment of fines after its due date. 
D.  In addition to any fine imposed pursuant to this chapter, a reinspection fee shall be assessed against any responsible person in an amount established by resolution of the City Council if the responsible person does not timely and completely correct or abate a violation (with all requisite approvals, permits, licenses, and/or inspections) after having received notification from the City to correct or abate same. 
(Prior code § 1-6.04) 
(Ord. No. 09-910, § 2, 11-16-09)  
1.04.040 - Payment of the fine. 
A.  The fine shall be paid to the City within 30 calendar days from the date of the administrative citation. 
B.  Any administrative citation fine paid pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be refunded in accordance with Section 1.04.090(D), if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation or that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation. 
C.  Payment of the fine under this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of the Code violation that is the subject of the administrative citation. 
D.  The City shall use all available legal means to collect past due fines and other related costs. 
(Prior code § 1-6.05)  
1.04.050 - Hearing request. 
A.  Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest its validity by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the City within 15 calendar days from the date of the administrative citation, together with an advance deposit of the fine or notice that an advance deposit hardship waiver has been filed in accordance with Section 1.04.060. 
B.  A request for hearing form or an advance deposit hardship waiver form may be obtained from the Code Enforcement Division of the Montclair Fire Department during normal City business hours. 
C.  The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least 10 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
D.  If the Enforcement Officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the Hearing Officer for consideration at the hearing, a copy of this report shall also be served on the person requesting the hearing at least five calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Prior code § 1-6.06)  
1.04.060 - Advance deposit hardship waiver. 
A.  Any person who intends to request a hearing, and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine as required in Section 1.04.050(A) may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver. 
B.  The request shall be filed with the City Manager on an advance deposit hardship waiver form within 10 calendar days of the date of the administrative citation. 
C.  The requirement of depositing the full amount of the fine as described in Section 1.04.050(A) shall be stayed unless or until the City Manager or his or her designee makes a determination not to issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. 
D.  The City Manager or his/her assigned designee may waive the requirement of the advance deposit set forth in Section 1.04.050(A) and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the cited person submits to the City Manager or his or her designee a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the City Manager, or assigned designee, the person's actual financial inability to deposit with the City the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing. 
E.  If the City Manager, or his/her assigned designee, determines not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the person shall remit the deposit to the City within 10 calendar days of the date of that decision or 30 calendar days from the date of the administrative citation, whichever is later. Determination of the City Manager shall be final. 
(Prior code § 1-6.07)  
1.04.070 - Designation of Hearing Officer. 
The City Manager shall designate the Hearing Officer for the administrative citation hearing. 
(Prior code § 1-6.08)  
1.04.080 - Hearing procedure. 
A.  No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a Hearing Officer shall be held unless the fine has been deposited in advance in accordance with Section 1.04.050, or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued in accordance with Section 1.04.060. 
B.  A hearing before the Hearing Officer shall be set for a date that is not less than 15 calendar days and no more than 60 calendar days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  At the hearing, the person contesting the validity of the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence concerning the administrative citation. 
D.  The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine, and a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies. 
E.  The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the Enforcement Officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
F.  The Hearing Officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the Enforcement Officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. 
(Prior code § 1-6.09)  
1.04.090 - Decision of Hearing Officer. 
A.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or cancel the administrative citation, and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final. 
B.  If the Hearing Officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the City shall be retained by the City. 
C.  If the Hearing Officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the Hearing Officer shall set forth in the decision a payment schedule for the fine. 
D.  If the Hearing Officer determines that the administrative citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the City, then the City shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine. 
E.  The recipient of the administrative citation shall be provided with a copy of the Hearing Officer's written decision. 
(Prior code § 1-6.10)  
1.04.100 - Late payment charges. 
Any person who fails to pay the City any fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter on or before the date that the fine is due shall be liable for the payment of any applicable late payment charges set forth in the schedule of fines. 
(Prior code § 1-6.11)  
1.04.110 - Recovery of Code abatement costs. 
The administrative citation process described in this chapter does not preclude the City from recovering any Code violation abatement costs incurred by the City in performing its Code enforcement efforts pursuant to Section 10.44.110 of this Code. 
(Prior code § 1-6.12)  
1.04.120 - Recovery of delinquent administrative fines, fees, and costs. 
A.  The City may collect any past due administrative fine or other associated fee or cost by use of all available legal means. Unpaid administrative fines and other charges, fees, or costs imposed in accordance with this chapter shall constitute a debt that may be collected in any manner allowed by law, including, but not limited to the recordation of a lien (secured or unsecured) with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office and/or with the California Franchise Tax Board "Inter-Agency Offset Program" (pursuant to Section 12419.10 of the California Government Code). The City may also recover its collection costs pursuant to Section 1.12.030 of this Code. 
1.  Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, a Citee is not entitled to a hearing before the City Manager, Planning Commission, City Council, or other hearing officer prior to the recordation of a lien with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office and/or with the California Franchise Tax Board "Inter-Agency Offset Program" for any delinquent administrative fine that has been deemed final. This section does not affect a Citee's ability to contest an administrative citation in accordance with Section 1.04.050 of this Code or to seek judicial review of an administrative citation in accordance with Section 1.04.130 of this Code. 
B.  The City may also withhold issuance or renewal of any license, permit, or other entitlement for any property or business whenever an administrative penalty resulting from a Code violation at said property or business remains unpaid. 
C.  The City shall be entitled to recover its attorney fees and costs arising from an action to collect an administrative fine and other charges, fees, or costs imposed in accordance with this chapter if it is the prevailing party and provided it made the election to seek attorney fees at the commencement of the action. A Citee shall be entitled to recover his or her attorney fees if the City made the election to seek attorney fees at the outset of the action and the Citee prevails thereon. 
(Prior code § 1-6.13) 
(Ord. No. 09-910, § 3, 11-16-09)  
1.04.130 - Right to judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a Hearing Officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for review with the Municipal Court in San Bernardino County in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in Section 53069.4 of the California Administrative Code. 
(Prior code § 1-6.14)  
1.04.140 - Notices. 
A.  The administrative citation and all notices required to be given by this chapter shall be served on any person responsible for the violation in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.08.090 of this Code. 
B.  Failure to receive any notice specified in this chapter does not affect the validity of the proceedings conducted hereunder. 
(Prior code § 1-6.15) 
(Ord. No. 09-910, § 4, 11-16-09)  
Chapter 1.08 - HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - Request for hearing before the City Manager or his/her designee. 
Whenever it is specified in this Code that a matter may be heard by the City Manager related to any administrative decision made by any official of the City pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code, such request for hearing shall be made and acted upon in the following manner: 
A.  All requests for hearing before the City Manager shall be made in writing to the City Manager within 15 days of the mailing of the notification of the matter on which the hearing is requested. 
B.  Such requests shall include the following information: 
1.  A brief statement setting forth the legal interest(s) of the appellant(s) in the building or the land involved in the notice and/or order of the administrative decision; 
2.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant; 
3.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be set aside; 
4.  The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses; 
5.  The verification, by declaration under penalty of perjury, of each appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal. 
C.  Notice of Hearing. The City Manager shall serve a Notice of Hearing pursuant to Section 1.08.040C of this chapter of the date and time of such hearing to the person(s) requesting same. Such Notice of Hearing shall be mailed at least 10 days prior to such hearing. 
D.  Hearing by City Manager. At the time stated in the Notice of Hearing, the City Manager shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections, or protests, and shall receive testimony from owners, witnesses, City personnel and other interested persons relative to such administrative decision or other alleged violation of this Code. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
E.  Decision of City Manager. After the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager shall, based upon such hearing, determine whether or not the administrative decision on which the appeal was requested is found to be upheld, amended, or overturned. The City Manager shall then place his/her findings in writing and mail such findings, pursuant to Section 1.08.040C of this chapter within 10 days of the hearing to the person(s) requesting such hearing. Such written findings shall be made as follows: 
1.  If the administrative decision which was the subject of the hearing is upheld or amended, the written findings shall constitute a City Manager's Order to Comply and shall contain the following information: 
a.  A detailed description of the conditions or activities which render a building, structure, premises or portion thereof a public nuisance or otherwise cause a violation of this Code to occur; and 
b.  A concise statement of proposed methods of abatement and/or compliance; and 
c.  A timeline during which such abatement must be made and/or such compliance must be attained; and 
d.  Information rerated to requesting additional review of the matter by the Planning Commission and/or the City Council. 
2.  If the administrative decision on which the hearing was requested is overturned, the appellant shall be so notified pursuant to this subsection and the matter shall be concluded. 
F.  Any abatement proceedings by the City shall be held in abeyance during this hearing process. 
G.  Within 10 days from the date of the mailing of the City Manager's Order to Comply, the person(s) who requested the hearing before the City Manager may appeal the matter to the Planning Commission pursuant to Section 1.08.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 00-800 § 3 (part))  
1.08.020 - Appeal to the Planning Commission. 
Whenever it is specified in this Code that a matter may be appealed to the Planning Commission, the following procedure shall be followed: 
A.  All requests for appeals before the Planning Commission shall be made in writing to the City Clerk within 15 days of the mailing of the City Manager's Notice to Comply and shall contain the following information: 
1.  A brief statement setting forth the legal interest(s) of the appellant(s) in the building or the land involved in the City Manager's Notice to Comply; 
2.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant; 
3.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be set aside; 
4.  The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses; 
5.  The verification, by declaration under penalty of perjury, of each appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal. 
B.  Notice of Hearing. The City Manager shall serve the Notice of Hearing pursuant to Section 1.08.040C of this chapter of the date and time such matter shall be heard by the Planning Commission. Such notice shall be mailed at least 10 days prior to such hearing. 
C.  Persons to be Notified. The Notice of Hearing shall be sent to the appellant(s) named in the request for hearing of appeal and any other persons required by law to receive such notification. 
D.  At the time and place stated in the Notice of Hearing, the Planning Commission shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections, or protests, and shall receive testimony from owners, witnesses, City personnel, and other interested persons relative to such administrative decision or other alleged violation(s) of this chapter. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
E.  Decision of the Planning Commission. After the conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall, based upon such hearing, determine whether or not the administrative decision on which the appeal was requested is found to be upheld, amended, or overturned. The Planning Commission shall then place its findings in writing and mail such findings pursuant to Section 1.08.040C of this chapter within 10 days of the hearing to the appellant(s). Such written findings shall be made as follows: 
1.  If the administrative decision on which the appeal was requested is upheld or amended, the written findings shall constitute a Planning Commission Order to Comply and shall include the following information: 
a.  A detailed description of the conditions or activities which render a building, structure, premises or portion thereof a public nuisance or otherwise cause a violation of this Code to occur; and 
b.  A concise statement of proposed methods of abatement and/or compliance; and 
c.  A timeline during which such abatement must be made and/or such compliance must be attained; and 
d.  If called for in the cited Code provision, notification that if the nuisance/violation is not abated as called for in subsection (E)(2)(c) of this section, the City shall commence abatement pursuant to Section 10.44.100 of this Code without further notice. 
2.  If the administrative decision on which the appeal was requested is overturned by the Planning Commission, the appellant shall be so notified pursuant to this subsection and the matter shall be concluded. 
F.  Abatement proceedings by the City shall be held in abeyance during this hearing process. 
G.  Within 10 days from the date of the mailing of the Planning Commission Order to Comply, the appellant(s) may appeal the matter to the City Council pursuant to Section 1.08.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 00-800 § 3 (part))  
1.08.030 - Appeal to the City Council. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, administrative decisions may be appealed to the City Council through the following procedure: 
A.  All requests for such appeals shall be made in writing to the City Clerk within 15 days of the mailing of the notification of the matter on which the hearing is requested and shall contain the following information: 
1.  A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and/or order; 
2.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant(s); 
3.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be set aside; 
4.  The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses; 
5.  The verification, by declaration under penalty of perjury, of each appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal. 
B.  Notice of Hearing. The City Clerk shall serve the Notice of Hearing pursuant to Section 1.08.040C of this chapter of the date and time such matter shall be heard by the City Council. Such notice shall be mailed at least 10 days prior to such hearing. 
C.  Persons to be Notified. The Notice of Hearing shall be sent to the appellant(s) named in the request for hearing of appeal and any other persons required by law to receive such notification. 
D.  At the time and place stated in the Notice of Hearing, the City Council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections, or protests, and shall receive testimony from owners, witnesses, City personnel, and other interested persons relative to such administrative decision or other alleged violation of this chapter. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
E.  Decision of the City Council. After the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall, based upon such hearing, determine whether or not the administrative decision on which the appeal was requested is found to be upheld, amended, or overturned. The City Council shall then place its findings in writing and mail such findings pursuant to Section 1.08.040C of this chapter within 10 days of the hearing to the appellant(s). Such written findings shall be made as follows: 
1.  If the administrative decision on which the appeal was requested is upheld or amended, the written findings shall constitute a City Council Notice to Comply and shall contain the following information: 
a.  A detailed description of the conditions or activities which render a building, structure, premises or portion thereof a public nuisance or otherwise cause a violation of this Code to occur; and 
b.  A concise statement of proposed methods of abatement and/or compliance; and 
c.  A timeline during which such abatement must be made and/or such compliance must be attained; and 
d.  Notification that if the nuisance/violation is not abated as called for in subsection (E)(2)(c) of this section, the City shall commence abatement pursuant to Section 10.44.100 of this chapter without further notice. 
2.  If the administrative decision on which the appeal was requested is overturned, the appellant shall be so notified pursuant to this subsection and the matter shall be concluded. 
F.  Any abatement proceedings by the City shall be held in abeyance during this hearing process. 
G.  The City Council may, on its own motion, appeal any administrative decision or any decision of the Planning Commission. An oral motion to appeal made by the City Council in an open City Council meeting shall be considered a written notice for this chapter. Matters on appeal shall not become effective until finally decided by the City Council. 
H.  The City Council's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 00-800 § 3 (part))  
1.08.040 - Forms of proper services of notice. 
Notice as called for in this Code may be made as follows: 
A.  Personally Served. Notice shall be considered served when served personally upon the occupant, owner, or agent of subject premises; and/or 
B.  Posting. Notice may be posted on property; and/or 
C.  Served by Regular Mail. Notice shall be considered served when it is placed, postage prepaid, in the U.S. Mail; and/or 
D.  Served by Certified Mail. Notice shall be considered served when it is placed, postage prepaid certified U.S. Mail. 
The failure of any person to receive notice pursuant to this section shall not affect the validity of any proceeding so noticed. 
(Ord. 00-800 § 3 (part))  
1.08.050 - Persons to be served. 
Persons to be served notice as called for in this Code shall include but not be limited to the following: 
A.  The owner or agent of record of the premises about which notice is required. "Owner" as used in this section also means any person, mortgagee or beneficiary having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in said premises when known by the City to have an ownership or leasehold interest in the premises, as disclosed by a current title search from any accredited title company. 
B.  The person occupying, in possession of or in real or apparent charge and control of the premises about which notice is required. 
(Ord. 00-800 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 1.12 - GENERAL PENALTIES/COLLECTION ACTIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.12.010 - Penalties. 
A.  Violations. No person, firm, corporation, or other responsible entity shall violate any provision, restriction, or requirement of this Code or any Code adopted by reference herein, any ordinance of the City, any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, or any condition of any permit issued pursuant to this Code. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or other responsible entity who violates any provision, restriction, or requirement of this Code or any Code adopted by reference herein; any ordinance of the City; any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto; or any condition of any permit issued pursuant to this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless: 
1.  Such requirement is classified as an infraction by the California Vehicle Code or any Code or law of the State, this Code, or any ordinance of the City. 
2.  The City Attorney or City Prosecutor files a complaint charging the offense as an infraction. 
3.  The City Attorney or City Prosecutor reduces the offense to an infraction and the defendant does not object to having the case proceed as an infraction. 
4.  A public officer or employee designated in or pursuant to subsection E of this section issues a citation charging the offense as an infraction, provided that such reduction of the offense to a lesser penalty is authorized by policy established by the City Council, standing committee thereof, or City Manager pursuant to subsection F of this section. 
B.  Penalties. 
1.  Misdemeanor. Any person, firm, corporation, or responsible entity convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Code by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed One Thousand (1,000) Dollars, or by imprisonment in the City or County Jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
2.  Infraction. Any person, firm, corporation, or responsible entity convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this Code by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be punishable by the following: (a) a fine not exceeding One Hundred (100) Dollars for a first violation; (b) a fine not exceeding Two Hundred (200) Dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within any consecutive 12-month period; or (c) a fine not exceeding Five Hundred (500) Dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within any consecutive 12-month period. 
3.  Administrative Citation. Any person, firm, corporation, or other responsible entity that violates any provision, restriction, or requirement of this Code or any Code adopted by reference herein; any ordinance of the City; any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto; or any condition of any permit issued pursuant to this Code is also subject to Chapter 1.04 ("Administrative Citations") of this Code. 
4.  Attorney Fees. In addition to any civil and criminal penalties as provided by the provisions of this section or otherwise, the City may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses of litigation and/or prosecution incurred in the enforcement of the provisions of this Code against a person, business, or entity found to have violated any of the provisions of this Code. 
C.  Continuing Violations. It shall constitute a new and separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Code or any Code adopted by reference herein, any ordinance of the City, any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, or any condition of any permit issued pursuant to this Code is committed, continued, maintained, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. 
D.  Public Nuisance. In addition to the penalties provided by this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision, restriction, or requirement of this Code or any Code adopted by reference herein; any ordinance of the City; any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto; or any condition of any permit issued pursuant to this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the City by any and all means (civil, administrative, and/or equitable) as provided by law or in equity. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
E.  Enforcement. The City Council authorizes the City Manager and City employees as may be designated by the City Manager to be enforcement officers. These enforcement officers shall have the duty and authority to enforce the provisions of this Code and any Code adopted by reference herein, any ordinance of the City, any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, and any condition of any permit issued pursuant to this Code. 
F.  Penalty Flexibility Policy. The City Council, at its discretion, may order, direct, declare, or establish a policy or set of policies or direct the City Manager to do the same that determine, allow, or authorize enforcement flexibility in the application of penalty provisions for violations of the provisions of this Code and any Code adopted by reference herein and any ordinance of the City, any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, and any condition of any permit issued pursuant to this Code. The administration of such policy or set of policies shall be overseen and executed by the City Manager or designee and that each such deviation from the penalty prescribed in this Code and any Code adopted by reference herein, and any ordinance of the City, any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, and any condition of any permit issued pursuant to this Code as provided for in such policy or set of policies shall not proceed without direction or authorization from the City Manager or designee. 
(Ord. 06-889 § 2) 
(Ord. No. 19-985, § V, 6-17-19)  
1.12.020 - Prohibited acts. 
Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 1-2.02)  
1.12.030 - Fees, charges and taxes made a civil debt. 
The amount of any fee, service charge, or utility charge, including, but not limited to, sewer- and refuse-related charges, license fees, or taxes of any nature whatsoever imposed by any provisions of this Code shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the City. 
(Ord. 02-815 § 2: Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 1-2.05)  
1.12.040 - Responsibility for payment of civil debts. 
The property owner of record is responsible for payment of all civil debts as defined in Section 1.12.030 of this Code. This is not intended to prevent an arrangement or the continuance of an existing arrangement, under which payments of such fees, charges, or taxes are made by a tenant or any agent on behalf of the owner. However, any such arrangement will not affect the property owners obligation to the City for such civil debts. 
(Ord. 02-815 § 3 (part))  
1.12.050 - Late fees. 
The City determines that a late fee in the amount of 10 percent shall be added to those civil debts remaining unpaid on the day after the stated due date. 
(Ord. 02-815 § 3 (part))  
1.12.060 - Delinquent Civil Debts defined. 
A civil debt, as described in Section 1.12.030 of this Code shall be determined to be delinquent and subject to collection procedures as defined in Section 1.12.090 of this Code if such civil debt remains unpaid for 90 days past the date on which it was billed. Such a civil debt, together with any late charges and/or collection costs as described herein shall constitute a Delinquent Civil Debt. 
(Ord. 02-815 § 3 (part))  
1.12.070 - Costs related to placement of accounts with collection agency. 
The City's costs related to placement of an account with a collection agency shall be added to the amount of the Delinquent Civil Debt being referred for collection. This fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 02-815 § 3 (part))  
1.12.080 - Costs related to placement of liens and/or assessments on property to satisfy Delinquent Civil Debts. 
The City's costs related to placement of liens and/or assessments on property to satisfy delinquent civil debts shall be added to the amount of the Delinquent Civil Debt on such property. This fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 02-815 § 3 (part))  
1.12.090 - Collection of Delinquent Civil Debts. 
Delinquent Civil Debts may be collected by one or more of the following methods: 
A.  Collection by placement of lien on real property. In addition to and not withstanding any other means of collection, any Delinquent Civil Debt may result in a lien being placed on the property on which the delinquency has been charged. Such lien shall be placed as follows: 
1.  The City shall cause a Report of Delinquent Civil Debt to be attached to real property to be prepared periodically. Such Report shall be in the format prescribed by the San Bernardino County Auditor/Controller-Recorder. The City shall fix a time, date and place for hearing by the City Council of the Report and any objections or protests thereto. 
2.  The City shall, pursuant to Montclair Municipal Code Section 1.08.040(C), mail notice of the hearing to the property owners, as listed on the current San Bernardino County Equalized Assessment Roll, of the affected properties. Such notice shall be sent not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing and shall inform the property owners of the date, time, and location of the hearing and the amount of their Delinquent Civil Debt. Such notice shall inform the property owners that, upon approval by the City Council, the Delinquent Civil Debt(s) that is (are) the subject of such hearing shall be attached as a lien to their real property. 
3.  At the hearing, the City Council shall hear any objections or protests from the property owners who are subject to a lien being placed on their property for a Delinquent Civil Debt. The City Council may make such revisions or corrections to the Report as it deems just, after which the Report shall be confirmed by City Council resolution and shall constitute authority for placement of the lien(s). 
4.  The City Clerk shall certify that the Report has been adopted by the City Council in its final form and file the Report with the County Auditor and the County Recorder. 
B.  Placement of Special Assessment on the Tax Rolls. In addition to and not withstanding any other means of collection, any Delinquent Civil Debt as described herein may be placed as a Special Assessment to the Tax Rolls as follows: 
1.  The City shall prepare a Report of Delinquent Civil Debt to be placed on Tax Rolls once each year. The Report shall be in the format prescribed by the San Bernardino County Auditor/Controller-Recorder. The City shall fix a time, date and place for hearing by the City Council of the Report and any objections or protests thereto. 
2.  The City shall, pursuant to Montclair Municipal Code Section 1.08.040(C), mail notice of the hearing to the property owners, as listed on the current San Bernardino County Equalized Assessment Roll, of the affected properties. Such notice shall be sent not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing and shall inform the property owners of the date, time, and location of the hearing and the amount of their Delinquent Civil Debt. Such notice shall inform the property owners that, upon approval by the City Council, the Delinquent Civil Debt will result in a special assessment on their property taxes in the following year. 
3.  At the hearing, the City Council shall hear any objections or protests from the property owners who are subject to having this special assessment added to their property taxes. The City Council may make such revisions or corrections to the Report as it deems just, after which the Report shall be confirmed by City Council resolution and shall constitute authority for placement of the special assessments. 
4.  The City Clerk shall, on or before August 10 of each year, file with the County Auditor/Controller-Recorder a copy of the Report with a statement endorsed thereon that the Report has been adopted by the City Council. The Auditor/Controller-Recorder shall then enter the amounts of the Delinquent Civil Debts against the respective lots or parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll. 
C.  Placement of a Delinquent Civil Debt with a Collection Agency. In addition to and not withstanding any other means of collection of a Delinquent Civil Debt, such debt may be submitted to a collection agency that is under contract with the City for such collection service. 
D.  Judicial Action. An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of a Delinquent Civil Debt. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be cumulative, and the use of an action to collect such Delinquent Civil Debt by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this Code or by law. 
(Ord. 02-815 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 1.16 - CLAIMS 
Section: 
 
1.16.010 - Claims. 
A.  Authority. This chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 935 of the California Government Code. 
B.  Claims Presentation Procedures. AH claims and demands against the City for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Government Tort Claims Act, California Government Code Section 900 et seq. or other state law (hereinafter "claims") shall be presented within the timeframe and in the manner prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof), as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended from time to time, and as further provided in this chapter. 
C.  Form of Claim. All claims shall be made in writing and filed with the City Clerk or designee. All claims shall be verified by the claimant or by his/her guardian, conservator, executor, or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910 et seq. The City may provide a claim form pursuant to Government Code Section 910.4 specifying the information to be contained in any claim against the City. 
D.  Audit. All claims shall be audited by the City Clerk or designee for compliance with this chapter and submitted as required for approval or rejection as provided for in California Government Code Section 37202. 
E.  Claim Prerequisite to Suit. In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b), 945.4, and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this chapter and acted upon by the City prior to the filing of any action on such claims; and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of this chapter. 
F.  Suit. Any legal action brought against the City upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Government Code Sections 940—949. Any action brought against any employee of the city shall conform to the requirements of California Government Code Sections 950—951. 
(Ord. No. 10-912, § 1, 2-16-10)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 2.02 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
2.02.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this title: 
Legislative body shall mean the City Council, Redevelopment Agency Board, Montclair Housing Corporation Board, Planning Commission, Community Action Committee, or any other legislative body that is created by the Montclair City Council and is subject to The Brown Act. 
Meeting site shall mean any location in which a legislative body as defined herein is meeting, including, but not limited to, the City Council Chambers. 
Presiding Officer shall mean, in the case of the City Council, the Mayor, or in the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem, or in the absence of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem, a member designated by the City Council. In the case of other legislative bodies defined herein, the presiding officer shall mean the Chairperson, or in the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson, or in the absence of both the Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson, a member designated by the legislative body. 
(Ord. 03-830 § 1)  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY HALL 
Sections: 
 
2.04.010 - Location. 
That certain building situated at 5111 Benito Street in the City of Montclair, County of San Bernardino, State of California, is designated as the City Hall of the City of Montclair. 
(Prior code § 2-3.01)  
2.04.020 - Office hours. 
The offices of the City Hall shall be open to the public for business from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 2-3.02)  
2.04.030 - Official time standard. 
Whenever hours are named in this Code, they shall mean Pacific Standard Time or Pacific Daylight Saving Time as may be in current use. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 4-4.104)  
2.04.040 - Holidays. 
The administrative offices of the City shall be closed on those holidays established by action of the City Council. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 2-3.03)  
Chapter 2.08 - CITY MANAGER 
Sections: 
 
2.08.010 - Office created. 
The office of City Manager is established and created. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council wholly on the basis of his/her administrative and executive abilities and qualifications and shall hold office at the direction of the City Council. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-1.01)  
2.08.020 - Residence. 
Residence in the City at the time of appointment of a City Manager shall not be required as a condition of such the appointment, but within one year thereafter the City Manager shall become a resident of the City, or the City Council shall declare the office of City Manager to be vacant. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-1.02)  
2.08.030 - Eligibility. 
No person elected as a Council Member of the City shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one year has elapsed after such Council Member shall have ceased to be a Member of the Council. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-1.03)  
2.08.040 - Acting City Manager. 
The City Manager shall appoint one of the other officers or department heads of the City to serve as Acting City Manager during any temporary absence or disability of the City Manager. In the event of absence or disability of the City Manager and his/her failure to so appoint an Acting City Manager, the City Council may designate a qualified City employee to perform the duties of the City Manager during the period of absence or disability of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-1.04)  
2.08.050 - Compensation. 
The City Manager shall receive such compensation as is called for in an employment agreement between the City Council and the City Manager or by other action of the City Council. Such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City as the City Council shall designate. 
The City Manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred and paid by him/her in the performance of his/her duties, including those expenses incurred and paid by him/her when traveling on business pertaining to the City. Reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented for approval and has been so approved. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-1.05)  
2.08.060 - Powers and duties. 
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the City under the direction and control of the City Council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The City Manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the business of the City which is under his/her control. In addition to the general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, the City Manager shall have the following specific powers and duties: 
A.  Law Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to enforce the provisions of this Code and all laws and ordinances of the City and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits, licenses, and privileges granted by the City Council are faithfully observed. 
B.  Authority Over Employees. It shall be the duty of the City Manager and he/she shall have the authority, to control, order, and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the City under his/her jurisdiction through their department heads. 
C.  Appointments. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City Manager to appoint, remove, promote and demote any officers and employees of the City, except the City Attorney, with the consent of the City Council. 
D.  Reorganization Recommendations. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City Manager to recommend to the City Council such reorganization of offices, positions, departments or units under his/her direction as may be indicated in the interests of the efficient, effective, and economical conduct of the City's business. 
E.  Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to recommend to the City Council adoption of such measures and ordinances as he/she deems necessary. 
F.  Meeting Attendance. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to attend all meetings of the City Council unless excused therefrom, except when his/her removal is under consideration. 
The City Manager or his/her designee shall attend any and all meetings of the commission, boards and committees created by the City Council upon his/her own volition or upon direction of the City Council. At such meetings which the City Manager attends, he/she shall be heard by such commissions, boards and committees as to all matter s upon which he/she wishes to address the members thereof. He/she shall inform the members as to the status of matters being considered by the City Council, and he/she shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards and committees appointed by the City Council. 
G.  Financial Records. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to keep the City Council fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the City. 
H.  Budget. The City Manager shall supervise development and submission of proposed annual budgets for consideration and adoption of the City Council. The City Manager shall supervise administration of the annual budget. 
I.  Purchasing. The City Manager shall supervise development and submission of a purchasing manual for consideration and adoption by action of the City Council. The City Manager shall supervise administration of the purchasing manual. 
1.  It is the duty and responsibility of the City Manager to oversee and approve expenditures for all services, supplies, and capital outlay in compliance with appropriate provisions of the City's Purchasing Manual; provided, however, that revenues necessary for the purchase of all services, supplies, and capital outlay are appropriated by action of the City Council. 
2.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the purchase of services, supplies, or capital outlay requiring a contract, sealed bid, or expenditure of revenues not contained in the annual budget shall be approved by action of the City Council. No such expenditure requests shall be submitted for consideration by the City Council except upon approval of the City Manager. 
3.  The selection process for architectural and engineering consulting services will vary depending upon the anticipated complexity of the project and fee. Projects shall be classified as minor, intermediate, or major. The City shall develop and maintain an Architectural and Engineering Consultant Register listing consultants, their areas of expertise, and locations. 
a.  Minor Projects. Minor projects are defined as projects where the design fee will not be expected to exceed Fifteen Thousand (15,000) Dollars. A one-step consultant selection process shall be used. Based on the services required staff will select a consultant from the Architectural and Engineering Consultant Register with whom to negotiate a scope of services and fee. Upon successfully negotiating a fee for the required services, a professional services contract approved by the City Attorney shall be prepared. For a minor project the authority to sign on behalf of the City is delegated to the City Manager. 
b.  Intermediate Projects. Intermediate projects are defined as projects where the design fee is expected to be between Fifteen Thousand (15,000) Dollars and Seventy-five Thousand (75,000) Dollars. Unless otherwise authorized by the City Council, a two-step consultant selection process shall be used. Requests for proposals (RFPs) shall be sent to a minimum of three firms selected from the Architectural and Engineering Consultant Register professing expertise for the services required. After reviewing the submitted proposals, the City department requiring the services shall determine the best-qualified consultant and negotiate the required fee. If a fee cannot be successfully negotiated, the department will suspend negotiations with that firm and begin negotiations with the next best qualified firm, and so on, until a fee can be successfully negotiated. After negotiating the fee, the department shall prepare a professional services contract in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, and submit it to the City Council with a recommendation for approval and signature in accordance with Section VI E of the Purchasing Manual. 
c.  Major Projects. Major projects are defined as projects where the design fee exceeds Seventy-five Thousand (75,000) Dollars. Unless otherwise authorized by the City Council, a three-step consultant selection process shall be used. Requests for qualifications and letters of interest (RFQs/LOIs) shall be sent to all consultants listed in the Architectural and Engineering Consultant Register professing expertise for the services required. After reviewing responses to the RFQs/LOIs, a minimum of three and no more than six consultants shall be selected to receive RFPs. After reviewing the submitted proposals, the City department requiring the services shall determine the best-qualified consultant and negotiate the required fee. If a fee cannot be successfully negotiated, the department will suspend negotiations with that firm and begin negotiations with the next best qualified firm, and so on, until a fee can be successfully negotiated. After negotiating the fee, the department shall prepare a professional services contract in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, and submit it to the City Council with a recommendation for approval and signature in accordance with Section VI E of the Purchasing Manual. 
4.  The City Manager shall direct the recurring submission of detailed expenditure reports to the City Council for review. 
J.  Travel, Training and Meetings. The City Manager shall supervise development and submission of a proposed Travel Policy for consideration and approval by action of the City Council or standing committee of the City Council designated to consider and approve personnel actions. The City Manager shall supervise administration of the Travel Policy. 
1.  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City Manager to approve all expenditures related to travel, training, conferences, seminars and meetings. The City Manager shall require any employee or agent traveling and/or attending training classes, conferences, seminars and meetings on behalf of the City to submit legitimate and verifiable receipts for expenditures related to such travel, conferences, seminars and meetings. 
2.  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City Manager to preapprove all travel by any employee or agent of the City when such travel is outside the State of California. 
K.  Investigations. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to investigate all complaints on matters related to administration of the City government. Such investigations may relate to any department or division of the City. 
L.  Public Utilities: Franchises. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to investigate all complaints in regard to the service provided by public utilities in the City and to see that the terms of all such franchises, permits or privileges granted by the City are met. 
M.  Public Buildings. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and other public property under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council. 
N.  Service in Other Capacities. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City Manager to serve in any appointed office or as the head of any department within the City government to which he or she may be qualified when appointed thereto by the City Council and to hold and perform the duties thereof at the direction of the City Council. 
O.  Additional Duties. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him/her by ordinance, resolution, or other action of the City Council. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the City Manager may delegate responsibility for performance of any duty to a designated subordinate. 
(Ord. 00-797 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-1.06)  
2.08.070 - Hours of employment. 
The City Manager shall maintain regular office hours consistent with the operating hours of City Hall as established by action of the City Council. During regular office hours, the City Manager shall devote this time to the interests of the City. In addition to regular office hours, the City Manager shall be required, as necessary, to devote time to represent the city at meetings and activities requiring representation of the City Manager. Except as otherwise provided for by action of the City Council, the City Manager shall not be employed or work in any other capacity than interferes with the devotion of time, as specified in this section, to the duties and office of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-1.07)  
2.08.080 - Relations with the Council. 
The City Council and its Members shall deal with the administrative services of the City only through the City Manager, except for the purpose of inquiry; and neither shall Council Members give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager. The City Manager shall take his/her orders and instructions from the Council Members only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the City Council. Council Members shall not give any orders or instructions to the City Manager outside a duly held meeting of the City Council. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent any Council Member from discussing matters of the City with the City Manager. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-1.08)  
2.08.090 - Removal from office. 
A.  City Manager Employment Agreement. The removal of the City Manager form office shall be in compliance with the terms of the City Manager's Employment Agreement. Except as otherwise provided in the City Manager Employment Agreement, removal of the City Manager from office shall be subject to the provisions of Section 2.08.100 of this chapter. 
B.  No City Manager Employment Agreement. In the event that a City Manager Employment Agreement does not exist, or such agreement or its termination clauses are otherwise held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, removal of the City Manager from office shall be only upon a majority vote of the entire City Council during a regular City Council meeting, subject to the provisions of Section 2.08.100 of this chapter. In the event of such intended removal by the City Council, the City Manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the City Council's intention to remove the City Manager and the reason(s) therefor at least 30 days before the effective date of such removal. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-1.11)  
2.08.100 - Removal from office. 
A.  Within seven days after the delivery to the City Manager of such notice he/she may, by written notification to the City Clerk, request a hearing before the City Council. Thereafter, but before the expiration of the 30-day period, the City Council shall schedule a time for the hearing, which shall be held at the regular meeting place of the City Council, at which the City Manager shall appear and be heard. 
B.  Suspension Pending Hearing. After furnishing the City Manager with written notice of his/her intended removal, the City Council may suspend him/her from duty, but his compensation shall continue until his removal by the City Council subsequent to the hearing if such hearing is requested. 
C.  Discretion of Council. In removing the City Manager, the City Council's action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to permit the City Manager to present to the City Council his/her grounds of opposition to his/her removal prior to the effective date of such removal. 
D.  Limitations. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the City Manager shall not be removed from office during or within the period of 90 days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the City at which election a Member of the City Council is elected. The purpose of this provision is to permit any newly-elected Member of the Council, or a reorganized City Council, to observe the actions and abilities of the City Manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his/her office. After the expiration of the 90-day period, the provisions of this chapter related to the removal of the City Manager shall apply and be effective. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code §§ 2-1.12—2-1.15)  
Chapter 2.12 - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 
 
2.12.010 - Qualifications of Council Members - Vacancy upon nonresidence. 
A.  Qualifications. A person is not eligible to hold office as Council member or Mayor unless that person is, at the time of taking out nomination papers for election to such office or being appointed to such office, a legally registered voter in the City of Montclair. 
B.  Residency. If a person holding the elective office of Mayor or Council Member moves his/her place of residence outside of the City Limits or ceases to be a legally registered voter in the City, his/her office shall immediately become vacant. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-2.01)  
2.12.020 - General election - Elective officers, term and expenditure ceiling. 
A.  Municipal Election. A general municipal election shall be held on the second Tuesday in November in each even-numbered year and shall be consolidated with the statewide general election. 
B.  Elective Officers. The offices of Mayor and Council Member are elective offices. All elective offices shall be filled by the City electorate at a general municipal election, unless a vacancy is filled by appointment pursuant to the Government Code. 
C.  Term. City officers holding elective City office shall hold office for four years from the date they assume office until their successors are elected and assume office, or until the end of an unexpired term to which they are appointed or elected. 
D.  Expenditure Ceiling. 
1.  A voluntary expenditure ceiling of 25 cents per resident for each candidate at a Montclair municipal election at which candidates for Mayor or City Council are on the ballot is imposed. 
2.  Each candidate for the office of Mayor or City Council shall file a statement of acceptance or rejection of the voluntary expenditure ceiling before accepting any contributions. 
3.  Contribution limitations depend on whether or not the expenditure limit is accepted, and are pursuant to Chapter 5 of Title 9 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-2.02)  
2.12.030 - Oath. 
Before entering upon elective duties, each elected City officer shall take, and file with the City Clerk, the constitutional oath of office. 
(Prior code § 2-2.03)  
2.12.040 - Vacancy for absence. 
If the Mayor or a Council Member is absent from all regular City Council meetings for 60 consecutive days from the last regular meeting attended, without first leaving notice with the City Clerk indicating the period of time for which the absence is planned, the office shall be declared vacant and shall be filled as any other vacancy. No inference is made in this section that the absence of the Mayor or a Council Member is dependent upon the authorization of the City Council. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-2.05)  
2.12.050 - Compensation—Salary schedule and effective date—Exclusion of benefit costs in salary computation. 
A.  Schedule. Each member of the City Council shall receive as salary the sum of one thousand one hundred fifty dollars ($1,150.00) per month. 
B.  Effective Date. Any increase in compensation shall become effective for all members of the City Council no sooner than that calendar month that next succeeds the beginning of a new term of office for any member of the City Council following the adoption of such increase. 
(Ord. 06-872 § 1 (part): Ord. 03-833; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-2.06) 
(Ord. No. 17-970, § I, 2-5-18)  
2.12.060 - Additional compensation for Mayor. 
Compensation provided to the Mayor, in addition to that received as a Council Member, shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month. 
(Ord. 06-872 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-2.07) 
(Ord. No. 17-970, § I, 2-5-18)  
2.12.070 - Compensation—Filling vacancies. 
Compensation to a member of the City Council appointed or elected to fill a vacancy is the same as that payable to the member whose office was vacated. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-2.08)  
2.12.080 - Reimbursement. 
The salaries prescribed in this chapter are, and shall be, exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the City Council as reimbursements for actual and necessary expenses incurred through the performance of official duties for the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-2.09)  
2.12.090 - Council meetings. 
A.  Council Meetings. Except as otherwise provided in the Government Code, all meetings of the City Council shall be open to the public, and all persons shall be permitted to attend any meeting of the City Council. A member of the public shall not be required, as a condition to attendance at a meeting of the City Council, to register his or her name, to provide other information, to complete a questionnaire, or otherwise to fulfill any condition precedent to his or her attendance. If an attendance list, register, questionnaire, or other similar document is posted at or near the entrance to the room where the meeting is to be held, or is circulated to the persons present during the meeting, it shall state clearly that the signing, registering or completion of the document is voluntary, and that all persons may attend the meeting regardless of whether a person signs, registers or completes the document. 
B.  Time. The City Council shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Mondays of each month at 7:00 p.m. When a regular meeting falls on a holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next business day. 
C.  Place. All regular meetings of the City Council shall be held in the City Council Chambers, located at 5111 Benito Street, Montclair, California. 
D.  Presiding Officer. The Mayor shall be the presiding officer at all meetings of the City Council. If the Mayor is absent or unable to act, the Mayor Pro Tem shall serve until the Mayor returns or is able to act. The Mayor may make or second any motion and present and discuss any matter as a member of the City Council. The Mayor is a member of the City Council and has all the powers and duties of a member of the City Council. 
E.  Adjourned Meetings. The City Council may adjourn any regular, adjourned regular, special or adjourned special meeting to a time and place specified in the order of adjournment. Three Council Members shall constitute a quorum for transaction of business in all meetings; less than a quorum may adjourn a meeting to a stated time and place. If all Council Members are absent from any regular or adjourned meeting, the City Clerk shall declare the meeting adjourned to a stated time and place. A written notice of the adjournment shall be conspicuously posted on or near the door of the place where the meeting was held within 24 hours after the time of the adjournment, and a copy of the notice of adjournment shall be delivered to each Council Member. 
F.  Special Meetings. A special meeting may be called at any time by the presiding officer, or by a majority of the Council Members. A written notice of the special meeting, indicating the time and place of the special meeting and the business to be transacted, shall be received by each Council Member and a local newspaper of general circulation at least 24 hours before the time of the special meeting as specified in the notice. No other business shall be considered at a special meeting. Ordinances, other than an urgency ordinance, shall not be passed at other than a regular meeting or at an adjourned regular meeting. 
G.  Emergency Meetings. In the case of an emergency situation involving matters upon which prompt action is necessary due to the disruption or threatened disruption of public facilities, the City Council may hold an emergency meeting without complying with the 24-hour notice requirement; however, the local newspaper of general circulation shall be notified by telephone at least one hour prior to the emergency meeting. In the event telephone services are not functioning, this requirement shall then be waived. Such newspaper shall then be notified as soon after the meeting as possible of the purpose of the meeting and any action taken. An emergency meeting shall be open to the public. The minutes of an emergency meeting, accompanied by a list of persons notified, a copy of the roll call vote and any actions taken shall be posted for a minimum of 10 days in a public place as soon after the meeting as possible. For purposes of this section, "emergency situation" means any of the following: (1) work stoppage or other activity which severely impairs public health, safety, or both, as determined by a majority of the members of the City Council; and (2) crippling disaster which severely impairs public health, safety, or both, as determined by a majority of the members of the City Council. 
H.  Closed Sessions. All Closed Session of the City Council shall be held in accordance with that section of the Government Code known as "The Ralph M. Brown Act." 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-2.10)  
2.12.100 - Mayor Pro Tem—Selection, power and duties. 
A.  Selection. The City Council, at its first meeting following a general municipal election, shall choose one of its members as Mayor Pro Tem. 
B.  Power. The Mayor Pro Tem shall serve in the place of the Mayor if, for any reason, the Mayor is absent or is unable to act. While acting as the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem has all of the powers and duties of the Mayor. The Mayor Pro Tem shall relinquish his/her acting authority when the Mayor returns or is able to act. 
C.  Duties. The Mayor Pro Tem shall review payroll warrants and warrants in payment of budgeted demands prior to their presentation to the City Council for ratification and approval. Such warrants need not be audited by the City Council prior to payment. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-2.11)  
2.12.110 - Procedural rules—Minutes of proceedings. 
A.  Procedures. The City Council may establish rules for the conduct of its proceedings. 
B.  Minutes. The City Council shall direct the City Clerk to keep a record of its proceedings. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-2.12)  
Chapter 2.14 - DECORUM AT PUBLIC MEETINGS 
Sections: 
 
2.14.010 - Preservation of order. 
Meetings of a legislative body as herein defined shall be conducted in an orderly manner to ensure that the public has a full opportunity to be heard and that the deliberative process of the legislative body is conducted as efficiently as possible. The presiding officer shall be responsible for maintaining the order and decorum of meetings. 
(Ord. 03-830 § 2)  
2.14.020 - Rules of decorum. 
A.  Members of a Legislative Body. The members of a legislative body as herein defined shall preserve order and decorum, and a member shall not by conversation or other means delay or interrupt the legislative body's proceedings, including delaying or interrupting any person who is speaking who has been recognized by the presiding officer. 
B.  City Staff Members. Employees of the City shall observe the same rules of order and decorum as those that apply to members of the legislative body. 
C.  Persons Addressing the Legislative Body. Members of the public are afforded the opportunity to address the legislative body on any item of interest to the public that is within the subject matter jurisdiction of the legislative body. Each person who addresses the legislative body shall do so in an orderly manner and shall not make personal, impertinent, slanderous, or profane remarks to any member of the legislative body, staff, or general public that disrupt, disturb, or otherwise impede the orderly conduct of any meeting of the legislative body. 
Any person who makes such remarks; or who utters loud, threatening, personal, or abusive language; or engages in any other disorderly conduct that disrupts, disturbs, or otherwise impedes the orderly conduct of any meeting of the legislative body, including, but not limited to, addressing the legislative body without being recognized, repetitiously addressing the same subject, or failing to relinquish the podium when requested to do so, shall, at the discretion of the presiding officer, be barred from further audience before the legislative body during that meeting. 
D.  Members of the Audience. No person in the audience at a meeting of the legislative body shall engage in disorderly or boisterous conduct, including the utterance of loud, threatening, or abusive language; whistling; stamping of feet; or other acts which disturb, disrupt, or otherwise impede the orderly conduct of any meeting of the legislative body. Any person who conducts himself or herself in the aforementioned manner shall, at the discretion of the presiding officer, be barred from further audience before the legislative body during that meeting. 
(Ord. 03-830 § 2)  
2.14.030 - Addressing the legislative body. 
Any person wishing to address the legislative body regarding an item which is on the meeting agenda or is otherwise within the subject matter jurisdiction of the legislative body may submit a request on the form provided, or he or she may seek recognition by the presiding officer during discussion of any such item. Persons wishing to discuss a nonagenda item may seek recognition by the presiding officer during the Public Comment portion of the meeting. No person shall address the legislative body without first being recognized by the presiding officer. 
The following procedures shall be observed by persons addressing the legislative body: 
A.  Each person shall speak from the podium provided for the use of the public. 
B.  Each person shall confine his or her remarks to: (1) an agenda item before or during the legislative body's consideration of the item; or (2) any matter not on the agenda which is within the legislative body's subject matter jurisdiction. 
C.  Each person shall limit his or her remarks to five minutes, unless the presiding officer determines that a different time limit is appropriate. 
(Ord. 03-830 § 2)  
2.14.040 - Enforcement of decorum. 
The rules of decorum set forth above shall be enforced in the following manner: 
A.  Warning. The presiding officer shall request that a person who is violating the rules of decorum conform his or her behavior to these rules. If, after receiving a warning from the presiding officer, a person persists in disturbing the meeting, the presiding officer shall order him or her to leave the meeting. 
B.  Removal. If such person does not remove himself or herself from the meeting, the presiding officer may order any law enforcement officer who is on duty at the meeting as sergeant-at-arms to remove that person from the meeting. 
Any law enforcement officer who is serving as sergeant-at-arms may carry out orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the meeting. Upon instruction of the presiding officer, the sergeant-at-arms may remove from the meeting any person(s) who is (are) disturbing the proceedings of the legislative body in violation of these rules. 
C.  Resisting Removal. Any person who resists removal by the sergeant-at-arms may be charged with a violation of this section. 
D.  Clearing the Meeting Site. In the event that any meeting is willfully interrupted by a group or groups of persons so as to render the orderly conduct of such meeting unfeasible and order cannot be restored by the removal of individuals who are willfully interrupting the meeting, the presiding officer may order the room cleared and continue in session. In conformance with provisions of The Brown Act, the presiding officer may subsequently readmit individuals not believed to be responsible for creating the disturbance into the meeting. If a meeting of the legislative body is disturbed or disrupted in such a manner as to make unfeasible or improbable the restoration of order, the meeting may be adjourned or continued; and any remaining business of the legislative body may be considered at the next meeting. 
(Ord. 03-830 § 2)  
2.14.050 - Guidelines for recording meetings. 
As provided by The Brown Act, members of the public are permitted to record any open and public meeting of a legislative body. In order to provide for the recording of such meetings by members of the public, the City has developed the following guidelines: 
A.  The recording procedure must not disrupt, disturb, or otherwise impede the conduct of the meeting. A disruption or disturbance of the orderly conduct of the meeting can include, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Obstructing the view of audience/staff members. 
2.  Creating noise that keeps audience/staff members from hearing the proceedings. 
3.  Treating potential interviewees, and/or conducting interviews, in a belligerent manner. 
B.  Placement of video recording equipment/crew: 
1.  When recording is taking place in the City Council Chambers, video cameras, tripods, and/or crew shall be located in the walkway surrounding the perimeter of the Chambers and shall be situated so the public is able to safely walk around said perimeter without being impeded by such video cameras, tripods, and/or crew. 
2.  When recording is taking place at a meeting of a legislative body herein defined at a location other than the City Council Chambers, video cameras, tripods, and/or crew shall be situated so neither the view nor the circulation of the audience or staff is impeded. 
3.  All audio/electrical cords must be securely taped or covered with a mat. 
C.  City staff is in charge of enforcing the above guidelines at the meeting site. 
(Ord. 03-830 § 2)  
Chapter 2.16 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.16.010 - Created. 
A Planning Commission for the City is created. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-1.01)  
2.16.020 - Terms of office. 
The Planning Commission shall consist of five members. Such members shall serve for terms of four years. No person holding any municipal office or position in the City of Montclair being compensated by salary, excluding volunteers or persons receiving a stipend, shall be a member of the Planning Commission. Vacancies shall be filled pursuant to the City of Montclair Appointment Process Manual. 
(Ord. 00-793 § 1: Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-1.02)  
2.16.030 - Appointment. 
The members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-1.03)  
2.16.040 - Qualification for office. 
In order to qualify as a member of the Planning Commission, a person shall be a legally registered voter in the City of Montclair. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-1.04)  
2.16.050 - Meetings. 
A.  Time. Regular meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held on the second and fourth Mondays of each month. 
B.  Place. All regular meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held in the Council Chambers located at 5111 Benito Street, Montclair, California. 
C.  Holidays. Whenever a regular meeting of the Planning Commission falls on a holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next business day. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 9-1.05)  
2.16.060 - Meetings - Absences. 
If a member of the Planning Commission shall be absent form three successive regular meetings of the Planning Commission without cause, the office of such member shall be deemed to be vacant, and the term of such member ipso facto terminated. The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall immediately inform the Council of such termination. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-1.06)  
2.16.070 - Meetings - Absences for cause. 
An absence caused by illness, or an unavoidable absence from the City, with communication by written notice or by telephone thereof to the Secretary of the Planning Commission on or before the day of any regular meeting of the Planning Commission, shall be deemed absence for cause. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 9-1.07)  
2.16.080 - Organization. 
The presiding officer of the Planning Commission shall be the Chair or, in his/her absence, the Vice-Chair. The Planning Commission shall elect a Chair and Vice-Chair for two-year terms. When a vacancy occurs in the Chair's position, the Vice-Chair shall become Chair to serve the balance of the unexpired term. When a vacancy occurs in the Vice-Chair's position, the Planning Commission shall elect a successor who shall serve the balance of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 9-1.08)  
2.16.090 - Removal from office. 
Any member of the Planning Commission may be removed by the Mayor at any time with the approval of the Council, and such removed member's successor shall serve for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-1.09)  
2.16.100 - Removal limitations. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, no Planning Commissioner shall be removed from office during or within the period of 90 days succeeding any general municipal election held in the City at which election a Member of the City Council is elected. The purpose of this provision is to permit any newly-elected Member of the City Council, or a reorganized City Council, to observe the actions and ability of the Planning Commissioners in the performance of their duties. Upon expiration of the 90-day period, the provisions of this chapter related to the removal of the Planning Commissioners shall apply and be effective. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 9-1.10)  
Chapter 2.20 - COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND BOARDS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
2.20.010 - Authority to create. 
The City Council shall have the authority to create various commissions, committees or boards upon its determination that such commissions, committees or boards are needed. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
2.20.020 - Terms of office, qualifications and appointment process. 
Terms of office, qualifications, and appointment process shall be pursuant to the City of Montclair Appointment Process Manual as adopted by the City Council. 
Appointments to any commissions, committees or boards which are not created by the Montclair City Council, but to which the City Council has total or partial appointment authority, shall also be pursuant to the City of Montclair Appointment Process Manual. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
Chapter 2.24 - OFFICIAL BONDS 
Sections: 
 
2.24.010 - City Clerk. 
The City Clerk shall execute to the City an official bond for the due and faithful performance of his/her official duties in the penal sum of Twenty-Five Thousand (25,000) Dollars. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-3.01)  
2.24.020 - City Treasurer. 
The City Treasurer shall execute to the City an official bond for the due and faithful performance of his/her official duties in the penal sum of One Hundred Thousand (100,000) Dollars. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-3.02)  
Chapter 2.28 - OFFICIAL SEAL 
Sections: 
 
2.28.010 - Adoption. 
The City shall have and does adopt an official seal described as a die 2-1/4 inches in diameter and circular in shape. On the surface of the die at the top thereof shall be engraved the words "Montclair, California." At the bottom shall be engraved the words "Incorporated, April 25, 1956." In the center of the circle there shall be a mountain, and superimposed on the mountain shall be a citrus tree. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-4.01)  
2.28.020 - Use. 
The impression of the official seal shall be made and used upon all official documents executed by the City or its duly authorized officials. 
(Prior code § 2-4.02)  
2.28.030 - Custodian. 
The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the official seal. 
(Prior code § 2-4.03)  
Chapter 2.32 - PERSONNEL 
Sections: 
 
2.32.010 - Personnel system established—Administration. 
There shall be established a personnel system, which shall be based on reasonable and equitable personnel practices. It is the purpose of the personnel system to promote full communication between the employer and employees and to strengthen methods of administering employer-employee relations and employment practices through the establishment of uniform and orderly methods and procedures. It is also the purpose of the personnel system to promote the improvement of personnel management and employer-employee relations within the public agency and to recognize the right of public employees to be represented in their employment relationship with the City. The City Manager shall administer the personnel system. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-5.01)  
2.32.020 - Labor relations—Conditions of employment, impasse and job actions. 
A.  The City Council shall adopt an employer-employee labor relations resolution implementing Section 3500 et seq. of the Government Code. The employer-employee labor relations resolution shall include such procedures necessary for establishing and administering employer-employee relations in the City. 
B.  The employer-employee labor relations resolution shall establish procedures for meeting and conferring in good faith with employee bargaining groups for the purpose of discussing conditions of employment. Conditions of employment for each employee bargaining group shall be specified in memorandums of understanding. Any changes to conditions of employment specified in memorandums of understanding shall be presented to the City Council for consideration and approval. 
C.  The employer-employee labor relations resolution shall include, but not be limited to procedures for addressing employee bargaining group impasse hearings and job actions. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-5.02)  
2.32.030 - Employee wages. 
City employee salary ranges shall be fixed by City Council resolution, except that City Council Member and Planning Commissioner salaries shall be set by City Council ordinance pursuant to the California Government Code, and the City Manager salary may be fixed by an employer-employee agreement. This section shall not apply to employee wage adjustments related to step increases within a salary range established by City Council resolution. If an employee classification salary range does not exist. The City Manager may recommend to the Personnel Committee, as established pursuant to this chapter, merit increases for employees in such classifications. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-5.03)  
2.32.040 - Responsibility of City Manager. 
The City Manager shall be responsible for the personnel system and shall report periodically to the City Council on the operation of the system. The City Manager is responsible for the implementation and maintenance of the City's personnel policies; shall act as the appointing authority for the City; shall administer all the provisions of this chapter; shall recommend to the City Council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules; shall cause to be prepared a position-classification plan, including class specifications and revisions of the plan; shall have the authority to discipline employees in accordance with this chapter and the personnel rules of the City; shall provide for the receiving of applications for employment; shall provide for the publishing or posting of notices of tests for positions in the competitive service and provide for the conducting and grading of such tests: shall provide for the certification of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the competitive service; and shall perform any other duties that may be required to administer the personnel system. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-5.04)  
2.32.050 - Holidays. 
Regular, full-time City employees shall receive paid holiday leave each year for those days established by action of the City Council. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-5.05)  
2.32.060 - Personnel Committee established. 
The Mayor shall appoint a Personnel Committee, which shall include two members of the City Council and the City Manager. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, the City Council may delegate to the Personnel Committee authority to review and approve actions of the City Manager and department heads in administering the City's personnel system. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 2-5.06)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.02 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
3.02.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this title: 
Electrical corporation shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 218 of the California Public Utilities Code, except it shall also be construed to include any municipality, public agency, or person engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power to a service user. 
Fee administrator , when applied to Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund, means the Finance Director of the City. 
Gas , when applied to the Utility Users Tax, means natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel which may be substituted therefor. 
Gas corporation shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 222 of the California Public Utilities Code, except it shall also be construed to include any municipality, public agency, or person engaged in the selling or supplying of gas to a service user. 
Hotel , when applied to Transient Occupancy Taxes, means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied, or intended or designed for occupancy, by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes and shall include any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure, or portion thereof. 
Mobile Source Air Pollution Reduction Programs means any program or project implemented by the City to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which is determined will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Programs Article 5, commencing with Section 40460, of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Non-utility Supplier, when applied to the Utility Users Tax, means (1) a service supplier, other than an electrical corporation serving customers within the City, which generates electrical energy in capacities of at least 50 kilowatts for its own use or for sale to others; or (2) a gas supplier, other than a gas corporation, that sells or supplies gas to users within the City. 
Occupancy, when applied to Transient Occupancy Taxes, means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room, or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes. 
Operator , when applied to Transient Occupancy Taxes, means the person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this title and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this title by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
Person , when applied to Transient Occupancy Taxes, means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
Person , when applied to the Utility Users Tax, means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club trust, society, or individuals. 
Rent , when applied to Transient Occupancy Taxes, means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Service supplier , when applied to the Utility Users Tax, means any entity required to collect or self-impose and remit a tax as imposed by Chapter 3.36 of this Code. 
Service user , when applied to the Utility Users Tax, means a person required to pay tax imposed under Chapter 3.36 of this Code. 
Tax Administrator , when applied to the Utility Users Tax, means the City Administrator or his or her designee. 
Telephone corporation shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 234 of the California Public Utilities Code. 
Transient , when applied to Transient Occupancy Taxes, means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the provisions of Chapter 3.32 of this Code may be considered. 
Water corporation shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 241 of the California Public Utilities Code, except it shall also be construed to include any municipality, public agency, or person engaged in the selling or supplying of water to a service user. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code §§ 3-2.302, 3-5.302, 3-5.602)  
Chapter 3.04 - FINANCIAL AFFAIRS 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - Deposits and investments—Borrowing funds. 
A.  Deposits in the State. As far as possible, the City Treasurer shall deposit for safekeeping all money belonging to, or in the custody of the City, in state or national banks, California branch offices of a foreign or other state bank, savings associations or federal associations, credit unions, federally insured industrial loan companies in this state, or any depository designated by the Government Code, except that money shall not be deposited in any state or federal credit union if a member of a legislative office, City Manager's office, or administrative office also serves on the board of directors or any committee associated with the state or federal credit union. Such money shall be deposited with the objective of receiving maximum return consistent with prudent financial management. 
B.  Deposits Outside the State. The City Treasurer may deposit money necessary to pay the principal and interest of bonds in a bank within or without the State at the place where they are payable. 
C.  Maximum Deposits. Deposits shall not exceed those maximum standards as prescribed by the California Government Code. 
D.  Investments. Investments made by the City Treasurer shall comply with investment procedures established by the Government Code. 
E.  Investment Policy. The City Council shall adopt a Statement of Investment Policy and annually review such policy at a public meeting. 
F.  Borrowing Funds. The City Council shall deliberate, at a public meeting, on any decision that involves borrowing funds in the amount of One Hundred Thousand (100,000) Dollars or more. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-2.101)  
3.04.020 - Demands against the City. 
Active deposits, investments, and interest thereon are subject to withdrawal upon the demand of the City Treasurer or authorized official; provided, however, that demands for payment against the City shall be presented in fully itemized statements, invoices or bills at regular meetings of the City Council for approval of payment. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-2.102)  
3.04.030 - Audit and approval by the City Council—Exclusions. 
A.  Audit and approval by the City Council. A member of the City Council designated by the Mayor shall audit all demands presented to the City Council. In the event such designation has not been made, the Mayor Pro Tem shall audit all demands presented. All demands presented for payment shall be approved by a majority of City Council Members sitting in quorum. 
B.  Exclusions. Payroll warrants or checks need not be audited prior to payment; provided, however, that payrolls are presented to the City Council for approval at the first meeting after delivery of the payroll warrants. Demands for which earlier payments are required by sound business practice need not be audited prior to payment; provided, however, that prepaid demands are approved by the City Treasurer and are presented to the City Council for audit and approval at the first meeting after prepayment of the demands. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
3.04.040 - Payment method. 
All payments of demands brought against the City shall be by warrants drawn on the City Treasury. The warrants shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City Treasurer and City Clerk. The Mayor, City Treasurer and City Clerk are designated as the signatories for disbursement of all funds in payment of demands brought against the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
Chapter 3.08 - PURCHASING 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Adoption of purchasing manual—Purchasing Officer. 
A.  Adoption of Purchasing Manual. In order to establish efficient and cost-effective procedures and controls and to establish authority for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment, the City Council shall adopt a Purchasing Manual. The Purchasing Manual shall set forth procedures to be followed by all departments in the purchase of supplies, services and equipment. 
B.  Purchasing Officer. The Purchasing Manual shall designate a Purchasing Officer for the City. 
C.  Powers and Duties of the Purchasing Officer. The Purchasing Manual shall identify the powers and duties of the Purchasing Officer. Powers and duties shall include: 
1.  Preparing and maintaining the Purchasing Manual; 
2.  Reviewing and approving requisition requests; 
3.  Directing the preparation, review and approval of purchase orders. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 3-4.01)  
Chapter 3.12 - AIR-QUALITY IMPROVEMENT TRUST FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Intent. 
This chapter is intended to support the South Coast Air Quality Management District's (SCAQMD's) imposition of the vehicle registration fee and to bring the City into compliance with the requirements set forth in the Health and Safety Code in order to receive fee revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-2.301)  
3.12.020 - Administration of vehicle registration fee. 
A.  Receipt of Fee. The additional vehicle registration fees shall be disbursed by SCAQMD and remitted to the City pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Establishment of Air-Quality Improvement Trust Fund. There shall be established a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of City funds. 
C.  Transfer of Funds. Such vehicle registration fees shall be deposited into the separate account established pursuant to subsection B of this section. All interest earned by the Trust Fund Account shall be credited only to that account. 
D.  Expenditure of Air-Quality Trust Fund Revenues. All revenues received from SCAQMD and deposited in the trust fund shall be exclusively expended on mobile source emission-reduction programs as defined in Chapter 3.02 of this title. Such revenues and any interest earned on the revenues shall be expended within one year of the completion of the programs. 
E.  Audits. The City consents to an audit of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from SCAQMD pursuant to of the Health and Safety Code. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by SCAQMD as provided in the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-2.303)  
Chapter 3.16 - GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Created. 
To comply with the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code of the State, there is created in the City Treasury a special fund to be known as the "Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund." 
(Prior code § 3-2.201)  
3.16.020 - Deposits. 
All moneys received by the City from the State pursuant to the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code of the State for the acquisition or real property or interests therein, or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than State highways, shall be paid into said fund. 
(Prior code § 3-2.202)  
3.16.030 - Expenditures. 
All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by the California Streets and Highways Code, including the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 and Chapter 3 of Division 3 of the California Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-2.203)  
Chapter 3.18 - TRANSPORTATION DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 
Sections: 
 
3.18.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as "Transportation Development Impact Fees." 
(Ord. 06-887 § 1 (part))  
3.18.020 - Purpose. 
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the circulation element of the City's General Plan, to mitigate traffic impacts caused by new development and redevelopment in the City, and to comply with requirements of Measure I 2010—2040 and the San Bernardino Associated Governments' Nexus Study, certain thoroughfares and intersections within the City must be constructed, improved, and/or modified. The City Council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to finance these improvements. In establishing the fee described in the following sections, the City Council has found the fee to be consistent with its General Plan and, pursuant to Government Code Section 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the City's housing needs as established in the housing element of the General Plan. 
(Ord. 06-887 § 1 (part))  
3.18.030 - Fees established. 
The Citywide Transportation Development Impact Fees are established on the issuance of a building permit for development or redevelopment in the City to pay for construction, improvements, and/or modifications to thoroughfares and intersections. The City Council shall, in a Council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, list the projects to be financed by the fee, describe the estimated cost of the facilities, and describe the reasonable relationship between the fee and the various types of new developments. In accordance with Government Code Section 66007(a), this development impact fee shall be paid by each developer prior to date of the final inspection or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first. On an annual basis, the City Council shall review this fee to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the impacts of developments and whether the described public facilities are still needed. 
(Ord. 06-887 § 1 (part))  
3.18.040 - Limited use of fees. 
The revenues raised by payment of the Citywide Transportation Development Impact Fees shall be placed in separate and special accounts. An account shall be established for the portion of the Transportation Development Impact Fee required for compliance with San Bernardino Associated Governments' Nexus Program as identified in the fee resolution. An account shall be established for the portion of the Transportation Development Impact Fee required for City facilities as identified in the fee resolution. Ten percent of the total fee collected shall be placed in the City's General Fund as an administrative fee. Such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to pay for the City's future construction of facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 3.18.030 of this chapter or to reimburse City for those described or listed facilities constructed by the City with funds advanced by the City from other sources. 
(Ord. 06-887 § 1 (part))  
3.18.050 - Fee adjustments. 
A developer of any project subject to the fee described in Section 3.18.030 of this chapter may apply to the City Council for a waiver, adjustment, or reduction of that fee based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the traffic impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the City Clerk not later than: (1) 10 days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project; or (2) if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, adjustment or reduction. The City Council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or a separate hearing held within 60 days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The decision of the City Council shall be final. If a waiver, adjustment, or reduction is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction. 
(Ord. 06-887 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 3.20 - DOCUMENTARY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.20.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Documentary Transfer Tax Law of the City of Montclair." 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.401)  
3.20.020 - Tax imposed. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or her or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds One Hundred (100) Dollars a tax at the rate of 27.5 cents for each Five Hundred (500) Dollars or fractional part thereof. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.402)  
3.20.030 - Person responsible for payment. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.20.020 of this chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Prior code § 3-5.403)  
3.20.040 - Debt security instruments exempted. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Prior code § 3-5.404)  
3.20.050 - Governmental agencies exempted. 
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.405)  
3.20.060 - Bankruptcies, receiverships and reorganizations. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
1.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
2.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subsection (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; 
3.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subsection (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or 
4.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form, or place of organization is effected. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.406)  
3.20.070 - Securities and Exchange Commission. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subsection (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; and 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Prior code § 3-5.407)  
3.20.080 - Partnerships. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for the purposes of this chapter such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Prior code § 3-5.408)  
3.20.090 - Administration. 
The County Recorder shall administer the provisions of this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State and the provisions of any County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Prior code § 3-5.409)  
3.20.100 - Claims for refunds. 
Claims for the refund of taxes imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State. 
(Prior code § 3-5.410)  
Chapter 3.24 - PROPERTY TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Assessment and collection duties. 
The duties of assessing property and collecting taxes, provided by law to be performed by the County Assessor and the City Treasurer, shall be performed by the County Assessor and the County Tax Collector in accordance with the provisions of Sections 51500 through 51521 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.101)  
Chapter 3.28 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.28.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law" of the City. 
(Prior code § 3-5.201)  
3.28.020 - Sales tax imposed—Use tax imposed. 
A.  Sales Tax Imposed. The rate of sales tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be 1 percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold by that person at retail in the City. 
B.  Use Tax Imposed. The rate of use tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be 1 percent of the sales price of the property whose storage, use, or other consumption is subject to the tax. The use tax imposed by this chapter shall be upon the storage, use, or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer for storage, use, or other consumption in the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.202)  
3.28.030 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-State destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Prior code § 3-5.207)  
3.28.040 - Adoption of State law provisions—Limitations. 
A.  Adoption of State Law Provisions. This chapter is adopted pursuant to Part 1.5 of Division 2 of Chapter 1 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code. The City Council adopts by reference the provisions of sections 7202 and 7203, inclusive of 7203.2, of the California Revenue and Taxation Code as now in effect or as later amended, which are required to be included in this chapter, regardless of whether or not this chapter is amended. 
B.  Limitations on State Law Provisions. In adopting the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the State is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the City shall be inferred or substituted therefor. However, such substitution or inference shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, the Constitution of the State, or in any other context where "State" is meant to imply an agency or specific function or task of the State government; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the function incident to the administration or operation of the provisions of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption of this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt form this tax while such sales, storage, use, or other consumption remains subject to the tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to that tax by the State under the provisions of said Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 of said Code or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.209)  
3.28.050 - Additional seller's permits not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer pursuant to the provisions of Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.211)  
3.28.060 - Exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State or County upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  There are exempt from the taxes imposed by this chapter the gross receipts form the sale of and the storage, use, or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property, the gross receipts form the sale of which, or the storage, use, or other consumption of which, is exempt form taxing under Chapter 4 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.212)  
3.28.070 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State of the City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Prior code § 3-5.216)  
Chapter 3.30 - TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.30.010 - Title. 
A.  This chapter shall be known as the "Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance of the City of Montclair." 
B.  This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the City of Montclair. 
(Ord. 04-849 § 1 (part))  
3.30.020 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following purposes, among others, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish these purposes: 
A.  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the City of Montclair to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
B.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax law of the State of California, insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure, therefore, that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes. 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will, to the greatest degree possible, be consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes; and, at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-849 § 1 (part))  
3.30.030 - Contract with State. 
Prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter as set forth in Section 3.30.020, the City of Montclair shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided that if the City has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, nevertheless, it shall so contract, and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. 04-849 § 1 (part))  
3.30.040 - Transactions tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City of Montclair at the rate of one quarter of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in such territory on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-849 § 1 (part))  
3.30.050 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his/her agent to an out-of-State destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State, or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to a prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 04-849 § 1 (part))  
3.30.060 - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in the City of Montclair of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for storage, use, or other consumption in such territory at the rate of one quarter of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 04-849 § 1 (part))  
3.30.070 - Proceeds of tax. 
The proceeds of this tax shall be deposited into the general fund to be used for all general government needs of the City, which may include, but is not limited to capital equipment requirements, capital improvement projects, fire and police protection, street and park maintenance, planning and engineering services, code enforcement, youth and senior citizen programs, operational expenses, fiduciary responsibilities, indebtedness, and general obligations of the City. The tax imposed in this chapter is intended to be, and is, a general tax, the proceeds of which are to be spent as the City Council shall, in its discretion, from time to time determine. 
(Ord. 04-849 § 1 (part))  
3.30.080 - Adoption of provisions of State law. 
Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 04-849 § 1 (part))  
3.30.090 - Limitations on adoption of State law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made in the following circumstances: 
1.  When the word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California. 
2.  When the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
3.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property that would not otherwise be exempt from this tax, while such sales, storage, use, or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property that would not be subject to tax by the State under the provision of that code. 
4.  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  The word "City" shall be substituted for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 04-849 § 1 (part))  
3.30.100 - Additional seller's permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-849 § 1 (part))  
3.30.110 - Additional business license not required. 
If a business license has been issued to a retailer under Chapter 4.04 of Title 4 of the Montclair Municipal Code, an additional business license shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-849 § 1 (part))  
3.30.120 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the computation of the measure of the transactions tax and use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California, or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax law, or the amount of any State-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the City, which is shipped to a point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his/her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the City shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-City address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his/her principal place of residence; 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out of the City and declaration, under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property, which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (B)(4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use, or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any State-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
3.  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease that is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
6.  Except as provided in subsection (C)(7), a retailer engaged in business in the City shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the City or participates within the City in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the City, or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the City under the authority of the retailer. 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the City" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the City. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property, the storage, use, or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. 04-849 § 1 (part))  
3.30.130 - Amendments. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes that are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter, provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-849 § 1 (part))  
3.30.140 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate, or other legal or equitable process, shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the State or the City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 04-849 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 3.32 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.32.010 - Title. 
A.  This chapter shall be known as the "Transient Occupancy Tax Law" of the City. 
B.  Purpose. This chapter imposes a tax on the privilege of occupying a room or rooms, or other living space, in a hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, campsite, recreational vehicle park, mobile or manufactured home outside a mobile home park, or other lodging unless the occupancy is for any period of more than 30 consecutive days. 
C.  Exclusions. This chapter does not include facilities operated by a government agency nor does it affect the right of an owner of a timeshare estate, the owner of a membership campsite facility, or the owner of a private residence or their guest(s) to occupy the room(s), camping sites in National or State Park systems, or other real property in which the owner retains noncommercial interest. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.301)  
3.32.020 - Tax imposed by City. 
For the privilege of temporary occupancy in a hotel, the occupant(s) of each room or other living space in a hotel shall submit to the City a tax in the amount of 10 percent of the rent charged by the operator of the hotel. The tax shall be collected by and paid to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. If, for any reason, the tax due is not paid to the hotel, or if the operator of the hotel fails to collect the tax, the City Treasurer may require the operator of the hotel to pay the tax to the City Treasurer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.303)  
3.32.030 - Exemptions. 
A.  No tax shall be imposed upon: 
1.  Any officer of a foreign government who is exempt by provision of federal law or treaty; 
2.  An federal, state, county, or municipal employee when on official business; 
3.  Any person for whom it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax provided for in this chapter. 
B.  No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time the rent is due upon a document prescribed as an "occupancy tax-exemption form." 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.304)  
3.32.040 - Operator's duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by the provisions or this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-5.305)  
3.32.050 - Registration. 
Within 30 days after commencing business, each operator of any hotel shall register such hotel with the City. Upon registration, the City will issue a "Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate" which shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous place on the hotel premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, set forth the following information: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; and 
D.  The following statement: "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Transient Occupancy Tax Law by registering with the City Treasurer for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting such tax to the City Treasurer. This certificate shall not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws. This certificate shall not constitute a permit." 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.306)  
3.32.060 - Reporting and remitting. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the City Treasurer, make a report to the City Treasurer, on forms provided by the City, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected from transients. At the time the report is made, the full amount of tax collected shall be remitted to the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer may establish shorter reporting periods deemed necessary to ensure collection of the tax. All taxes shall be due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be held in trust until payment is made to the City Treasurer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.307)  
3.32.070 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who shall fail to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty in the amount of 10 percent of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who shall fail to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty in the amount of 10 percent of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the 10 percent penalty set forth in subsection A of this section. 
C.  Fraud. If the City Treasurer shall determine that the nonpayment of any remittance due pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty in the amount of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties set forth in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who shall fail to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of ½ of 1 percent per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, form the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues, pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.308)  
3.32.080 - Failure to collect and report tax—Appeal. 
A.  Failure to Collect and Report Tax. If any operator fails or refuses to collect or report the tax as provided for in this chapter, the City Treasurer shall proceed to obtain the facts and information on which to estimate the tax due. As soon as the City Treasurer procures such facts and information and estimates the tax due the City, including interest and penalties, the City Treasurer shall proceed to assess against such operator the taxes, interest and penalties due. The City Treasurer shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving the operator in person or by certified mail. 
B.  Appeal. Such operator may, within 10 calendar days after receiving notification by certified mail or in person from the City Treasurer of the amount due, appeal in writing the decision of the City Treasurer to the City Manager pursuant to the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this Code. If an appeal in writing is not received within the time prescribed, the decision of the city Treasurer shall become final and the estimated tax, penalties and interest shall immediately become due and payable. The city is authorized to collect any such tax as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.309)  
3.32.090 - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by the provisions or this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as the operator may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the City, which records the City Treasurer shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.311)  
3.32.100 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any such tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid, or paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City, such amount may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the City Treasurer within three years after the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the City Treasurer. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the City Treasurer that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the City, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the City Treasurer that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid pursuant to the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.312)  
3.32.110 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount. 
(Prior code § 3-5.313)  
3.32.120 - Violations of provisions. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter or who renders a false or fraudulent report or claim shall be deemed guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this Code. Any person found guilty of a violation of failing to comply with this chapter shall continue to be responsible for the payment of any taxes, penalties, and interest due the City. 
(Ord. 06-889 § 6: Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.314)  
Chapter 3.36 - UTILITY USERS TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.36.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Utility Users Tax Law of the City of Montclair." 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.601)  
3.36.020 - Exemptions. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of California statute, the Constitution of the State of California, or the Constitution of the United States. 
B.  The City Council may, by resolution, establish one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter, and provide that such classes of persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from such tax. 
C.  The Tax Administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section, and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. 
(Prior code § 3-5.603)  
3.36.030 - Other exemptions. 
A.  The exemption granted by this section shall not eliminate the duty of the service supplier, nonutility supplier, or person to collect and remit utility users' taxes from exempt persons, or the duty of exempt persons to pay such taxes unless an exemption is applied for and granted in accordance with Section 3.36.040. 
B.  The tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to utilities supplied to a residence if: (1) the combined gross income of all members of the service user's residence is less than the amount established for San Bernardino County by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for low-income families for the applicable household size; and (2) such condition is demonstrated to the Tax Administrator's satisfaction. 
C.  The income exemption limit provided herein shall be revised by the Tax Administrator to conform to the Low-Income Limits for San Bernardino County for applicable household sizes, as determined by HUD with regard to the Public Housing and Section 8 Program, within 60 days of the effective date of any revision of such amounts by HUD. 
(Prior code § 3-5.604)  
3.36.040 - Application for exemption. 
A.  Any service user meeting the exemption qualifications imposed by Section 3.36.030 may file an application with the Tax Administrator for an exemption. Such application shall be made on forms supplied by the Tax Administrator and shall recite under oath facts which qualify the applicant for an exemption. 
B.  The Tax Administrator shall review all such applications, certify qualified applicants as exempt, and notify all affected service suppliers when an exemption is approved, stating the name of the applicant, the address to which exempt service is being supplied, the account number, if any, and such other information as may be necessary for the service supplier to remove the exempt service user from its tax billing procedure. The service supplier shall remove the exempt service user from its tax billing procedure no later than 60 days after receipt of such notice from the Tax Administrator. 
C.  Except as provided hereinafter, exemptions shall continue and be renewed automatically by the Tax Administrator as long as the facts supporting the application for exemption continue. An exemption granted shall automatically terminate with any change in the residence of the person exempted, but such person may apply for a new exemption with each change of residence. 
D.  Any person exempt from the tax shall notify the Tax Administrator within 10 days of any change in fact or circumstance which might cause the person to become ineligible for exemption. 
E.  Any person knowingly receiving the benefits of this exemption when the basis for such exemption does not exist, or ceases to exist, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
F.  Any service supplier who determines that a new or nonexempt service user is receiving exempt service through a meter or connection previously used by an exempt service user shall immediately notify the Tax Administrator of such fact, and the Tax Administrator shall ascertain whether or not the provisions of this chapter have been complied with and, where appropriate, order the service supplier to commence collecting the tax from the nonexempt service user. 
(Prior code § 3-5.605)  
3.36.050 - Telephone users tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax on the amounts paid for any intrastate, interstate, and international telephone services by every person in the City using such services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 3.89 percent of the charges made for such services, and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. 
B.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones, except that where such coin-operated service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee, plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge, shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due; nor shall the term "charges" include charges for any type of service or equipment furnished by a service supplier subject to Public Utilities Commission regulations during any period in which the same or similar services or equipment are also available for sale or lease from persons other than a service supplier subject to Public Utilities Commission regulations; nor shall the words "telephone communication services" include land mobile service or maritime mobile services as defined in Section 2.1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as said section existed on January 1, 1970. The term "telephone communication services" refers to that service which provides access to a telephone system and the privilege of telephone quality communication with substantially all persons having telephone stations which are part of such telephone system. The telephone users tax is intended to, and does, apply to all charges billed to a telephone account having a situs in the City, irrespective of whether a particular communication service originates and/or terminates within the City. 
C.  The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person providing the intrastate, interstate and international telephone communication services, or the person receiving payment for such services. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax collected, measured by the tax bill in the previous month, shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of each month. 
D.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the tax imposed under this section shall not be imposed upon any person for using intrastate, interstate and international telephone communication services to the extent that the amounts paid for such services are exempt from or not subject to the tax imposed under Division Part 20, of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, or the tax imposed under Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. 01-807 § 1 (part); Ord. 00-795 § 1 (part); prior code § 3-5.606)  
3.36.060 - Electricity users tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax upon every person other than an electric or gas corporation, using electrical energy in the City. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 3.89 percent of the charges made for such energy by an electrical corporation providing service in the City and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the energy. The tax applicable to electrical energy provided by a nonutility supplier shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charge the service user would have incurred if the energy used has been provided by the electrical corporation franchised by the City. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the City. Nonutility suppliers shall install, maintain, and use an appropriate utility-type metering system which will enable compliance with this section. 
"Charges," as used in this section, shall include charges made for: (1) metered energy; and (2) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges, and all other annual and monthly charges, fuel or other cost adjustments authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
B.  As used in this section, the term "using electrical energy" shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by him or her for use in an automobile or other machinery device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received, provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include electricity used and consumed by an electric utility supplier in the conduct of its business; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric corporation or governmental agency at a point within the City for resale; nor shall the term include the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a water utility or a governmental agency. 
C.  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or nonutility supplier. The tax imposed in this section on use supplied by self-generation, or from a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be collected and remitted to the Tax Administrator in the manner set forth in Section 3.36.080. The amount of tax collected by a service supplier or a nonutility supplier in one month shall be remitted by United States mail to the Tax Administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of the following month, or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, shall be remitted by United States mail to the Tax Administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of each month. 
(Ord. 01-807 § 1 (part); Ord. 00-795 § 1 (part); prior code § 3-5.607)  
3.36.070 - Gas users tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax upon every person in the City, other than a gas corporation or electrical corporation, using, in the City, gas which is transported through mains or pipes or by mobile transport. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 3.89 percent of the charges made for the gas and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the gas. The tax applicable to gas or gas transportation provided by nonutility suppliers shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or gas transportation had been provided by the gas corporation franchised by the City. 
"Charges," as used in this section, shall include: (1) that billed for gas which is delivered through mains or pipes; (2) gas transportation charges; and (3) demand charges, service charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charge authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
B.  The tax otherwise imposed by this section is not applicable to: (1) charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains and pipes; (2) charges made for gas used and consumed by a public utility or governmental agency in the conduct of its business; or (3) charges made by a gas public utility or gas used and consumed in the course of its public utility business; and (4) charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as authorized in the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
C.  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling or transporting the gas. A person selling only transportation services to a service user for delivery of gas through mains or pipes shall collect the tax from the service user based on the transportation charges. The person selling or transporting the gas shall, on or before the 20th day of each calendar month, commencing on the twentieth day of the calendar month after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, make a report to the Tax Administrator stating the amount of taxes billed during the preceding calendar month. At the time such reports are filed, the person selling or transporting the gas shall remit tax payments to the Tax Administrator in accordance with schedules established or approved by the Tax Administrator. The tax imposed in this section on use supplied by self-production or a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be collected and remitted to the Tax Administrator in the manner set forth in Section 3.36.080. 
(Ord. 01-807 § 1 (part); Ord. 00-795 § 1 (part); prior code § 3-5.608)  
3.36.080 - Service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a service user receiving gas or electricity directly from a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter, or otherwise not having the full tax due on the use of gas or electricity in the City directly billed and collected by the service supplier, shall report said fact to the Tax Administrator within 30 days of said use and shall directly remit to the City the amount of tax due. 
B.  The Tax Administrator may require said service user to provide, subject to audit, filed tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used and the price thereof. 
(Prior code § 3-5.609)  
3.36.090 - Water users tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax upon every person in the City using water which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 3.89 percent of the charges made for such water and shall be paid by the person paying for such water. 
B.  There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed, charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered through mains or pipes; and charges made by a municipal water department, public utility, or a City or municipal water district for water used and consumed by such department, utility or district. 
C.  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person supplying the water. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month. 
(Ord. 01-807 § 1 (part); Ord. 00-795 § 1 (part); prior code § 3-5.610)  
3.36.100 - Remittance of tax. 
Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return may be postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
(Prior code § 3-5.611)  
3.36.110 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the City. Any such tax collected from a service user, and not re mitted to the Tax Administrator, shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount. 
(Prior code § 3-5-6.12)  
3.36.120 - Duty to collect—Procedures. 
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be performed as follows: 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3.36.080, the tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as, and along with, the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the service charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a service user shall be applied to the utility charge first until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall be applied to taxes due. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of his or her refusal to pay the tax imposed on said energy charges, Section 3.36.140(C) will apply. 
B.  The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing. 
C.  The City is authorized to collet any such tax as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-5.613)  
3.36.130 - Additional power and duties of tax administrator. 
A.  The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The Tax Administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the Tax Administrator's office. 
C.  The Tax Administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the requirements of this chapter so that collection of any tax imposed hereby may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of the particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the Tax Administrator's office. 
D.  The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by this chapter. The Tax Administrator shall provide the service supplier with the name of any person who the Tax Administrator determines is exempt from the tax imposed hereby, together with the address and account number to which service is supplied to any such exempt person. The Tax Administrator shall notify the service supplier of termination of any person's right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person. 
E.  The Tax Administrator shall provide notice to all service suppliers at least 90 days prior to any annexation or other change in the City's boundaries. Said notice shall set forth the revised boundaries by street and address, along with a copy of the final annexation order from LAFCO. 
(Prior code § 3-5.614)  
3.36.140 - Assessment—Service user administrative remedy. 
A.  Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him or her from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of tax, the person required to collect the tax may be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods as set forth below. 
B.  The service supplier shall provide the City with amounts refused and/or unpaid, along with the names and addresses of the service users neglecting to pay the tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due, except that the service supplier shall forthwith notify the Tax Administrator if any tax payment is made by the service user. 
C.  The Tax Administrator shall notify the service user that the Tax Administrator assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him or her personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax or, should the service user's address change, to the last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator within fifteen 15 days from the date of the service of the notice upon him, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than Five (5) Dollars. The penalty shall become part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Prior code § 3-5.615)  
3.36.150 - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every service supplier to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records relating to collection and remittance of the tax imposed by this chapter. The Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect such records during normal business hours. 
(Prior code § 3-5.616)  
3.36.160 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever it has been determined by the City's Finance Department, an independent audit, court decision or other source determined by the City to factually represent, with evidence, that the amount of any tax subject to this chapter has been overpaid, or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this chapter, such tax payment so collected or received may be refunded as provided in this section. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, a service supplier claiming a refund may take as credit against taxes owed the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established to the City's satisfaction that the service user from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the amount of the tax overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed by the service supplier unless it can be established to the City's satisfaction that the amount of the tax overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the service supplier required to collect and remit. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter and actually due from a service user may refund such excess amount to the service user and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns, provided such credit is claimed as provided in Chapter 1.16 of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
C.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns, provided such credit is claimed as provided in Chapter 1.16 of the Montclair Municipal Code. In the event the ordinance codified in this chapter is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne by the City. 
D.  A service supplier may refund the taxes collected to the service user in accordance with this section or by the service supplier's customary practice. 
(Prior code § 3-5.617) 
(Ord. No. 16-960, § 1, 10-3-16)  
3.36.170 - Termination or suspension of utility users tax. 
The service supplier shall, upon notification, terminate or suspend any utility users tax commencing with the first full billing period which occurs after the effective date of such notice by the Tax Administrator. 
(Prior code § 3-5.618)  
Title 4 - BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 4.02 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
4.02.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this title: 
Accupressure means a method or form of therapeutic treatment similar to that of massage as defined under this section. For the purpose of this title, the word "accupressure" shall have the same meaning as that of "massage." 
Accupressure clinic . This term shall have the same meaning as that of "massage establishment." 
Acutherapy . This term shall have the same meaning as that of "accupressure" or "massage." 
Affected home owner , as applied to mobile home rent regulation, means any home owner whose rent payment is affected by any proposed rent adjustment other than permitted by Section 4.60.080(A) of this Code. 
Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring attention and to which police are called upon to respond. 
Ambulance means any privately or publicly owned vehicle used to transport sick, injured, convalescent, infirm, or otherwise incapacitated persons. 
Ambulances classified as paramedic or advanced life support ambulances shall be certified for advanced life support, capable of providing special services designed to provide definitive prehospital emergency medical care. Prehospital emergency medical care shall include, but not be limited to, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, cardiac monitoring, cardiac defibrillation, advanced airway management, intravenous therapy, administration of specified drugs and other medical preparations, and other specified techniques and procedures administered by authorized personnel. Such authorized personnel shall be under the direct supervision of a base hospital as part of a local emergency medical services system at the scene of an emergency, during transport to an acute care hospital, during interfacility or interambulance transfer, and while in the emergency department of an acute care hospital until responsibility is assumed by the emergency or other medical staff of that hospital. 
Ambulances classified as basic life support ambulances shall provide emergency first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation procedures which, as a minimum, include recognizing respiratory and cardiac arrest and starting the proper application of cardiopulmonary resuscitation to maintain life without invasive techniques until the patient may be transported or until advanced life support is available. 
Average number of employees , when applied to business licensing means the average number of persons employed daily in the applicant's business for the period of one year and shall be ascertained by determining the total number of hours of service performed by an employee during the previous year and divided by the number of hours of service constituting a day's work, according to the customs or laws governing such employment, and by again dividing the sum thus obtained by the number of business days in each year. In computing the average number of persons employed, fractions of numbers shall not be included. 
Business , when applied to business licensing, means any employment avocation, occupation, profession, trade, calling, lawful game, show, exhibition, event, venture, fundraising activity, commercial enterprise, company, corporation, joint enterprise, place of business, partnership or other activity or enterprise engaged in for gain, profit, benefit, advantage or livelihood. 
Business license fee means the fee, charge or assessment imposed for the privilege of engaging in business in the City. 
Capital improvement , as applied to mobile home rent regulation, means the installation of new improvements and facilities and/or the replacement or reconstruction of existing improvements and facilities which consist of more than ordinary maintenance or repairs and have a useful life of at least five years. 
Card room means any establishment where legal gambling as defined in this chapter is conducted. 
Collector , when applied to business licensing, means the City Treasurer or designated representative. 
Consumer Price Index , as applied to mobile home rent regulation, means the Consumer Price index (CPI) published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor for all urban consumers for the Los Angeles/Anaheim/ Riverside Metropolitan Area. If the CPI is discontinued or revised while the mobile home rent regulation section of this Code is in effect, such other government index or computation with which it is replaced shall be used in order to obtain substantially the same result as would be obtained if the CPI had not been discontinued or revised. 
Dance hall means any public place open to the public wherein the public may engage in dancing. Dances under the supervision and control of school authorities shall be exempt from the provisions of this Code and shall not be considered public dances. 
Driver , when applied to taxicabs, means every person in actual charge and control of any taxicab as the driver thereof. 
Emergency, when applied to ambulances, means a condition or situation in which an individual has the need for immediate medical attention, or where the potential for such need is perceived by emergency medical personnel or a public safety agency. 
Emergency medical services , when applied to ambulances, means the services utilized in responding to a medical emergency. 
Emergency medical services plan , when applied to ambulances, means a plan for the delivery of emergency medical services consistent with State guidelines addressing Section 1797.103 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Emergency medical services system , when applied to ambulances, means a specially organized arrangement which provides for the personnel, facilities and equipment for the effective and coordinated delivery of emergency medical services as designated by the County Health Officer or emergency medical services plan. 
Emergency Medical Technician-I (EMT-I) means an individual certified and trained in all facets of basic life support according to standards prescribed by the California Health and Safety Code. 
Emergency Medical Technician-II (EMT-II) means an EMT-I certified to have additional training in limited advanced life support according to standards prescribed by the California Health and Safety Code. 
Emergency Medical Technician-Paramedic (EMT-P) means an individual whose scope of practice and training to provide advanced life support meets the standards prescribed by the California Health and Safety Code and who has a valid EMT-P certificate. 
Employee , when applied, to business licensing, means any person engaged in the operation or conduct of any business whether as an officer, agent, manager, solicitor, or as a member of the business owner's family, and any and all other persons employed or working in said business. 
Engaging in business , when applied to business licensing, means carrying on, commencing, conducting, operating, performing, managing or transacting any business, whether done as an owner or partner, or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee servant or lessee, whether operating from a fixed location in the City or from a vehicle, or as a transient, or by use of telephone communications, for the purpose of monetary gain or profit. 
Exclusive operating area , when applied to ambulances, means an emergency medical service area as defined by the County emergency medical service plan, which restricts operations to one or more emergency ambulance service or provider of limited or advanced life support. 
False alarm means an alarm signal, either silent or audible, necessitating response by the Police Department where an emergency situation for which the alarm system was designed or used does not exist. The activation of an audible alarm system for one second or less shall not be deemed a false alarm. 
Food truck means any vehicle or trailer as those terms are defined in the California Vehicle Code, which is equipped or used for retail sales of prepared unpackaged food or foodstuffs of any kind. Food vending vehicle as used in this title does not refer to, nor include, ice cream trucks, catering trucks selling prepackaged food, or vehicles used for delivering previously ordered food from any store or restaurant to another place of business or residence. 
Food truck event means the permitted use of one or more food trucks at a single location. Multiple food trucks at an event may also be referred to as a food truck festival, or food truck rodeo. 
Food truck event: Extended term - is a temporary food truck event which takes place at an approved location on multiple occasions at regularly scheduled intervals and/or over an extended time frame. 
Food truck event: Short-term is an approved one day or a single short-term (maximum three days in duration) outdoor social occasion or business activity conducted on private property where a food truck may operate. 
Food truck vendor means a person or company who owns, controls, operates, and/or leases a food truck vehicle from which food items are prepared and sold. 
Food truck vendor permit means a permit issued by the City granting approval to operate a food truck vehicle within City boundaries pursuant to this chapter. 
Gaming club means any establishment where legal gambling as defined in this chapter is conducted. 
Gross payroll , when applied to business licensing, means all salaries remunerated to owners, partners, officers, agents, employees and any and all other persons employed by a business located in the City. Included in the computation of salaries shall be all wages, commissions, bonuses or any other form of payment. 
Gross receipt , when applied to business licensing, means the total amount actually received from all sources; the total amount received for the performance of any act, service or employment whether or not such service, act or employment is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise; and gains realized from rents, fees, commissions, dividends or other emoluments, however designated. Included in gross receipts shall be all receipts, cases, credits and property of any kind or nature without any deduction on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever, except that the following shall be excluded: 
1.  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
2.  Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold, at which time the sales price shall be included as "gross receipts"; 
3.  Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
4.  Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon recision of a contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit; 
5.  Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, provided the agent or trustee has furnished the collector with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts collected for them and paid to them; 
6.  Refundable deposits, provided that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded; 
7.  That portion of the receipts of a general contractor which represent payments to licensed subcontractors. The general contractor shall furnish the collector with the names and addresses of the subcontractors and the amounts paid each subcontractor; 
8.  Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or units of the same business; 
9.  The sales price of real estate sold for the account of others, except that portion which represents commission or other income to a real estate agent or broker; and 
10.  That portion of "gross receipts" which has been the measure of a business license tax or business license fee paid to any other municipality for sales transacted outside the City. 
Legal gambling means any game played with cards, dice, or other device for currency, check, credit, or any other thing of value that is not already prohibited under State law or local ordinance. This definition shall specifically exclude California State lottery games and bingo games as defined in Chapter 4.20 of this Code. 
License , when applied to business licensing, means the valid receipt issued by the collector, which indicates that any fee imposed in Chapter 4.04 of this Code has been paid to the City. The business license is a receipt only and shall have no other legal effect. 
Licensee , when applied to business licensing, means any person holding a license issued pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4.04 of this Code. 
Local EMS agency , when applied to ambulances, means the County EMS office responsible for administering the County emergency medical service plan. 
Location means a fixed point on a private parcel of real property, or contiguous private parcels of real property under common ownership, on which a mobile food truck vendor is permitted to conduct business. 
Massage means a method of procedures upon the external parts of the body consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading or tapping with the hand or other parts of the body or any instrument, with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, oils, powder, creams, lotions, or other similar preparations used in this practice. 
Massage establishment means an establishment having a fixed place of business where any person, association, firm or corporation engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, any business of giving Turkish, Russian, Swedish, vapor, sweat, electric, salt, or any other kind or character of baths or where alcohol rubs, fomentation, baths, manipulations of the body, accupressure, massage, or similar procedures are given. 
Massage technician means any person, male or female, who administers to another person, for any form of consideration, a massage, accupressure, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, or electric massage procedure, manipulation of the body, or other similar procedure. 
Mobile home , when applied to mobile home rent regulation, means a vehicle designed or used for human habitation when used as the owner's principal place of residence. 
Mobile home owner , when applied to mobile home rent regulation, means any person entitled under the terms of a rental agreement, whether verbal, written or implied, to the use or occupancy of a mobile home space. "Mobile home owner" shall also include a prospective mobile home owner. A prospective mobile home owner is a person who has purchased or is in the process of purchasing or otherwise acquiring a mobile home that is or will be located in a particular mobile home park. 
Mobile home park means any parcel of land where two or more spaces are rented or held out for rent to accommodate mobile homes when 50 percent or more of the spaces available for rent are occupied by mobile homes in excess of 8 feet in width and/or 40 feet in length. 
Mobile home space means a site within a mobile home park rented or offered for rent for the location and installation of a mobile home and any accessory structures or appurtenances attached thereto. 
Owner , when applied to taxicabs, means every person owning or controlling any taxicab. 
Park owner , when applied to mobile home rent regulation, means a person or entity who received or is entitled to receive rent for the use or occupancy of spaces in a mobile home park or an agent or representative authorized to rent on behalf of such person or entity. 
Park services , when applied to mobile home rent regulation, means services which include, but are not limited to repairs, replacement, maintenance, provision of utilities, storage, laundry facilities, janitorial services, refuse removal and any other benefit, privilege or facility connected with the use or occupancy of a mobile home space. Park services to a mobile home space shall include a proportionate part of the services provided to the common facilities in a mobile home park available to or for the benefit of a mobile home space. 
Permittee , when applied to false alarms, means any person holding an alarm system permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
Person , when applied to business licensing, means and includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. 
Premises , when applied to alarm systems means any building or structure identified by a numerical or lettered address where an alarm system is installed, or a group of units within one building or structure with one alarm system. 
Public dance means any public place open to the public wherein the public may engage in dancing. Dances under the supervision and control of school authorities shall be exempt from the provisions of this Code and shall not be considered public dances. 
Rent , when applied to mobile home rent regulation, means the consideration, including any bonus, benefits or gratuity demanded or received in connection with the use and occupancy of a mobile home space in a mobile home park, including park services, including, but not limited to amounts demanded or paid for park services, subletting, and security damages, but exclusive of any amounts paid for use of a mobile home. 
Rent-Review Administrator (RRA) , when applied to mobile home rent regulation, means the City Manager or his or her designee. 
Sworn statement , when applied to business licensing, means an affidavit sworn to before the collector or a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury. 
Taxicab means every motor vehicle used in the business of carrying passengers for hire, the destination and route of which vehicles are under the control of the passengers being carried therein. 
Taxicab stand means a portion of the street designated by the City Council for the use of taxicabs while waiting for employment. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code §§ 3-1.101, 4-7.01, 4-11.02, 5-1.01, 5-2.502, 5-5.01, 5-10.20, 5-19.02) 
(Ord. No. 18-976, § 1, 5-21-18)  
Chapter 4.04 - BUSINESS LICENSE PROVISIONS GENERALLY 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
4.04.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of raising revenue for municipal purposes. 
(Prior code § 3-1.102)  
4.04.020 - License and fee required—Exception. 
A.  License and Fee Required. No person shall engage in any business in the City without first having obtained a business license, paid the appropriate license fee, and complied with any and all applicable provisions of this Code. In any business where a State license is required, such license shall be exhibited to the collector before a City business license is issued. Failure of the applicant for a business license to exhibit or be in actual possession of a State license or failure of the collector to verify the legitimacy or applicant's possession of such license shall not constitute negligence on the part of the City. 
B.  Exception. This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a business license where such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the State of California. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.103)  
4.04.030 - Fees set by resolution. 
Every person engaging in business in the City shall pay a business license fee as prescribed by resolution. The City Council shall review the resolution fixing business license fees and shall retain, revoke, modify, adjust, add or determine any amount or rate of such business license fees. Such resolution shall have the force of law and shall be binding on all persons engaging in business in the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.104)  
4.04.040 - Fees and penalties constitute debt. 
The amount of any license fee and penalty imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent license fee and penalties. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.105)  
4.04.050 - Compliance with other regulations. 
The payment of a fee required by this chapter, and the issuance of a license to any person, shall not entitle the licensee to engage in any business unless the licensee has complied with all other applicable federal, state or local laws; nor shall the licensee be excused from the payment of any license, certificate, registration, insurance, bond, cash deposit, permit fee or tax required under any other provision of this Code or any ordinance of the City; nor shall the licensee be authorized to conduct any business or activity in violation of any federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.106)  
4.04.060 - Evidence of doing business. 
When any person engages or represents to be engaged in business in the City, and when the collector requests a person believed to be conducting business in the City to file a sworn statement denying such activity, and such person fails to file such statement, then these facts shall be considered evidence that such person is engaging in business in the City until disproved by evidence to the contrary. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.107)  
4.04.070 - Separate license required for each place or type of business. 
A separate license shall be obtained for each branch or location of a business carried on in the City; provided, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. Any person conducting two or more types of business at the same location and under the same management, where the license fee for each type of business is based on gross receipts, gross payroll or average number of employees, may combine each business as a single business and pay only one license fee calculated on the total gross receipts, gross payroll or average number of employees of the business(es). 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.108)  
4.04.080 - Information confidential. 
The collector shall maintain in confidence the business affairs, operations or other information contained in any statement or business license application and any information obtained from any investigation of records of a business; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the examination of records by Federal or State officials, a grand jury or court of law upon subpoena, or another agent of the City for the purpose of auditing the accounts of the collector or administering or enforcing this chapter; nor shall this section prohibit the disclosure of the names and business addresses of licensees, the general type of their business, and general statistics regarding business license fees collected in the City. 
(Prior code § 3-1.109)  
Article II. - Exemptions 
 
4.04.090 - Constitutional and statutory exemptions. 
This chapter shall not be construed to require the payment of a license fee by any person engaging in business when said person or business is exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the State of California, or by any ordinance of the City of Montclair. 
(Prior code § 3-1.201)  
4.04.100 - Mandatory exemptions. 
A.  Interstate/Foreign Commerce. No license fee provided for by this chapter shall be so applied as to impose an undue burden upon or unlawful interference with interstate or foreign commerce. Where a licensee or applicant for a license believes a license fee places an undue burden upon or unlawfully interferes with interstate or foreign commerce, such person may apply to the collector for an exemption of the fee. Application for exception of the fee shall be made during application for a license. The licensee or applicant for a license shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, demonstrate to the collector the interstate or foreign commerce character of the business entitling the licensee or applicant to such exemption. The statement shall contain the name and address of the company or firm for which the orders are to be solicited or secured; the name and address of the nearest local or state manager, if any; the kind of materials or merchandise bought or sold in commerce; the place from which the same are to be shipped or forwarded; the method of solicitation or taking orders; the address of any warehouse, factory or plant within the state; the method of delivery; the name and address of the applicant for the exemption; and any other information required by the collector to establish such claim of exemption. The collector shall then conduct an investigation to determine the facts and, if warranted, issue a fee-exempt license. 
B.  Banks. No license fee shall be required of or from any banks or financial corporations to the extent that the City may not levy a tax upon them pursuant to the provisions of Section 23182 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  Insurance Companies. No license fee shall be required of any insurance company pursuant to the provisions of Section 12204 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
D.  Disabled Veteran. No honorably discharged veteran who is physically disabled shall be required to pay a license fee when such payment would impose an undue burden on said disabled veteran. An honorably discharged veteran who can produce evidence attesting to such disability and discharge status, and who provides a sworn statement attesting to the nature of the undue burden a business license fee would impose, may distribute circulars and peddle and vend any goods, wares or merchandise owned, except alcoholic beverages, without payment of a business license fee. 
E.  City Services. No license fee shall be required of any vendor performing services to the City in which the aggregate value of all City payments to the vendor during the calendar year is Five Thousand (5,000) Dollars or less and the vendor is engaged in no other business within the City. If the vendor is engaged in other business within the City, the vendor shall be required to obtain a license. Additionally, a supplier delivering materials in connection with a contract with the City and for use on a City project is not required to obtain a business license unless otherwise provided in the contract. 
F.  Delivery by Common Carrier. A seller located outside the City merely delivering goods into the City by means of common carrier is not required to obtain a business license provided it engages in no other business activities in or with the City. If a seller performs other business activities in the City in addition to delivering goods by common carrier, the seller must obtain a business license. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.202) 
(Ord. No. 13-940, § 1, 1-6-14)  
4.04.110 - Discretionary exemptions. 
A.  Nonprofit and Charitable Organizations. Except as otherwise provided, this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license fee to engage in any business operated for nonprofit purposes where such business is conducted, managed or carried on by and/or only for the benefit of any nonprofit organization, including fraternal societies, orders or organizations, religious, charitable, philanthropic, scientific, literary or educational organizations, amateur sports or humanitarian organizations, civic leagues, social welfare and employees' organizations, nonprofit pleasure and recreation clubs, political organizations, home owners' associations, and military, federal, state, county or municipal organizations. The collector shall require any information or evidence necessary to establish nonprofit status. 
B.  Public Utilities. This chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require payment of a license fee by any public utility which pays to the City a franchise tax; provided, that a license fee shall be required for any retail sales conducted in the City by such public utility. Where a license fee is imposed on a public utility, it shall not differ from the rate imposed on mercantile, manufacturing and other business corporations. 
C.  Employees of Licensees. Except as otherwise provided, no person acting solely as an employee or as the direct representative of a business which holds a business license shall be required to pay a business license. 
(Prior code § 3-1.203)  
4.04.120 - Filing statement for exemption. 
Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this chapter shall file a sworn statement with the collector staring the facts upon which said exemption is claimed; in the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such person shall be liable for the payment of the appropriate business license fee as set forth by resolution. The collector shall, upon verification of the information contained in the sworn statement, issue a license to such person desiring exemption. Upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption, the collector, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke any license and shall require the licensee to pay the amount of the license fee determined to be due the City. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt any person from complying with any and all other applicable federal, stare or local laws. 
(Prior code § 3-1.204)  
Article III. - Application and Administration 
 
4.04.130 - General application procedure. 
Every person required to have a business license shall apply to the collector for a license. Upon receipt of a completed application and any fees required, the collector shall process the application and issue a business license. The amount or fees due shall be determined in accordance with a schedule established by resolution. The collector may submit the application to other City departments or governmental agencies to determine if the business and premises to be occupied meet the requirements of federal, state and local laws. 
(Prior code § 3-1.301)  
4.04.140 - Contents of business license. 
Each business license shall contain the name and title of the person to whom the license is issued; the name of the business; the complete address where such business is to be transacted and carried on or, in the case of a person engaging in business with-out a fixed location in the City, the complete address that serves as the primary business location for such person; the mailing address when it is different than the business address; the date of expiration of the business license; the type of business being conducted or carried on; the amount of the license fee paid by the licensee; and other information as may be necessary for the enforcement and administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.302)  
4.04.150 - First application. 
Any person applying for a first business license shall submit to the collector a completed license application and pay the appropriate fee set forth by resolution. When the amount of the license fee to be paid is based on gross receipts, gross payroll or average number of employees, the applicant shall furnish to the collector a sworn statement setting forth such information as may be required by the collector to determine the amount of the license fee to be paid by the applicant. The applicant shall estimate the gross receipts, gross payroll or average number of employees for the period to be covered by the license to be issued, and report such estimate to the collector. Such report, if accepted by the collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of the license fee due; provided, however, the amount of the license fee so determined shall be tentative only, and the licensee shall, within 30 days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish to the collector a sworn statement showing the actual gross receipts, gross payroll or average number of employees during the period of such license. The license fee for such period shall be ascertained and paid at the rate specified by resolution less the amount paid at the time such license was issued. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.303)  
4.04.160 - Renewal of license. 
Any person applying to renew a business license shall submit to the collector a completed application for renewal and pay the appropriate license fee as set forth by resolution. When the license fee is based on gross receipts, gross payroll or average number of employees, the license fee shall be computed on the basis of information supplied concerning the applicant's business during the preceding license period. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.304)  
4.04.170 - License fees—Payment due dates. 
A.  Annual. Except for businesses licensed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and unless otherwise specifically provided, all business license fees shall be due and payable annually on the first day of the month following the anniversary date on which a license was originally issued. For businesses licensed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, license fees shall be due and payable on the first day of July of each year. A grace period of thirty days shall follow the due date of each annual license. 
B.  Establishing Alternative License Periods. If deemed necessary or convenient for administrative purposes, the collector may establish alternative license periods for individual businesses or to certain classes of businesses on a fiscal year, calendar year or other basis. In no instance shall a license period extend for a period in excess of one year. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.305)  
4.04.180 - Prorating fees. 
No business license shall be issued or fees assessed for any period of time other than a full license period. 
(Prior code § 3-1.306)  
4.40.190 - Refunds. 
No business license fees or penalties collected shall be refundable in any manner; provided, that when a licensee establishes to the satisfaction of the collector that an amount was paid in excess of the correct amount due for a first license, a refund of the excess amount paid shall be made by the collector. Claims for refund shall be made by sworn statement with supporting testimony and must be filed with the collector within a period of 30 days from the day on which the first license expired. Claims for refund may be made only by a person named on the business license, a designated guardian, executor, administrator or heir. No refund for overpayment shall be made when the license was issued under a misrepresentation of fact by the applicant. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.307)  
4.04.200 - Mistakes not to prejudice fees or terms. 
In no case shall any mistake of the collector in stating the amount or terms of a license, or the time for which the license is valid, prevent or prejudice the collection, by the City, of what shall be actually due from any person engaging in business in the City. 
(Prior code § 3-1.308)  
4.04.210 - Duplicate license—Modification to license. 
A.  Duplicate License. Upon a licensee filing a statement indicating that a license has been lost or destroyed, and after paying a fee as established by resolution, a duplicate license shall be issued by the collector. 
B.  Modification to License. Where a license is issued authorizing a person to engage in a business under a particular business name or at a particular location, the licensee may, upon application, and paying a fee as established by resolution, have the license amended to reflect a new business name or some other location to which the business has or is to be moved. 
(Prior code § 3-1.309)  
4.04.220 - License not transferable. 
No license issued pursuant to this chapter is transferable. 
(Prior code § 3-1.310)  
4.04.230 - Payments received by mail. 
Whenever any payment, statement, report or other communication is received after a deadline prescribed by this chapter, but is received in a sealed envelope bearing a postmark dated on or before such deadline, the collector may regard such payment, statement, report or other communication as having been received in a timely manner. 
(Prior code § 3-1.311)  
Article IV. - Enforcement 
 
4.04.240 - Posting and keeping of licenses. 
Any person engaging in business at a fixed place of business in the City shall keep a business license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where the business is carried on. Any person engaging in business, but not operating at a fixed place of business in the City, shall be in possession of a business license at all times while on such business in the City. 
(Prior code § 3-1.401)  
4.04.250 - Authority to enforce—Entry to inspect. 
A.  Authority to Enforce. The collector shall have the authority to enforce each of the provisions of this chapter. The police department and other departments of the City shall render assistance in the enforcement of this chapter as may, from time to time, be necessary. The collector shall have the authority to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all persons found to be violating any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Entry to Inspect. The collector, in the exercise of the duties imposed by this chapter, and every police officer, fire inspector and other officers of the City empowered to enforce the provisions of this Code, shall have the power and authority to enter into or upon, free of charge, and at any reasonable time, the premises of any place of business required to be licensed and demand that any person in charge of such place of business exhibit a license to engage in business. Any person engaging in business in the City who is required to be in possession of a business license shall exhibit such license on demand by the collector or any police officer, fire inspector, or other officer of the City empowered to enforce the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.402)  
4.04.260 - Audit and verification—Audit program. 
A.  No application or statement submitted to the collector pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall be conclusive as to the information it contains. The contents of any application or statement shall be subject to audit and verification by the collector, who is authorized to examine, audit and inspect books and records of any business in the City. Inspection of books and records shall be conducted only to ascertain the amount of the license fee due the City. No licensee or applicant for a license shall refuse to allow the collector or other authorized representative of the City to inspect such books and records at any reasonable time or place. 
B.  The collector shall establish a business license audit program to perform checks on the accuracy of reported gross receipts or any other measure upon which a business license fee is based. Such program shall not be limited in type or number of businesses audited. Where the collector has found that a person engaging in business in the City has under-reported gross receipts, or any other measure upon which a business license fee is based, the collector shall take action to collect any license fee and/or penalties due the City. The collector shall give notice of the amount assessed by serving such notice personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office in the City, addressed to the person so assessed at such person's last known address. Such person may, within 15 days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make an application in writing to the City Manager for a hearing on the amount due the City. Upon receipt of such request for a hearing, the City Manager or authorized representative shall set the matter for hearing, and cause notice of the time and place of the hearing to be given to the licensee not less than five consecutive days prior to such hearing. At such hearing, the City Manager or authorized representative shall determine if the amount determined to be due the City is reasonable. Licensee shall have the right to appeal the decision of the City Manager or authorized representative to the City Council pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this Code. Any person failing to cooperate with the collector in the conduct of the business license audit program shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be liable under the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.403)  
4.04.270 - Penalties for delinquency—Action to collect. 
A.  Penalties for Delinquency. Any person engaging in business in the City who fails to pay the appropriate business license fee shall be subject to rile following penalties: 
1.  For failure to pay a license fee when due, the collector shall add a penalty of 10 percent of such license fee on the day following the last day of each consecutive 30-day interval following the due date while the license fee remains unpaid; provided, that the total amount of the penalty to be added shall not exceed 100 percent of the amount of the license fee due. 
2.  For failure to secure a license to engage in business, the license fee due and payable shall be that amount due and payable from the first date the person engaged in business, together with applicable penalties provided in subsection (A)(1) of this section. 
3.  For failure to pay the amount which was actually due, it shall be deemed that to the extent of the deficiency, there was a failure to pay a license fee when due. Penalties provided in subsection (A)(1) of this section shall be assessed on the amount of the deficiency from the date when such amount was first required to be paid. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to apply to any person when the deficiency is the result of an error by the collector in calculating the amount of the license fee due and when such error is not the result of misrepresented facts supplied to the collector by any such person. 
B.  Action to Collect. Notwithstanding subsection (A)(1) of this section, should court action be required to collect any license fee and/or penalties, an additional penalty shall be charged equal to the cost incurred by the City for the court action, including attorney fees. All penalties shall be added to the license fee and shall become due and payable along with the delinquent license fee. The City is authorized to collect any such fee as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.404)  
4.04.280 - Failure to file. 
If any person fails to file any statement or fails to provide any information required by the collector to determine the license fee due, or if the collector is not satisfied with the information provided, the collector may determine the amount of the license fee due from such person by means of such information the collector is able to obtain. if such determination is made, the collector shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving such notice personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office in the City, addressed to the person so assessed at such person's last known address. Such person may, within 15 days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make an application in writing to the City Manager for a hearing on the amount of the license fee. Upon receipt of such request for a hearing, the City Manager or authorized representative shall set the matter for hearing, and cause notice of the time and place of the hearing to be given to the licensee not less than five consecutive days prior to such hearing. At such hearing, the City Manager or authorized representative shall determine if the license fee fixed by the collector is reasonable. Licensee shall have the right to appeal the decision of the City Manager or authorized representative to the City Council pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.405)  
4.04.290 - Withholding a license. 
The collector shall withhold from any person a license to engage in business when there are pending violations of this Code against such person applying for a license, or when any person owes a debt to the City as a result of a violation of this Code, or when there are pending violations of this Code against the property from which the business is to be conducted. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.406)  
4.04.300 - Revoking a license. 
Any business license issued pursuant to this chapter is accepted by the licensee with the understanding that it may be revoked upon action by the City Council, or upon determination by the City Manager or authorized representative that the license was obtained by false representation of facts or that the licensee is in violation of the relevant provisions of this Code or laws of the City, State or of the United States. The collector may recommend to the City Manager or authorized representative the cancellation of any business license issued pursuant to this chapter. Upon receipt of such recommendation, the City Manager or authorized representative shall set the matter for hearing and cause notice of the time and place of the hearing, and the grounds upon which it is proposed to revoke such license, to be given the licensee not less than five consecutive days prior to such hearing. At such hearing, the City Manager or authorized representative shall determine if the license shall be revoked. Licensee shall have the right to appeal the decision of the City Manager or authorized representative to the City Council pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this Code. Upon the revocation of a business license, no part of the license fees paid shall be refunded. When a person's license has been revoked, no license to engage in any business shall be issued to such person for a period of six months following the date of revocation. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.407)  
4.04.310 - Violations. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this Code. Any person found guilty of a violation for failing to comply with this chapter shall continue to be responsible for the payment of any license fees, interest, and/or penalties due the City. 
(Ord. 06-889 § 4: Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.408)  
4.04.320 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector with respect to the issuance or denial of a business license shall have the right to appeal to the City Council pursuant to the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this Code. 
(Prior code § 3-1.409)  
4.04.330 - Waiver or reduction of fees. 
The collector, with the consent of the City Council, may, for good and satisfactory cause shown, order the issuance of a license for less than the fees and/or penalties provided. 
(Prior code § 3-1.410)  
4.04.340 - Rules and regulations. 
The collector may make rules and regulations and adjust fees consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the State of California. Such rules, regulations and fee adjustments shall be established to clarify provisions of this chapter or aid in their enforcement. The body of such rules, regulations and fee adjustments shall be known collectively as the "City of Montclair Business License Policies and Procedures" and shall be placed in written form, and approved by the City Manager before becoming effective. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-1.411)  
4.04.350 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative, and the use of any one remedy by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedies for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-1.412)  
Chapter 4.08 - ADVERTISING MATTER—DISTRIBUTION 
Sections: 
 
4.08.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the people against the nuisance of the unlawful or careless and repetitious distribution of commercial and noncommercial advertising matter and the resulting danger to public health and safety and the public interest. The City Council determines to: 
A.  Protect the people against the unlawful activities or operations of dissolute persons of criminal habits or tendencies, representing themselves as advertising distributors, requiring that all such persons apply for and receive a permit to distribute advertising matter and pay a license fee; 
B.  Protect residents against trespassing by advertising distributors upon the private property of such residents if they do not wish to be solicited by such persons; 
C.  Protect the health and safety of the people and protect against the expense resulting from the littering of the streets and public places by the careless and repetitious distribution of commercial advertising matter; 
D.  Protect the people against the accumulation of commercial advertising matter on their property during their absence caused by the unlawful activities or operation of dissolute persons of criminal habits or tendencies made aware of the absence of the people from their premises by the accumulation of commercial advertising matter during such absence; 
E.  To preserve for the people their constitutional right to receive and disseminate information not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency and good morals and public order by distinguishing between the nuisance created by the careless and repetitious distribution of advertising matter and the right to deliver advertising matter to all who are willing to receive it. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.020 - Permit requirements. 
Persons responsible for the distribution of commercial advertising matter, whether as the person distributing advertising matter or as the person responsible for hiring others to distribute advertising matter, shall first apply for and obtain a permit as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.030 - Application requirements. 
The applicant shall complete the application form provided by the City Treasurer. The applicant shall include a California picture identification and any other information deemed reasonable by the City Treasurer for each person distributing commercial advertising matter under this permit. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.040 - Permit conditions. 
The applicant must hold a valid business license to do business within the City prior to applying for a permit to distribute commercial advertising matter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.050 - Permit exceptions. 
The permit fee required by this chapter shall not apply to any advertising matter sent through the United States Postal Service in accordance with postal regulations nor shall it be required for the circulating of newspapers as defined in Chapter 4.02 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.060 - Permit fee. 
A nonrefundable application fee, as established in the business license fee resolution, must be paid at the time the application is submitted. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.070 - Consent requirements. 
For the purpose of this section, the consent of the owner or occupant of private property shall be presumed unless the owner or occupant has conspicuously posted upon the property a sign bearing the words "No Solicitors," "No Peddlers," "No Trespassing," "No Advertising," or equivalent language which shall prohibit commercial advertising matter delivery in or upon such premises or unless such owner or occupant contacts the City Treasurer by certified mail and specifically requests that their property be placed on a list to be maintained by the City Treasurer that withholds consent for the receipt of commercial advertising matter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.080 - Commercial advertising matter requirements. 
A.  All commercial advertising matter distributed in the City shall have printed on or affixed to each, in legible form, the following information: 
1.  The name, telephone number, address, or other identifying information regarding the real estate broker, real estate firm, real estate agent, or other person associated with the realty firm; 
2.  The name, telephone number, address, or other identifying information of the owner or lessee of property used for a commercial activity or event; 
3.  The name, telephone number, address, or other identifying information of the sponsor or promoter of a sporting event, concert, theatrical performance, or similar activity or event. 
B.  Failure of the distributor to comply with this section is grounds for permit revocation. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.090 - Distributor's identification badge. 
No person shall distribute any commercial advertising matter in the City without first obtaining from the City Treasurer an identification badge. The identification badge shall be displayed in a prominent and visible place on the person at all times when engaged in the distribution of commercial advertising matter in the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.100 - Identification badge fee. 
A nonrefundable identification badge fee, as established in the business license fee resolution, will be charged for each identification badge issued under this permit. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.110 - Distribution on public property prohibited. 
No person shall distribute, or cause to be distributed, commercial advertising matter in or along any public street, alley, or other public place within the City; the foregoing shall not prohibit the handing out of commercial advertising matter to anyone willing to accept or receive same. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.120 - Distribution on vacant private property. 
It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, leave or cast any commercial advertising matter on or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.130 - Distribution on motor vehicles. 
It is unlawful for any person to distribute, or cause to be distributed, any commercial advertising matter by placing the same in or upon any motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the California Vehicle Code, which is parked upon any public street, alley, or public parking area, or upon any such vehicle parked upon any private property. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.140 - Distribution on private property. 
The delivery of commercial advertising matter on private property shall be accomplished by attaching the same securely to a doorknob or other suitable hardware in the area around the main door in such a manner that it will not likely be blown and scattered about the premises. No person shall distribute, or cause to be distributed, any commercial advertising matter except by use of authorized sidewalks, pathways, or other designated walkways on private property that lead directly to the main entry door of the house or place of business. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.150 - Hours of distribution. 
No person shall distribute, or cause to be distributed, any commercial advertising matter between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.160 - Political, charitable and religious handbills. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the distribution and delivery of any newspaper, political, charitable or religious advertising matter, or other advertising medium having reference to an election or to any candidate in any national, state, county or City election or election of any other public entity; provided, however, that any such newspaper, political advertising matter, or advertising medium shall have printed on or affixed to it the name, address, telephone number and other identifying information of the person responsible for its distribution. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.170 - Littering. 
Any commercial advertising matter distributed in a manner that does not comply with this chapter shall be deemed littering and is made unlawful. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.180 - Exemptions. 
Nothing in this chanter shall be construed as prohibiting the posting of any notice required by law or order of any court to be posted nor the posting or placing of any notice, particularly pertaining to the grounds or premises upon which the notice is so posted or placed, nor the posting or placing of any notice, sign or device used exclusively for giving public notice of the name, direction or condition of any highway, street, lane, road or alley. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.08.190 - Violations. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter may be found guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable under the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this Code. Any person found guilty of a misdemeanor for failure to comply with this chapter shall continue to be responsible for the payment of any permit and badge fees and penalties due the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
Chapter 4.12 - ALARM SYSTEMS 
Sections: 
 
4.12.010 - Purpose. 
The City finds and determines that the regulation of alarm systems and the control of false alarms is necessary to promote the health, welfare and safety of the people in that some users have alarm systems which either mechanically malfunction or are not operated properly by their users, causing an increase in false alarm reports, thereby resulting in unnecessary costs and expense to the City, and constituting a hazard to the safety of police officers and the public in general. 
(Prior code § 4-11.01)  
4.12.020 - Registration of alarm company operators. 
It is unlawful for any person who is required to be registered as an alarm company operator by the Alarm Company Act to engage in the business of an alarm company operator within the City without first registering their name and filing a copy of their State identification card with the Administrative Services Department pursuant to Section 7592.8(b) of the Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-11.03)  
4.12.030 - Registration of alarm agents. 
It is unlawful for any person who is required to be registered as an alarm agent by the Alarm Company Act to act as an alarm agent without first registering their name and filing a copy of their State identification card with the Department of Administrative Services pursuant to Section 7592.8(b) of the Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-11.04)  
4.12.040 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any persons to use, install, or cause to be used or installed an alarm system on any premises within the City under their control without having obtained a business permit therefor pursuant to Section 7592.8(a) of the Business and Professions Code. 
When emergency messages, signals or notices are received by the Police Department that evidence a failure to obtain a permit or comply with any other requirement under this chapter, the Police Chief is authorized to demand that the owner or lessee of the alarm system initiating such message, signal or notice disconnect the alarm system until it is made to comply with said requirements. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-11.05)  
4.12.050 - Permit application forms. 
Any person desiring an alarm system permit shall file an application with the Department of Administrative Services setting forth the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant; 
B.  The address at which the alarm system is to be installed and used; 
C.  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of its principal officers; 
D.  If the applicant is a partnership, association or other business entity, the names and addresses of the partners or persons comprising same; 
E.  A description of the alarm system or system proposed to be installed within the City, including the manufacturer's name and model number, if any; and 
F.  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of one or more persons who will be available to secure the premises during any hour of the day or night. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-11.06)  
4.12.060 - Alarm system permit fee. 
Each alarm system permit applicant is required to pay a one-time alarm system permit fee. The amount of the fee is set forth in the Business License Fee resolution. The fee shall be paid at the time the permit application form is submitted. The fee is to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated in the application and processing thereof. Such administrative fees shall not be returned to the applicant because they are for service. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-11.07)  
4.12.070 - Alarm system permit issuance denial. 
A.  Issuance. Upon the filing of an application containing all of the information required in Section 4.12.050 of this chapter, the Department of Administrative Services shall issue an alarm system permit, unless the provisions of subsection B of this section apply. 
B.  Denial. The following reasons shall be sufficient for the denial of an alarm system permit: 
1.  That the application is not in the form and does not contain all the information required by the provisions of this chapter; or 
2.  That the required waiting period following the revocation of an alarm system permit previously issued for the same premises has not expired. See Section 4.12.120. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-11.08)  
4.12.080 - Separate permits required. 
A separate alarm system permit shall be required for each of the premises on which an alarm system is used or installed. 
(Prior code § 4-11.09)  
4.12.090 - Permits—Correction of information. 
Whenever any change occurs related to the written information required in Section 4.12.050 of this chapter, the permittee shall give written notice of such change to the Administrative Services Department within five days. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-11.10)  
4.12.100 - Alarm system regulations. 
A.  Repairs. After any false alarm caused by a malfunction of an alarm system, the permittee shall cause the alarm system to be repaired to eliminate the malfunction before the reactivation of the alarm system by the permittee. 
B.  Notification. A permittee shall cause the Police Department to be notified prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, alteration or installation of an alarm system which might produce a false alarm. 
C.  Automatic Deactivation. Every audible alarm system shall be equipped with a device which will automatically deactivate the alarm system not more than 30 minutes after the alarm system is activated. 
D.  Prohibited Sound. No alarm system shall be installed or used which emits a sound which is similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren or a Civil Defense warning system. 
E.  Permit Display. An alarm system permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises for which the permit is issued. 
F.  Power Supply. Alarm systems shall be supplied with an uninterruptible power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of normal utility electricity will not activate the alarm system. The power supply must be capable of at least 4 hours of operation. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-11.11)  
4.12.110 - Permit revocation. 
A.  Grounds for Revocation. An alarm system permit shall be revoked by the Administrative Services Department on the recommendation of the Police Chief for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Failure to observe any of the regulations or other provisions of this chapter; 
2.  Alarm system for which the alarm system permit is issued emits more than six false alarms during any consecutive 365-day period; or 
3.  False representations were made upon any application or notice of change required by the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Notices and Effective Dates. A written notice of revocation, stating the reason for such revocation, shall be personally served upon or mailed to the permittee by certified mail addressed to the permittee at the permittee's address shown on the application or the latest notice of change on file with the Administrative Services Department. In the event the notice of revocation is mailed, service shall be deemed complete upon deposit in the United States mall. The effective date of the revocation of an alarm system permit shall be 15 days after the service of a notice of revocation. 
C.  Surrender of Licenses and Deactivation of Alarm Systems. Whenever the revocation of an alarm system permit becomes effective, the permit shall be surrendered forthwith to the Administrative Services Department, and the alarm system shall forthwith be removed or deactivated. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-11.12)  
4.12.120 - Permit revocation—Notices of Appeal. 
Revocation of alarm system permits shall be appealed to the City Manager. A written Notice of Appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within 15 days following the service of a Notice of Revocation. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-11.13)  
4.12.130 - Revocation of permit—Effective period. 
A.  First Revocation. No new alarm system permit may be issued for a premises within six months following the first revocation of an alarm system permit previously issued for the same premises unless there is a change in property owner or business owner, at which time application may be made for a new permit. 
B.  Second or Subsequent Revocations. No new alarm system permit may be issued for a premises within one year following the second or subsequent revocation of an alarm system permit previously issued for the same premises unless there is a change in property owner or business owner, at which time application may be made for a new permit. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-11.14)  
4.12.140 - Confidentiality. 
The information contained in alarm system permit applications and notices of change shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed other than to City employees or other public officials who require such information in the performance of their official duties. 
(Prior code § 4-11.15)  
4.12.150 - False alarm service fee. 
Any person who maintains or has an alarm which has caused any signal, message or alarm to be transmitted to the Police Department, either by direct telephone or other direct communication, or by communication from an alarm agent, or an alarm business, or by a person responding to an audible alarm, and which is a false alarm, shall pay a false alarm service fee to the City as established by resolution of the City Council. Failure to pay a false alarm service fee within 30 days after issuance of invoice by the City shall cause immediate revocation of alarm service permit. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-11.16)  
4.12.160 - Limitation on liability. 
The City is under no obligation or duty to any permittee or any other person by reason of any provision of this chapter, or the exercise of any privilege by any permittee hereunder, including but not limited to any defects in the alarm board at the Police Department, any delay in transmission of an alarm message to any emergency unit, or damage caused by delay in responding to any alarm by any City officer, employee or agent. 
(Prior code § 4-11.17)  
Chapter 4.16 - AMBULANCES 
Sections: 
 
4.16.010 - Permit required—Exceptions. 
A.  Required. It is unlawful for any public or private agency or any person, either as owner or agent, to operate, conduct, or otherwise engage in the business or service of the transportation of patients upon the streets, or any public way or place without complying with State, County, and local regulations and without possessing a valid permit to do so from the City. 
B.  Exceptions. The permit provisions of this chapter shall not apply to ambulances operated for or by any agent or agency of the United States government, the State of California, or any government agency authorized by the local EMS agency. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.02)  
4.16.020 - Permit fees. 
Ambulance permit application fees shall be established by the City Council in the Business License Fee resolution. It is provided, however, that the City Treasurer may adjust fees in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter or the laws of the State of California Such fee adjustments shall be established to aid in the administration of this chapter. Fee adjustments shall be incorporated into the body of rules, regulations and fee adjustments known collectively as the "City of Montclair Business License Policies and Procedures" and shall be placed in written form and approved by the City Manager before becoming effective. All permits shall be issued to expire on June 30th each year. Permit fees shall not be prorated. Permit fees may be waived by the City Council if required by public need and convenience. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.03, 1999)  
4.16.030 - Permit applications—Renewal. 
Applicants for permits or the renewal of permits required by this chapter shall file with the City Manager an application in writing on a form furnished by the City, which shall set forth the following information: 
A.  The applicant's name; 
B.  The business address and residence address of the applicant, 
C.  The trade, firm name, or d.b.a. as recorded of the company applying for a permit; 
D.  If a corporation, joint venture, partnership, or a limited partnership, the names of all partners or corporate officers, their addresses, and their percentages of participation or ownership in the business; 
E.  A statement of facts showing the experience of the applicant(s) in the operation of an ambulance service and a statement that the applicant(s) is (are) qualified to render efficient ambulance service. A photocopy of the license issued by the Commissioner of the California Highway Patrol to privately owned ambulance companies (in accordance with Section 2501 of the Vehicle Code of the State) shall be attached to the application; 
F.  A statement that the applicant operates an ambulance or ambulance fleet that is in good mechanical condition, possesses the required equipment to adequately conduct an ambulance service in the City and owns, or has access to, suitable facilities for maintaining all such equipment and vehicles under the control of the applicant in a clean and sanitary condition; 
G.  A list of all ambulance vehicles operated by the applicant, including each Vehicle Identification Number (VIN), general description, patient capacity, and a copy of its most recent Ambulance Inspection Report issued by the California Highway Patrol shall be attached to the application. This list shall be amended, as required, during the year to reflect any changes, substitutions or additions to the applicant's ambulance fleet; 
H.  An affirmation that each ambulance operated by the applicant and its appurtenances conform to all applicable provisions of this chapter, the California Vehicle Code and the California Administrative Code; 
I.  A statement that the applicant employs sufficient personnel adequately trained in accordance with the California Health and Safety Code and the requirements of the local EMS agency to deliver ambulance services of good quality at all times in the applicant's service area; 
J.  A list giving a description of the EMT training for each employee in the applicant's ambulance operations and a copy of each certificate or license issued by the State or County establishing the qualifications of such personnel. This list shall be amended, as required, during the year to reflect any employee changes, substitution or additions; 
K.  A schedule of all proposed rates to be charged by the applicant for ambulance services provided under this chapter; 
L.  A statement that shows to the satisfaction of the City that the local County Health Officer or local EMS agency has properly designated the applicant as a primary or secondary service provider of emergency medical services for the City and any surrounding communities in compliance with exclusive operating-area assignments provided for by the County Health Officer or local EMS agency. If the County Health Officer or local EMS agency issues a certificate to an applicant regarding the applicant's designation as a provider of ambulance services for the exclusive operating area that includes the City, such certificate shall be attached to the application; 
M.  A statement signed by the applicant or person with legal authority to speak for the applicant that, as a condition of the City issuing a permit to provide ambulance services, the applicant agrees to appear and defend all actions against the City arising out of the exercise of such permit; that the applicant, shall indemnify and hold the City, its officers, employees and agents harmless of and from all claims, demands, actions, or causes of action of every kind and description resulting directly or indirectly, arising out of, or in any way connected with the exercise of the permit; and that the applicant shall provide the City with evidence of the same; 
N.  Such other facts or information as required by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.04)  
4.16.040 - Permits—Duty to investigate, issuance and denial. 
A.  Duty to Investigate. Upon the receipt of a completed application, the City Manager shall evaluate the qualifications of the applicant to determine compliance with State and County requirements. 
B.  Issuance. The City Manager or designated representative shall issue a permit to the applicant to provide ambulance service upon finding that the applicant satisfactorily completed the permit application process and that the applicant meets all the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  Denial. If it is determined that the applicant does not properly comply with State and County requirements, the City Manager shall formally notify the Count Health Officer or the local EMS agency of the unsuitability of the applicant to provide ambulance services in the City. The City Manager shall request the County Health Officer or local EMS agency to require the applicant to satisfactorily address the deficiencies identified in the evaluation, or designate an alternate ambulance provider to serve as the City's primary or secondary service provider, as appropriate. In the event that the County Health Officer or local EMS agency is unable to obtain compliance from the applicant, or designate an alternate primary provider of ambulance services, the City Council may direct the City Manager to apply to the County Health Officer or local EMS agency to designate the City as the primary provider for ambulance services and, if necessary and appropriate. designate the City as the primary transporter of patients. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.05)  
4.16.050 - Liability insurance. 
A.  Each ambulance service provider permitted under this chapter shall obtain and keep in force during the term of the permit general liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in California, insuring the owner and also naming the City and its officers, employees and agents as additional insureds against loss by reason of injury or damage that may be inflicted upon persons or property from routine or negligent operation, defective construction or maintenance of any ambulance, or any equipment used in connection therewith; from violations of this chapter or of any other law or regulation of the United States, State of California, or County government; or from any other cause. Such policy shall be in the sum of not less than Two Million (2,000,000) Dollars for personal injury to or death of any one person in any single occurrence, and the limits shall not be less than One Hundred Thousand (100,000) Dollars for damage to or destruction of property in any one occurrence. Workers' Compensation Insurance shall be carried covering all employees of the permit holder. Before the City Manager shall issue a permit, copies of general liability insurance policies and their "hold harmless" provisions, or certificates evidencing such policies and provisions, shall be filed with the City Manager. All policies shall contain a provision requiring a 30-day written notice to be given to the City prior to cancellation, nonrenewal, modification, or reduction of limits. The amounts of public liability insurance for bodily injury, property damage and personal injury shall be subject to periodic review and adjustment by the City Council. It is provided, however, that the City Manager may adjust liability insurance requirements in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter or the laws of the State of California. Such adjustments shall be established to protect the City and residents and aid in the administration of this chapter. Insurance liability adjustments shall be incorporated into the body of rules, regulations, and fee adjustments known collectively as the "City of Montclair Business License Policies and Procedures" and shall be placed in written form and approved by the City Manager before becoming effective. 
B.  Exceptions. Except as otherwise specified in any agreement for ambulance services, ambulance services operated by the County, municipalities, board-governed special districts, or other self-governing districts shall be exempt from the insurance requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.06)  
4.16.060 - Permit renewal. 
Permit shall be renewed annually by the City Manager upon submission of an application by the permit hodler and upon the City Manager's satisfactory evaluation of the permit application, and provided that the applicant meets all the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.07)  
4.16.070 - Permit revocation. 
A.  The City Manager, after conducting an evaluation of the permittee's application, shall immediately inform the County Health Officer or the local EMS agency of the permittee's failure to satisfactorily comply with applicable State, County and City regulations and requirements. The City Manager shall request the County Health Officer or local EMS agency to require the permittee to satisfactorily address the deficiencies identified in the evaluation or designate an alternate ambulance provider to serve as the City's primary or secondary service provider. In the event that the County Health Officer or local EMS agency is unable to obtain compliance from the permittee or designate an alternate primary provider of ambulance services, the City Council may direct the City Manager to apply to the County Health Officer or local EMS agency to designate the City as the primary responder for ambulance services and, if necessary and appropriate, designate the City as the primary transporter of patients. 
B.  Indicators of noncompliance may include: 
1.  Violations of an section of this chapter or any rules or regulations of the State, County or City which relate to the permittee's activities; 
2.  Felony convictions, misdemeanor convictions involving moral turpitude, or convictions related to the sale or transportation of illegal narcotics; 
3.  Falsification or misrepresentation of material information on the permit application; 
4.  Acts of dishonesty, fraud or deceit committed against the public during the conduct of business authorized under the permit; 
5.  Charging ambulance service rates greater than rates established by City Council resolution; 
6.  Failure to maintain and keep records regarding business transactions and activities in the City, and failure to make such records available to the City upon demand for inspection by the City Manager, and failure to maintain and keep such records for a period of three years after the completion of any business transaction or activity in the City to which the records refer; 
7.  Failure to accept an emergency call when the permittee is able to provide the requested service and/or failure to advise or inform the person making the emergency call that the permittee will not respond to the request for service. 
8.  Accepting an emergency call when the permittee is unable or unwilling to provide the requested service and/or failure to advise or inform the person making the emergency call of any delay in service. 
9.  Failure to provide adequate or proper care for or transportation for a patient. 
10.  Interfering with calls for service not directed to the permittee. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.08, 1999)  
4.16.080 - Change in ownership—Service. 
In the event of a change in ownership of any kind or nature, any interruption of service, or any substantial change in staffing or equipment of the ambulance service which causes the ambulance service to be carried out differently than specified in State, County or City regulations and requirements, the permittee shall notify the City immediately, stating the facts of such change. If the City Manager determines that such change is not in substantial compliance with State, County and City regulations and requirements, the City Manager shall immediately submit a formal request to the County Health Officer or local EMS agency to designate an alternate ambulance service provider. In all cases when a change of ownership occurs in an ambulance service, an application for a new permit shall be filed with the City within 30 days. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.08.1)  
4.16.090 - Emergency service availability. 
In compliance with the County emergency medical system and emergency medical plan, each permittee designated as an ambulance provider within the exclusive operating area for the City shall provide basic life support or advanced life support services, as required by the local EMS agency on a continuous 24-hour per day basis. If for any reason a permittee stops basic life support or advanced life support service on a continuous 24-hour per day basis, the permittee shall immediately notify the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.10)  
4.16.100 - Communications. 
A.  Each permittee shall establish and maintain the capability of making radio contact between its base station and each ambulance unit, base station hospital, or base hospital physician as provided by the local EMS agency, City police and fire dispatch services, and any other agency as required by the local EMS agency. During a dispatch and response by an ambulance unit, the ambulance's base station shall be able to make immediate ratio contact with the ambulance unit, base station hospital or base hospital physician, City police and fire dispatch services, and any other agency as required by the local EMS agency. 
B.  Each permittee receiving a request for emergency ambulance services from a source other than the Montclair Police Department indicating a reasonable belief that aid or assistance is requested in the event of a traffic accident, gunshot or knife wound, or other intentionally inflicted injury, drug overdose, or other call of a similar nature, shall immediately relay the information received to the Montclair Police Department. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.11)  
4.16.110 - Standards for dispatch. 
Upon receiving a call for emergency medical services, the permittee shall dispatch an ambulance immediately. Dispatch and response protocols for ambulances responding to emergency medical service calls shall be in accordance with those protocols established by the County Health Officer and/or the local EMS plan. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.12)  
4.16.120 - Automatic responses prohibited. 
It is unlawful for a permittee to dispatch an ambulance as a result of monitoring or hearing police or fire radio communications. An emergency response shall be upon the request of a law enforcement or other governmental agency having jurisdiction or upon the request of any person calling for emergency ambulance service. The permittee shall allow the City Manager to examine company records to verify the origin of emergency medical service calls. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.13)  
4.16.130 - Ambulance safety and emergency equipment. 
Ambulances shall be maintained at all times in good mechanical repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
A.  Minimum Equipment. All ambulances shall be equipped with all safety and emergency equipment required for ambulances by the California Vehicle Code, the California Health and Safety Code, the County Health Officer, the County emergency medical services system, and rules and regulations of the City. 
B.  Advanced Life Support Ambulances. In addition to the equipment and supplies required to be carried on basic life support ambulances, advanced life support ambulances shall be equipped with and as required by the rules and regulations of the State, County and City. 
C.  Maintenance of Emergency Equipment and Supplies. Medical supplies and equipment used for the care and treatment of patients shall be protected so that they are sterile when ready for use. Provisions shall be made to ensure autoclaving or resterilization of emergency equipment when required. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.14)  
4.16.140 - Ambulance personnel. 
A.  Ambulance Drivers. Every person who operates an ambulance within the City while responding to an emergency call shall be at least 18 years of age; hold a valid California Driver's License; and possess a valid ambulance driver's certificate pursuant to Section 2512 of the California Vehicle Code. Ambulance driver certificates shall not be required for persons who operate ambulances in the line of duty as regular full-time employees of State, County or City law enforcement agencies or fire departments. The driver shall be trained and competent in the proper use of all emergency equipment as required by the local EMS agency and the emergency medical services system. If required by the local EMS agency, the driver shall hold a valid certificate as an Emergency Medical Technician-I (EMT-I) or EMT II. EMT certificates shall be issued by the County Health Officer or local EMS agency, and shall be in compliance with provisions of the Emergency Medical Services Authority and emergency medical services system. 
B.  Ambulance Attendants. An ambulance attendant shall be at least 18 years of age, shall be trained and competent in the proper use of all emergency equipment as required by the local EMS agency and the emergency medical services system. The attendant shall also hold a valid certificate as an Emergency Medical Technician-II (EMT-II). If the vehicle being used is provided by the City's primary ambulance provider, at least one attendant shall hold a certificate as an Emergency Medical Technician-P (EMT-P). EMT certificates shall be issued by the County Health Officer or local EMS agency and shall be in compliance with provisions of the Emergency Medical Services Authority and emergency medical services system. 
C.  Ambulance Attendants Required. Both a driver and an attendant, as those individuals are designated in this section, shall staff each ambulance operating within the City in response to an emergency. The attendant of an ambulance responding to an emergency shall occupy the patient compartment while transporting any person in apparent need of medical attention. 
D.  Exception. Except as otherwise required by the Emergency Medical Authority, the local EMS agency, or the emergency medical services system, this section shall not apply during any state of emergency as declared by the County Health Officer or Director of EMS or City emergency as declared by local government authorities. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.15)  
4.16.150 - Ambulance rates. 
No permittee shall charge more than the schedule of maximum rates that may be charged for ambulance service as shall be set by City Council resolution. The City Council shall set an ambulance rate resolution for hearing at a meeting subsequent to the meeting at which the proposed rates are submitted to the City Council. The City Council shall not adopt a schedule of maximum rates for ambulance services that is in excess of the maximum schedule of rates established by the County Health Officer. In the event that the maximum schedule of rates for ambulance services adopted by the County Health Officer drops below the maximum schedule of rates adopted by the City Council, the rates adopted by the County shall prevail. In the event that the maximum schedule of rates for ambulance services adopted by the County Health Officer exceed the maximum schedule of rates adopted by the City Council, the rates adopted by the City Council shall prevail. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.16)  
4.16.160 - Emergency and disaster operations. 
During any "state of emergency" or "local emergency," as defined in the California Government Code, each permittee shall provide equipment, facilities, and personnel as required by local authorities whenever the City's local Emergency Plan is activated. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.17)  
4.16.170 - User complaints. 
Any user or subscriber to an ambulance service contending that he/she has been required to pay an excessive charge for service or that he/she has received inadequate services may file a written complaint with the City Manager setting forth such allegations. The City Manager shall notify the ambulance service of such complaint and shall investigate the matter to determine the validity of the complaint. If the complaint is determined to be valid, the City Manager shall take reasonable and proper actions to secure compliance with the conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.18)  
4.16.180 - Advertising. 
Nothing in this chanter shall be deemed to render unlawful the conduct of any ambulance service permittee from advertising its service to the public. Each permittee who disseminates printed advertising in any form shall comply with City rules and regulations related to the distribution of advertising material and specifically identify that the advertising is promulgated by the permittee. The permittee shall not identify the City or any agency of the City in its advertising or represent itself as an agent of the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.19)  
4.16.190 - Enforcement. 
The City Manager shall make all necessary and reasonable rules and regulations necessary for the effective administration of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall be in compliance with State and County rules and regulations and shall be established to clarify provisions of this chanter or aid in their enforcement. The body of such rules and regulations shall be incorporated into and known collectively as the "City of Montclair Business License Policies and Procedures" and shall be placed in written form and approved by the City Manager before becoming effective. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-7.20)  
Chapter 4.20 - BINGO GAMES 
Sections: 
 
4.20.010 - Bingo defined. 
As used in this chapter, "bingo" shall be defined as it is defined in State Penal Code Section 326.5. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.10)  
4.20.020 - Organizations eligible for City licenses to conduct bingo games. 
Organizations exempt from the payment of the bank and corporations tax by Sections 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g) and 23701(l) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, mobile home park associations, and senior citizens' organizations shall be eligible to apply to the City for a license to conduct bingo games under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and the provisions of this chapter if the receipts of these games are used only for charitable purposes. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.01)  
4.20.030 - Applications for licenses. 
Eligible organizations desiring to obtain a license to conduct bingo games shall file an application on a form provided by the City in the Business License Division. The issuing authority shall be the City Manager. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.02)  
4.20.040 - Applicants shall be qualified. 
No license shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under Section 4.20.010 of this chapter and the application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.03)  
4.20.050 - Contents of applications. 
A.  Such applications for licenses shall contain the following: 
1.  The name of the applicant organization and a statement that the applicant is an eligible organization under Section 4.20.020 of this chapter; 
2.  The names and signatures of at least two officers, including the presiding officer, of the organization applying for the license; 
3.  The particular property within the City, including the street number, owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which property the bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place; 
4.  The proposed days of the week and the hours of the day for the conduct of bingo games; 
5.  That the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the State and this chapter as they may be amended from time to time and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the City Manager upon the violation of any of such provisions; and 
6.  The signature of the applicant under penalty of perjury. 
B.  The license fee fixed by resolution of the City Council shall accompany the application. Such fee shall not exceed the actual cost of issuing the license. 
C.  The applicant shall also submit with its application a Certificate or Determination of Exemption under subsection (d) of Section 23701 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State or a letter of good standing from the Exemption Division of the Franchise Tax Board to Sacramento showing an exemption under subsection (d) of said Section 23701. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.04)  
4.20.060 - Investigations of applicants. 
Upon the receipt of the completed application and the fee, the Business License Division shall refer the same to interested departments of the City, including, but not limited to, the City Manager, City Attorney, Police Department and Fire Department, for investigation as to whether or not all the statements in the application qualify, and the extent to which it qualifies, as property on which bingo games may lawfully be conducted as to fire, occupancy, and other applicable restrictions. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.05)  
4.20.070 - Issuance and contents of licenses. 
A.  Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified under law to conduct bingo games in the City, the City Manager shall issue a license to such applicant, which license shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and nature of the organization to which the license is issued; 
2.  The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted; 
3.  The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted; 
4.  The date of the expiration of such license which shall be December 31st of the year it was issued; and 
5.  Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Only one license shall be issued for any location or property. No license may be transferred from one organization or location to another. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.06)  
4.20.080 - Summary suspension of licenses pending opportunity for hearings—Infraction to continue after suspension—Revocation. 
A.  Whenever the City Manager receives sufficient evidence that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the City Manager shall have the authority to summarily suspend the license and order in writing to the licensee that the licensee immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game. 
B.  Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this chapter or continuing to conduct a bingo game after any summary suspension thereof under subsection A of this section shall be deemed guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
C.  The order issued under subsection A of this section shall also notify the licensee that it shall have five working days from the date of such order to request a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked. Failure to request, in writing, such hearing before the City Manager within said five-day period shall result in the revocation of the license. 
D.  Upon such a request by a licensee whose license has been suspended under subsection A of this section for a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked, the City Manager shall provide such hearing within 10 days after the receipt of such request at which hearing the suspended licensee may appear before the City Manager for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless notice of the time and place of such hearing shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to such suspended licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the grounds advanced as the basis of the suspension and revocation. 
E.  Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the City until such time as the City Council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 06-889 § 5; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.07)  
4.20.090 - Revocation of licenses—Alternative procedure. 
A.  Whenever it appears to the City Manager that the licensee is conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representation, and no summary suspension is ordered under Section 4.20.080 of this chapter, the license may be revoked; provided, however, the licensee may appear before the City Manager, at the time fixed by the City Manager, for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless written notice shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing thereon by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to such licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the grounds advanced as the basis for the revocation. 
B.  Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the City until such time as the City Council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.08)  
4.20.100 - Appeals of revocation to the City Council. 
A.  Any holder of a license whose license is revoked under this chapter shall have the right, within 10 days after receiving notice in writing of the revocation, to file a written appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall set forth the specific ground on which it is based. The Council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days after its receipt by the City, or at a time thereafter agreed upon, and shall cause the appellant to be given at least 10 days' written notice of the hearing. At the hearing, the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to present evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of his appeal. The determination of the Council on the appeal shall be final. 
B.  Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not again apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the City for a period of one year after the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the grounds for revocation are cancellation of the exemption granted under subsection (d) of Section 23701 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of the reinstatement of such exemption. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.09)  
4.20.110 - Maximum amount of prizes. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed Two Hundred Fifty (250) Dollars in cash or in kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.11)  
4.20.120 - Profits to be kept in separate funds or accounts. 
A.  All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special account or fund and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. The licensee shall keep full and accurate records of the income and expenditures received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision, and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this chapter. 
B.  All profits derived from a bingo game shall be used only for the charitable purposes for which the organization is established except as follows: 
1.  The proceeds may be used for prizes. 
2.  A portion of the proceeds, not to exceed 20 percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes or Two Thousand (2,000) Dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for the rental of property and for overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security personnel. 
C.  The City, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such records at any reasonable time, and the licensee shall fully cooperate with the City by making such records available. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.12)  
4.20.130 - Financial interests in licensees only. 
No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity, except the licensee, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
(Prior code § 5-12.13)  
4.20.140 - Exclusive operation by licensees. 
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game or participate in the promotion or supervision or any other phase of such game. This does not preclude the employment of security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.14)  
4.20.150 - Bingo games open to the public. 
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensee organization. 
(Prior code § 5-12.15)  
4.20.160 - Attendance limited to occupancy capacity. 
Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the Fire Department and Building Division of the City in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. The licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. 
(Prior code § 5-12.16)  
4.20.170 - Bingo games conducted only on licensees' property. 
A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on the property listed on the license pursuant to Section 5-12.06 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.17)  
4.20.180 - Minors not to participate. 
No person under the age of 18 years shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.18)  
4.20.190 - Intoxicated persons not to participate. 
No person who is intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, and no alcoholic beverage shall be allowed to be consumed in the room in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.19)  
4.20.200 - Hours of operation. 
No licensee shall conduct any bingo game on more than two days per week and not for more than six hours out of any 24-hour period. No bingo game shall be conducted before 2:00 p.m. nor after 11:59 p.m. of any day. A licensee may request, one time during a calendar year, a permit not to exceed 10 consecutive days. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.20)  
4.20.210 - Participants to be present. 
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Prior code § 5-12.21)  
4.20.220 - Receipts of profits by persons—Misdemeanors under State laws. 
It shall be a misdemeanor, under subsection (b) of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code, for persons to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter, except that security personnel employed by the organization conducting the bingo game may be paid from the revenues of bingo games, as provided in State Penal Code Sections 326.5(j) and (k). A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed Ten Thousand (10,000) Dollars, which fine shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-12.22)  
4.20.230 - City may enjoin violations. 
The City may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the State or of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-12.23)  
Chapter 4.24 - CARD ROOMS 
Sections: 
 
4.24.010 - Gaming club prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, maintain or conduct any gaming club or card room within the territorial limits of the City. It is the intent by this enactment to exercise the City's jurisdiction over gaming clubs and card rooms and to prohibit them in the City. 
(Prior code § 5-2.501)  
4.24.020 - Establishment not permitted. 
The City Council finds and determines that to permit the establishment and operation of gaming clubs in the City would be contrary to the public health, safety and welfare of residents of the City. 
(Prior code § 5-2.503)  
4.24.030 - Applications not accepted. 
No application to establish or operate a gaming club in the City shall be accepted or processed unless and until the electors of the City affirmatively approve a measure permitting legal gambling within the City. 
(Prior code § 5-2.504)  
Chapter 4.28 - CLOSING-OUT SALES 
Sections: 
 
4.28.010 - Closing-out sales defined. 
"Closing-out sale" means any sale of goods, wares or merchandise at retail, which is represented as a bankrupt, insolvent, executors, administrators, closing-out, lost-our-lease, or going-out-of-business sale or any similar sale which is intended to lead the public to believe that the person conducting such sale is going out of business and is selling out or closing out the goods, wares or merchandise of the business at less than the current or going retail price for such goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-16.01)  
4.28.020 - Permit fee required. 
No person licensed under Chapter 4.04 of this Code shall advertise or represent to the public a sale of merchandise as a closing-out sale without first obtaining from the City Treasurer a permit to conduct such sale and paying to the City Treasurer the appropriate fee as established in the business license fee resolution. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-16.02)  
4.28.030 - License term. 
A closing-out sale permit shall be issued only for intervals of either 30, 60 or 90 days. No more than one such permit shall be issued within a 12-month period to any business. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-16.03)  
4.28.040 - Inventory required. 
Upon applying for a closing-out sale permit, the applicant shall file with the collector a complete and accurate list of the stock of merchandise to be closed out by such sale. Such list shall include the wholesale, retail and sale price of such merchandise; the applicant or his/her agent shall sign a statement attesting that the information provided on the inventory list is complete and accurate. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-16.04)  
4.28.050 - Conduct of sale. 
No person shall sell any merchandise at a closing-out sale where such merchandise is not the regular stock of the store; nor shall any person replenish such stock during the sale, except with stock from a warehouse operated by such person or with merchandise on back-order. Accurate records of the merchandise sold at any such sale shall be maintained by the permittee. 
(Prior code § 5-16.05)  
4.28.060 - Removal of signs and cleaning of premises. 
Within seven (7) days after the completion of a closing-out sale the permittee shall remove all signs advertising the sale and leave the interior and exterior of the premises in a clean condition. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-16.06)  
4.28.080 - Rules and regulations. 
The collector may make rules and regulations and adjust fees consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the State of California. Such rules, regulations, and fee adjustments shall be established to clarify provisions of this chapter or aid in their enforcement. The body of such rules, regulations, and fee adjustments shall be known collectively as the "City of Montclair Business License Policies and Procedures" and shall be placed in written form and approved by the City Manager before becoming effective. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-16.08)  
Chapter 4.36 - CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS 
Sections: 
 
4.36.010 - Cable television system defined. 
"Cable television system" means any system that transmits television programs by cable to subscribers for a fee. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part))  
4.36.020 - Franchises required—Unlawful to operate, interfere with, steal, or damage cable television service. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or corporation to establish, operate, or carry on the business of distributing to any person in the City any television or radio signals by means of a cable television system unless a franchise therefor has been obtained and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, and/or maintain within any public street in the City, or within any other public property of the City or within the City, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television or radio signals through a cable television system unless a franchise authorizing such system has first been obtained and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to illicitly receive, intercept, or interfere with television or radio signals carried on a cable television system franchised by the State or other legally designated public entity or make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of a cable television system franchised by the State or other legally designated public entity for the purpose of taking or receiving television or radio signals without proper remuneration of a subscription fee to the operator of any cable television system franchised by the State or other legally designated public entity or for the purpose of retransmitting television or radio signals without the approval of the operator of any cable television system franchised by the State or other legally designated public entity. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the operator of any cable television system franchised by the State or other legally designated public entity to willfully tamper with, remove, or damage any cables, wires, or equipment used for the distribution of television or radio signals. 
(Ord. 08-902 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 7-3.01)  
4.36.030 - State franchise video service fees required. 
A.  Gross Revenues. For purposes of this chapter, "gross revenues" shall be defined consistent with Section 5860 of the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 and/or amendments or successors thereto. 
B.  State Franchise Fee. State franchise holders or any video service provider with a franchise issued by the State or other legally designated public entity that offers video services within the administrative and/or jurisdictional boundary of the City will annually calculate and remit to the City a franchise fee equal to 5 percent of gross revenues to be used in a manner consistent with law as provided in Section 5800(n) of the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 and/or amendments or successors thereto. 
C.  PEG-Support Fee. State franchise holders or any video service provider with a franchise issued by the State or other legally designated public entity that offers video services within the administrative and/or jurisdictional boundary of the City will annually calculate and remit an additional public educational and government access (PEG) facilities-support fee equal to 1 percent of gross revenues to be used in a manner consistent with law as provided in Section 5800(n) of the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 and/or amendments or successors thereto. 
D.  Fee Remittance. The franchise fee and PEG-support fee shall be remitted to the City on a quarterly basis and within 45 days after the end of each quarter for that calendar year in which such fees are due. Each payment shall be accompanied by a detailed summary explaining the basis for the calculation of the franchise fee and PEG-support fee. 
E.  Late Payment Charges. A late payment charge equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency plus 1 percent will be applied to any payment made by a State video franchise holder or any video service provider with a franchise issued by the State or other legally designated public entity for franchise fees and PEG-support fees not received when due under subsection D of this section as provided in Section 5860 of the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 and/or amendments or successors thereto. 
F.  Audit of Business Records. Not more than once annually the City and/or its officers, employees, agents, or representatives may examine the business records of a State franchisee to the extent reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter and the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 and/or amendments or successors thereto. 
G.  Fees Collected Credit. Any franchise fee and PEG-support fee levied and collected by the City of Montclair pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a credit against any franchise fee or PEG-support fee imposed herein. 
(Ord. 08-902 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 17-972-U, § 2, 12-18-17; Ord. No. 17-972, § 1, 1-16-18)  
Chapter 4.40 - DANCES 
Sections: 
 
4.40.010 - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person or association of persons to hold a public dance or operate a dance hall within the City without first obtaining a license to do so. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-1.02)  
4.40.020 - License application. 
An application for such license shall be made to the Chief of Police in writing and shall state the name and address of the applicant and the address of the place where the public dance is to be held or dance hall is to be located. Upon receipt of such application and license fee, the Chief of Police shall thoroughly investigate the application and may deny the same if: 
A.  The applicant is not of good moral character; 
B.  The premises in respect to which the license is to be issued do not comply with the provisions of any law or are injurious to the public health or safety; or 
C.  The applicant has had a license forfeited, suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or any similar law. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-1.03)  
4.40.030 - License issuance. 
Upon approval of such license by the Chief of Police, the City Treasurer shall issue a license to the applicant. Such license shall set forth the name of the applicant and the address of the place where the public dance is to be held or dance hall is to be located. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-1.04)  
4.40.040 - License fee—Rules and regulations. 
The license fee for holding a public dance or operating a dance hall shall be as set forth in the Business License Fee resolution. Such license fee shall be payable in advance and shall be paid to the City Treasurer upon the issuance of such license; provided, however, that the administrative cost of processing the application and issuing the license required by this chapter may be established by the City Treasurer when such fees are consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the State of California. The City Treasurer, in cooperation with the Chief of Police, may also make rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the State of California. Such rules and regulations shall be established to clarify provisions of this chapter and aid in their enforcement. The body of such rules and regulations shall be known collectively as the "City of Montclair Business License Policies and Procedures" and shall be placed in written form and approved by the City Manager before becoming effective. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-1.05)  
4.40.050 - License nontransferable—Posting. 
Each such license shall be nontransferable and shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or on the premises for which it is issued and shall be exhibited to any police officer upon demand. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-1.06)  
4.40.060 - License privileges limited. 
Each such license issued shall be separate and distinct, and no person shall seek to exercise the privileges granted thereunder except the person or association of persons to whom it was issued and at the specific time and place for which it was issued. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-1.07)  
4.40.070 - Investigation of conduct—Suspension, revocation, conditional license. 
The Chief of Police may, upon complaint of any person, investigate the conduct of any public dance or dance hall and shall have the power to suspend, revoke, or conditionally issue a license for any of the following reasons: 
A.  The misrepresentation of a material fact by the applicant obtaining a license; 
B.  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; 
C.  The commission of any act which would be sufficient grounds for denial of an application for a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; 
D.  Any violation of Penal Code Section 415 in, upon, or about the premises for which the license was issued or permitting any violation of Penal Code Section 415 upon or about the premises for which the license was issued; 
E.  A written protest against the holding of any public dance or operation of any public dance hall signed by a majority of the persons residing within 1,000 feet of any such dance or dance hall; or 
F.  Upon an oral statement made by the Chief of Police at a regular meeting of the City Council that such public dance or dance hall is being held or operated in a manner detrimental to public morals. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-1.08)  
4.40.080 - Appeals. 
Any operator of a public dance or dance hall, aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police with respect to the suspension, revocation, or conditional restrictions of a license to conduct a public dance or operate a public dance hall, shall have the right to appeal to the City Council pursuant to the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-1.09)  
4.40.090 - Hours of dancing. 
It is unlawful for any person or association of persons to hold a public dance or operate a public dance hall, or for any person to dance at any public dance or in any public dance hall, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-1.10)  
4.40.100 - Police officers—Right of entry. 
It shall be the duty of every person holding a public dance or operating a public dance hall to maintain at his/her own expense at every dance a police officer(s) and/or security guard(s) if, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, the same is necessary. Such police officer(s) and/or security guard(s) shall be approved by the Chief of Police. Any police officer of the City shall have the right to enter all public dances or dance halls; and if, in his/her judgment, any dance or other proceedings are improper, such police officer shall have the right, and it shall be his/her duty, to stop the same. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-1.11)  
4.40.110 - Intoxicating liquor. 
Except in places where intoxicating liquors are legally sold and consumed, no person shall have, possess or consume intoxicating liquor at any public dance. 
(Prior code § 5-1.14)  
Chapter 4.44 - FORTUNE TELLING 
Sections: 
 
4.44.010 - Fortune telling defined. 
"Fortune telling" means the professing of an ability to forecast future events or furnish information on matters hidden to the normal senses by means of any occult, psychic power, faculty, force, psychology or psychometry. Fortune telling includes the practice of astrology, botanomancy, cartomancy, clairaudience, clairvoyance, cleromancy, crystallomancy, fortune telling, genethlialogy, necromancy, numerology, oneiromancy, palmistry, phrenology, or other similar practices. 
(Prior code § 5-18.01)  
4.44.020 - Fraudulent practice unlawful. 
No person shall practice fortune telling with knowledge that they possess no actual ability to predict future events or discover secret matters hidden to the normal senses; nor shall any person practice fortune telling by the use of illusion, sleight of hand, trickery, skilful suggestion, hypnotism, secreting information, gimmickry, photography, recorded or projected sounds or images, device, deception or other fraudulent means. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be liable under the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Prior code § 5-18.02)  
4.44.030 - License—Permit and fees required. 
No person shall engage in the practice of fortune telling without first obtaining from the City Treasurer a business license issued pursuant to Chapter 4.04 of this Code and a permit no practice divina-tion in the City, and paying to the City Treasurer the appropriate fees as established in the Business License Fee Resolution. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-18.03)  
4.44.040 - Application for permit. 
Each applicant for a permit to practice divination shall file with the City Treasurer a sworn statement providing the following: 
A.  The full name and current home address of the applicant, and the complete business address where the applicant will be engaging in business; 
B.  If applicant has lived at the current residence less than two years, the two previous addresses of the applicant and the dates of residence at each; 
C.  The address, city and state, and dates when the applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction with others; 
D.  A statement of any convictions, other than minor traffic violations, or civil law suits involving the practice of fortune telling, or any claims of fraud or misrepresentation; 
E.  A description of the method of fortune telling to be practiced by the applicant; 
F.  A statement regarding the specific methods of advertising proposed or intended to be used in connection with the practice of fortune telling and the prices to be charged for services to be rendered by the applicant; 
G.  A statement that the applicant has not and will not use misleading claims, titles, degrees, or other credentials or statements which misrepresent the qualifications of the applicant; 
H.  The fingerprints of applicant submitted on a form provided by the Police Department. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-18.04)  
4.44.050 - Application fee. 
At the time of filing an application for a permit to practice fortune telling, each application shall pay a nonrefundable application fee as established in the Business License Fee resolution. Such fee shall be in addition to all other applicable fees assessed by this Code. 
(Prior code § 5-18.05)  
4.44.060 - Investigation. 
The City Treasurer shall forward a copy of each application for a permit to practice fortune telling to the Chief of Police who, for the protection of the public welfare, shall order a background investigation of the applicant. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-18.06)  
4.44.070 - Denial of permit. 
If, as a result of the investigation required in Section 4.44.060 of this chapter, the application shall be recommended for denial by the Chief of Police, he/she shall forward any reasons for disapproval to the City Treasurer who shall notify the applicant. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 18.07)  
4.44.080 - Appeal. 
An applicant aggrieved by the action of the City Treasurer or Chief of Police in a denial of a permit shall have the right to appeal to the City Council pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-18.08)  
4.44.090 - Approval of permit. 
If, as a result of the investigation required in Section 4.44.060 of this chapter, the Chief of Police recommends approval of the application, the City Treasurer may issue a permit and a business license pursuant to Chapter 4.04 of this Code and upon conditions as are reasonable and proper. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-18.09)  
4.44.100 - Surety bond. 
Upon approval of the application, the City Treasurer shall issue a permit and a business license only after the applicant has posted with the City cash or a surety bond. The surety bond shall be issued through an acceptable individual or corporate surety licensed and doing business in the State of California. The guarantor of the surety bond shall be bound with the principal (applicant) for the payment of a sum of money for every debt, obligation, miscarriage or default of the principal; and for any loss, damage, theft, or claim of fraud or misrepresentation suffered by any customer or patron of the principal. The value of the cash or surety bond posted shall be established by the City Treasurer, shall be incorporated into the body of rules, regulations, and fee adjustments known collectively as the "City of Montclair Business License Policies and Procedures" and shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the State of California. The "City of Montclair Business License Policies and Procedures" shall be placed in written form and approved by the City Manager before becoming effective. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-18.10)  
4.44.110 - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter is accepted by the permittee with the understanding that it may be revoked upon action by the City Council to amend this Code, as it relates to fortune telling or upon determination by the City Manager or authorized representative that the permit was obtained by a false representation of facts or that the permittee is in violation of the relevant provisions of this Code or laws of the City, State or of the United States. The City Treasurer may recommend to the City Manager the cancellation of any permit and business license issued pursuant to this chapter and Chapter 4.04 of this Code. Upon receipt of such recommendation, the City Manager shall set the matter for hearing and cause notice of the time and place of the hearing, and the grounds upon which is proposed to revoke such permit and license, to be to the permittee not less than five consecutive days prior to such hearing. At such hearing, the City Manager or authorized representative shall determine if the permit and license shall be revoked. Permittee shall have the right to appeal the decision of the City Manager to the City Council pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this Code. When a person's permit and/or license has been revoked, no permit and/or license to engage in any business in the City shall be issued to such person for a period of six months following the date of revocation. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-18.11)  
4.44.120 - Rules and regulations. 
The City Treasurer may make rules and regulations and adjust fees consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the State of California. Such rules, regulations, and fee adjustments shall be established to clarify provisions of this chapter or aid in their enforcement. The body of such rules, regulations, and fee adjustments shall be known collectively as the "City of Montclair Business License Policies and Procedures" and shall be placed in written form and approved by the City Manager before becoming effective. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-18.12)  
4.44.130 - Exception—Religious practice. 
No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any permit for conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium or healer (hereinafter collectively referred no as "minister") from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and holding regular services and having a creed or set religious principals that are recognized by all churches of like faith; provided that: 
A.  The fees, donations, offerings, gratuities, emoluments and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of the bona fide church or religious association, as defined herein; 
B.  The minister holding a certificate of ordination from such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in subsection A of this section, shall file with the City Treasurer a copy of the certificate and the street address and telephone number of the location at which the activity of fortune telling is to be conducted. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-18.13)  
Chapter 4.48 - HYPNOTISM 
Sections: 
 
4.48.010 - Hypnotism defined. 
"Hypnotism" means the professing to possess a technique to artificially induce a state of sleep or trance in a person by means of verbal suggestion by the hypnotist or by the person's concentration on some object, sound, suggested or visual image, or thought or feeling. 
(Prior code § 5-17.01)  
4.48.020 - License—Permit—Fees required. 
No person shall engage in the practice of hypnotism, either for the purpose of offering to others self improvement, personal counseling, behavior modification, or any other form of therapy or treatment, either medical or psychological, or for exhibition or entertainment purposes without first obtaining a business license issued pursuant to Chapter 4.04 of this Code and a permit to practice hypnotism in the City, and paying the appropriate fees as established in the Business License Fee resolution. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the use of hypnotic techniques pursuant to Section 2908 of the Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-17.02)  
4.48.030 - Application for permit. 
Each applicant for a permit to practice hypnotism shall file with the collector a verified application providing the following: 
A.  The full name and current home address of the applicant, and the complete business address where the applicant will be engaging in business; 
B.  If the applicant has lived at the current residence less than two years, the two previous addresses of the applicant and the dates of residence at each; 
C.  The address, city and state, and dates the applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction with others; 
D.  A statement of any convictions, other than minor traffic violations, civil permits involving the practice of hypnotism, or any claims of fraud or misrepresentation; 
E.  A description of the purposes for which the applicant's skills in hypnotism will be used; 
F.  A statement regarding the specific methods of advertising proposed or intended to be used in connection with the practice of hypnotism; 
G.  A statement that the applicant has not and will not use misleading claims, titles, degrees or other credentials or statements which misrepresent the qualifications of the applicant; 
H.  A list of the prices to be changed by the applicant for services to be rendered; 
I.  Proof that the applicant is licensed to practice hypnosis, if required by either the State Board of Behavioral Science Examiners, State Board of Medical Quality Assurance, State Department of Consumer Affairs, State Department of Health, or any other State agency authorized to license persons to practice hypnosis in the State. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-17.03)  
4.48.040 - Application fee. 
At the time of filing an application for a permit to practice hypnotism, each applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee as established in the Business License Fee resolution. Such fee shall be in addition to all other applicable fees assessed by this Code. 
(Prior code § 5-17.04)  
4.48.050 - Investigation. 
The City Treasurer shall forward a copy of each application for a permit to practice hypnotism to the Chief of Police who, for the protection of the public welfare, shall order a background investigation of the applicant. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-17.05)  
4.48.060 - Denial of permit. 
If, as a result of the investigation required in Section 4.48.050 of this chapter, the applicant's moral character or professional competence is found to be unsatisfactory, the applications shall be disapproved and the Chief of Police shall forward any reasons for disapproval to the City Treasurer who shall so notify the applicant. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-17.06)  
4.48.070 - Appeal. 
An applicant aggrieved by the action of the City Treasurer or Chief of Police in the denial of a permit shall have the right to appeal to the City Council pursuant to the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-17.07)  
4.48.080 - Approval of permit. 
If, as a result of the investigation required in Section 4.48.050 of this chapter, the Chief of Police recommends approval of the application, the City Treasurer may issue a permit and a business license pursuant to this chapter and Chapter 4.04 of this Code, and upon such conditions as are reasonable and proper. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-17.08)  
4.48.090 - Surety bond. 
Upon approval of the application, the City Treasurer shall issue a permit and a business license only after the applicant has posted with the City cash or a surety bond. The surety bond shall be issued through an acceptable individual or corporate surety licensed and doing business in the State of California. The guarantor of the surety bond shall be bound with the principal (applicant) for the payment of a sum of money for every debt, obligation, miscarriage or default of the principal and for any loss, damage, theft, or claim of fraud or misrepresentation suffered by any customer or patron of the principal. The value of the cash or surety bond posted shall be established by the City Treasurer, shall be incorporated into the body of rules, regulations, and fee adjustments known collectively as the "City of Montclair Business License Policies and Procedures" and shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the State of California. The "City of Montclair Business License Policies and Procedures" shall be placed in written form and approved by the City Manager before becoming effective. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-17.09)  
4.48.100 - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter is accepted by the permittee with the understanding that it may be revoked upon action by the City Council to amend this Code as it relates to hypnotism or upon determination by the City Manager or authorized representative that the permit was obtained by a false representation of facts or that the permittee is in violations of the relevant provisions of this Code or laws of the City, State or of the United States. The City Treasurer may recommend to the City Manager the cancellation of any permit and business license issued pursuant to this chapter and Chapter 4.04 of this Code. Upon receipt of such recommendation, the City Manager shall set the matter for hearing and cause notice of the time and place of the hearing, and the grounds upon which it is proposed to revoke such permit and license, to be given to the permittee not less than five consecutive days prior to such hearing. An such hearing the City Manager shall determine if the permit and license shall be revoked. Permittee shall have the right to appeal the decision of the City Manager or authorized representative to the City Council pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this Code. When a person's permit and/or license has been revoked, no permit and/or license to engage in any business in the City shall be issued to such persons for a period of six months following the date of revocation. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-17.10)  
4.48.120 - Rules and regulations. 
The City Treasurer may make rules and regulations and adjust fees consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the State of California. Such rules, regulations, and fee adjustments shall be established to clarify provisions of this chapter or aid in their enforcement. The body of such rules, regulations, and fee adjustments shall be known collectively as the "City of Montclair Business License Policies and Procedures," and shall be placed in written form and approved by the City Manager before becoming effective. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-17.12)  
4.48.130 - Exception—Religious practice. 
No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any permit for conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium or healer (hereinafter collectively referred to as "minister") from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious principles that are recognized by all churches of like faith; provided that: 
A.  The fees, donations, offerings, gratuities, emoluments and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely on or for the benefit of rise bona fide church or religious association, as defined herein; 
B.  The minister holding a certificate of ordination from such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in subsection A of this section, shall file with the City a copy of the certificate and the street address and telephone number of the location at which the activity of hypnotism is to be conducted. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-17.13)  
Chapter 4.52 - LIVE ENTERTAINMENT 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
4.52.010 - Live entertainment defined. 
The term "live entertainment," as used in this chapter, shall not include entertainment provided by the use of a radio, music recording machine, or juke box, or any entertainment provided under the supervision of school authorities, the City, or any nonprofit organization or service club. However, it shall include any presentation or activity of any nature which is designed or intended to divert, amuse, or attract the attention of persons observing such presentation or activities, including, but not limited to, any type of presentation in which live entertainers or performers appear before an audience of any number of persons. "Live entertainment" shall include any activity or presentation involving live entertainers or performers engaged in the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or in "specified sexual activities" as defined in Section 11.40.030 of this Code under "adult-oriented businesses." 
(Prior code § 5-7.02)  
4.52.020 - Permit required. 
No person shall operate, conduct, or manage any public place or place open to the public where any form of live entertainment is provided or furnished without first obtaining an entertainment permit as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-7.01)  
4.52.030 - Hours of entertainment. 
It is unlawful to operate, conduct, carry on, or participate in any live entertainment between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. 
(Prior code § 5-7.03)  
Article II. - Live Entertainment Permits 
 
4.52.040 - Permit process for live entertainment. 
A.  The Chief of Police shall have authority to grant, deny, or renew entertainment permits. 
B.  The application for permit shall be made on a form provided by the City. An original and two copies of the completed and sworn application for permit shall be filed with the Police Chief. 
C.  The completed application for permit shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents: 
1.  The applicant's legal name and permanent residence address and relationship to owner of business; 
2.  A detailed description of the entertainment, including the type of entertainment and the number and ages of persons engaged in the entertainment; 
3.  The dates, hours and location where such entertainment is proposed and the admission fee, if any, to be charged; 
4.  The exact name or names of the person or persons having the management or supervision responsibility for the applicant's business on the date(s) of the proposed entertainment; 
5.  The name or names of the person or persons who are the legal owner or owners of the premises where the applicant proposes to operate his or her business. 
D.  If the live entertainment or presentation contains activities commonly referred to as, but not limited to, "bikini contests," "legs contests," "dance contests," "exotic dancers," "dance reviews," "beauty contests," or other presentations of a similar nature (but not meeting the definition of an adult-oriented business as defined in Section 11.40.030 of this Code), a designated performance area shall be clearly identified and facilitate a separation between the audience, patrons or customers and the performers or entertainers. Such separation shall be maintained so that during the performance or entertainment, there shall be no physical contact between the performers or entertainers and the audience, patrons, or customers, including any contact for purposes of payment of a gratuity. Prior to the issuance of the permit, this stage or performance area (designated areas) shall be inspected and receive approval from a City Police Department representative. 
E.  The completed application for permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 
F.  Upon receipt of a completed application for permit and payment of the application fee, the Police Chief shall immediately stamp the application for permit as "received" and promptly investigate the application. 
G.  If the Police Chief determines that the applicant has completed the application for permit improperly, the Police Chief shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and grant the applicant an extension of time of not more than 10 calendar days to complete the application for permit properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension of time for the Police Chief to act on the application for permit. The time period for granting or denying the application for permit shall be stayed during the time period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-7.04 (part))  
4.52.050 - Investigation and action on application for permit. 
A.  Within 14 days after receipt of the properly completed application for permit, the Police Chief shall grant or deny the application for permit and so notify the applicant as follows: 
1.  The Police Chief shall write or stamp "granted" or "denied" on the application for permit and date and sign such notification. 
2.  If the application for permit is denied, the Police Chief shall attach to the application for permit an explanation of the reasons for such denial. 
3.  A copy of the application for permit, as granted or denied, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage fully prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application for permit. 
B.  The Police Chief shall grant the application for permit and issue the permit unless the application for permit is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in subsection D of this section. 
C.  If the Police Chief grants the application for permit or if the Police Chief neither grants nor denies the application for permit within 14 days after it is stamped as "received" (except as provided in Section 4.52.040(G), the applicant may begin performing in the capacity for which the permit was sought. 
D.  The Police Chief shall deny the application for permit for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for permit or in any report or document required to be filed with the application for permit; 
2.  The applicant is under 18 years of age; 
3.  The entertainment permit is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by the laws of the State of California or of the City of Montclair; 
4.  The stage or performance area of the premises do not meet the requirements of this chapter. 
E.  Each entertainment permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the Police Chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the application fee and a copy of the entertainment permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the entertainment permit. When made less than 30 days before the expiration date of said permit, the expiration of the entertainment permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for applications for permits. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-7.04 (part))  
4.52.060 - Suspension or revocation of entertainment permits. 
An entertainment permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section. 
A.  On determining that grounds for revocation of the entertainment permit exist, the Police Chief shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least 10 days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the Police Chief, but at a minimum shall include the following: 
1.  All parties involved shall have a right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; 
2.  All parties involved may be represented by counsel and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses; 
3.  Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs; 
4.  Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness; and 
5.  The Police Chief's decision may be appealed in accordance with Section 4.52.070. 
B.  A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of his or her entertainment permit, or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee: 
1.  The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for permit or in any report or record required to be filed with the City; 
2.  Any failure to comply with any requirement of this chapter; 
3.  Any failure to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed by an appropriate City official; 
4.  The permitted entertainment becomes a nuisance to the community, neighborhood, or surrounding businesses; 
5.  The entertainment exceeds the scope of the entertainment described in the application. 
C.  After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the Police Chief finds and determines that there are grounds for disciplinary action, based upon the severity of the violation, the Police Chief shall impose one of the following: 
1.  A warning; 
2.  Suspension of the entertainment permit for a specified period not to exceed six months; 
3.  Revocation of the entertainment permit. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-7.04 (part))  
4.52.070 - Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation. 
After denial of an application for permit for an entertainment permit, or after denial of renewal for such permit, or suspension or revocation of such permit, the applicant or person to whom the entertainment permit was granted ("permittee"), the applicant or permittee may seek review of such administrative action by the Police Chief in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.08.010, et seq., of this Code. If the denial, suspension or revocation is affirmed on review, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action pursuant to the California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. The City shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review, if sought by the applicant or permittee. 
(Prior code § 5-7.04 (part))  
Article III. - Adult Business Performer License 
 
4.52.080 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the licensing of adult business performers in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the City. The goals of the performer licensing provisions are as follows: (1) to protect minors by requiring that all performers be over the age of 18 years; (2) to assure the correct identification of persons performing in adult businesses; (3) to enable the City to deploy law enforcement resources effectively; and (4) to detect and discourage the involvement of crime in adult businesses by precluding the licensing of performers with certain sex-related convictions in a set time period. It is neither the intent nor the effect of these regulations to invade the privacy of performers or to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of these regulations to restrict or deny access by adults to communicative materials or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of adult businesses to their intended lawful market. Nothing in these regulations is intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or maintenance of any business, building, or use which violates any City ordinance or any statute of the State of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness, obscene or harmful matter, or the exhibition or public display thereof. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 4 (part))  
4.52.090 - Definitions. 
In addition to any other definitions contained in the Municipal Code, all words and phrases included in this chapter shall be consistent with the definitions in Section 11.40.030 of this Code, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 4 (part))  
4.52.100 - Adult business performer license. 
A.  No performer shall be employed, hired, engaged, or otherwise retained in an adult business as defined in Section 11.40.030 of this Code to participate in or give any live performance displaying "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities" without first having a valid adult business performer license issued by the City. 
B.  The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall grant, deny, and renew adult business performer licenses in accordance with these regulations. 
C.  License applicants shall file a written, signed, and verified application or renewal application on a form provided by the Chief of Police. Such application shall contain the following information: 
1.  The license applicant's legal name and any other names (including "stage names" and aliases) used by the applicant; 
2.  Principal place of residence; 
3.  Age, date and place of birth; 
4.  Height, weight, hair and eye color, and tattoo descriptions and locations; 
5.  Each present and/or proposed business address(es) and telephone number(s) of the establishments at which the applicant intends to work; 
6.  Driver's license or identification number and state of issuance; 
7.  Social security number; 
8.  Satisfactory written proof that the license applicant is a least 18 years of age; 
9.  The license applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the Montclair Police Department and two color 2-inch by 2-inch photographs clearly showing the applicant's face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. Fingerprints and photographs shall be taken within six months of the date of application; 
10.  Whether the license applicant has pled guilty or nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense, and (a) less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor; or (b) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period; 
11.  If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license, the license applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed. 
D.  The information provided in subsection C of this section which is personal, private, confidential, or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to the risk of harm will not be disclosed under the California Public Records Act. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant's residence address, telephone number, date of birth and age, driver's license and social security number. The City Council, in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system set forth in this article, has determined in accordance with Government Code Section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this chapter by ensuring that the applicant's privacy, confidentiality or security interest are protected. The City Clerk shall cause the above-mentioned information to be redacted from any copy of a completed application form made available to any member of the public. 
E.  The completed application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee and an annual license fee. The amount of such fees shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution from time to time by the City Council. 
F.  The completeness of an application shall be determined within two working days by the Chief of Police or his or her designee. The Chief of Police or his or her designee must be available during normal working hours, Monday through Friday, to accept adult business performer applications. If the Chief of Police determines that the application is incomplete, the Chief of Police shall immediately inform the applicant of such fact and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. Upon receipt of a completed adult business performer application and payment of the license fee specified in subsection E of this section, the Chief of Police shall immediately issue a temporary license which shall expire of its own accord 14 business days from the date of issuance; however, if the results of the fingerprint investigation have not been received at the expiration of the period, such temporary license shall automatically renew for a 14 business day period, until the results are received, or shall be extended as provided in Section 4.52.110 of this chapter. 
G.  This temporary adult business performer license shall authorize a performer to commence performance at an adult business establishment that possesses a valid adult business license authorized to provide adult live entertainment. 
H.  The fact that a license applicant possesses other types of State or City permits or licenses does not exempt the license applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult business performer license. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 4 (part))  
4.52.110 - Investigation and action on application for adult business performer license. 
A.  Upon submission of a completed application, payment of license fees, and issuance of a temporary adult business performer license pursuant to Section 4.52.100 of this chapter, the Chief of Police shall immediately stamp the application "Received" and in conjunction with City staff, including members of the Police Department, shall promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the license applicant should be issued an adult business performer license. 
B.  Investigation shall not be grounds for the City to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed application. The Chief of Police's decision to grant or deny the adult business performer license shall be made within 14 business days from the date the temporary license was issued. In the event the Chief of Police is unable to complete the investigation within 14 business days, he or she shall promptly notify the license applicant and extend the temporary license for up to 10 additional business days. In no case shall the investigation exceed 24 days, nor shall the decision to grant or deny the license application be made after the expiration of the temporary license. 
C.  The Chief of Police shall render a written decision to grant or deny the license within the time period set forth in subsection B of this section. Such decision shall be mailed, first class postage prepaid, or hand delivered to the applicant, within the foregoing 14-day period (or 24-day period if extended pursuant to subsection B of this section), at the address provided by the applicant in the application. 
D.  The Chief of Police shall notify the applicant as follows: 
1.  The Chief of Police shall write or stamp "Granted" or "Denied" on the application and date and sign such notation. 
2.  If the application is denied, the Chief of Police shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for the denial. Such notice shall also provide that the license applicant may appeal the denial to the City Manager. The City Manager or a Designated Hearing Officer shall conduct a hearing as described in Section 4.52.120 of this chapter. 
3.  If the application is granted, the Chief of Police shall attach to the application an adult business performer license. 
4.  The application, as acted upon, and the license, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, or hand delivered, addressed to the license applicant at the residence address stated in the application in accordance with the time frames established herein. 
E.  The Chief of Police shall grant the application and issue the license unless the application is denied based on one of the grounds set forth in subsection F of this section. 
F.  The Chief of Police shall deny the application based on any of the following grounds: 
1.  The license applicant has made false, misleading, or fraudulent statements of material fact in the application for an adult business performer license. 
2.  The license applicant is under 18 years of age. 
3.  The adult business performer license is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by laws of the State or City or a business that does not have a valid adult business license. 
4.  The license applicant has pled guilty, nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense and (a) less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor, or (b) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
G.  Failure of the Chief of Police to render a decision on the license within the time frames established by this section shall be deemed to constitute an approval. 
H.  Each adult business performer license, other than the temporary license described in Section 4.52.100(F) of this chapter, shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the Chief of Police a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual license fee and a copy of the license to be renewed. If such application conforms to the previously approved application and there has been no change with respect to the license holder being convicted of any crime classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense, the Chief of Police or his or her designee shall renew the license for one year. Any plea to or conviction of a sex-related offense requires the renewal application to be set for hearing before the City Manager in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.52.120(A) of this chapter. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the license. Applications for renewal shall be acted upon as provided herein for action upon applications for license. The Chief of Police's denial of a renewal application is subject to the hearing provisions of Section 4.52.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 4 (part))  
4.52.120 - Suspension or revocation of adult business performer license. 
A.  On determining that grounds for license suspension or revocation exist, the Chief of Police or his or her designee shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the license holder. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Municipal Code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the license holder, or shall be delivered to the license holder personally, at least 10 days prior to the hearing date. Hearings pursuant to this section shall be conducted by the City Manager or a Designated Hearing Officer designated by him or her which can include a retired judge. Hearings pursuant to this section shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the City Manager or Designated Hearing Officer but, at a minimum shall include the following: 
1.  All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing upon the issues and may be represented by counsel. 
2.  The City Manager or Designated Hearing Officer shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. 
3.  Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness at the request of the license holder. Extensions of time or continuances sought by a license holder shall not be considered delay on the part of the City or constitute failure by the City to provide for prompt decisions on license suspensions or revocations. 
4.  The City Manager's or Designated Hearing Officer's decision shall be final and there shall be no right of appeal from this decision. 
B.  A license may be revoked, based on any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the license holder: 
1.  The licensee has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statements of material fact in the application for a performer license; 
2.  The licensee has pled guilty, nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense and (a) less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor, or (b) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period; 
3.  Failure to comply with the operating standards of Chapter 4.53 of this title or the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  After conducting the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the City Manager or Designated Hearing Officer finds and determines that there are grounds for suspension or revocation, the City Manager or Designated Hearing Officer shall impose one of the following: 
1.  Suspension of the license for a specified period not to exceed six months; 
2.  Revocation of the license. 
The City Manager or Designated Hearing Officer shall render a written decision that shall be hand delivered or overnight mailed to the license holder within five days of the public hearing. 
D.  In the event a license is revoked pursuant to this section, another adult business license to operate an adult business shall not be granted to the licensee within 12 months after the date of such revocation. 
E.  The time for a court challenge to a decision of the City Manager or Designated Hearing Officer is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
F.  Notice of the City Manager's or Designated Hearing Officer's decision and its findings shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
G.  Any applicant or license holder whose license has been suspended or revoked pursuant to this section shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 4 (part))  
4.52.130 - Display of license and identification cards. 
The Chief of Police shall provide each adult business performer required to have an adult business performer license pursuant to this chapter with an identification card containing the name, business address, photograph, and license number of such performer. Every performer shall have such card available for inspection at all times during which he or she is on the premises of the adult business at which he or she performs. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 4 (part))  
4.52.140 - Register and permit number of employees. 
Every owner, operator, manager or permittee in charge or in control of an adult business as defined in Section 11.40.030 of this Code, which provides any live performance displaying "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities" must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the premises and their adult business performer permit numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any police officer of the City. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 4 (part))  
4.52.150 - Adult business performer license nontransferable. 
No adult business performer license may be sold, transferred, or assigned by any licensee or by operation of law, to any other person, group, partnership, corporation, or any other entity. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the adult business performer license, and the license thereafter shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 4 (part))  
Article IV. - Miscellaneous Provisions 
 
4.52.160 - Inspection and display of permit. 
An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Police Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Planning Department, or other City departments or agencies to inspect the premises where any live entertainment or adult live entertainment takes place for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law and this chapter at any time it is occupied or open for business. Such inspections shall be conducted in a reasonable manner. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 5 (part))  
4.52.170 - Time limit for filing application for license or permit. 
All persons required by this chapter to obtain any live entertainment permit or adult business performer license must apply for and obtain such a permit or license within 14 days of the effective date of this chapter. Failure to do so and continued performances of live entertainment after such time without a live entertainment permit or performances that display "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities" in an adult business after such time without an adult business performer license shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 5 (part))  
4.52.180 - Violations. 
A.  Any person or entity violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
B.  In addition to the penalties provided in Chapter 1.12 of this Code, any licensee violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter regulating live entertainment and adult business performer licenses shall be subject to license suspension/revocation pursuant to Sections 4.52.060 and 4.52.120 of this chapter and any and all other remedies (administrative, civil, and equitable) as allowed by law or in equity. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
C.  In addition to the remedies set forth in subsections A and B of this section, any violation of these provisions regulating live entertainment licenses and adult business performer licenses is declared to constitute a public nuisance and may be abated or enjoined. 
(Ord. 06-889 § 7: Ord. 06-873 § 5 (part))  
4.52.190 - Regulations nonexclusive. 
The provisions of this chapter regulating live entertainment licenses and adult business performer licenses are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the licensing provisions as adopted by the City Council of the City of Montclair. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 5 (part))  
4.52.200 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part, or any part thereof is held for any reason to be unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases shall not be affected thereby. The City Council declares that it would have adopted this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part regardless of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases may be determined to be unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 5 (part))  
Chapter 4.53 - ADULT BUSINESS LICENSES AND OPERATING REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
4.53.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the operations of adult businesses, which tend to have judicially recognized adverse secondary effects on the community, including, but not limited to, increases in crime in the vicinity of adult businesses, decreases in property values in the vicinity of adult businesses, increases in vacancies in residential and commercial areas in the vicinity of adult businesses, interference with residential property owners' enjoyment of their properties when such properties are located in the vicinity of adult businesses as a result of increases in crime, litter, noise, and vandalism, and the deterioration of neighborhoods. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to prevent these adverse secondary effects and the blighting or degradation of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of adult businesses while at the same time protecting the First Amendment rights of those individuals who desire to own, operate or patronize adult businesses. 
It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform operational standards for adult businesses. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 6 (part))  
4.53.020 - Definitions. 
In addition to any other definitions contained in the Municipal Code, all words and phrases included in this chapter shall be consistent with the definitions in Section 11.40.030 of this Code, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 6 (part))  
4.53.030 - Adult business license required. 
All adult businesses are subject to the adult business license requirements of this chapter as well as all other applicable ordinances of the City and laws of the State of California. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult business within the City of Montclair unless the person first obtains, and continues to maintain in full force and effect, an adult business license as herein required. Any occurrence of the "establishment of an adult business" as defined in Section 11.40.030(12) of this Code shall require a new application for an adult business license. The adult business license shall be subject to the development and operational standards of this chapter and the underlying zone where the facility is located. 
B.  The Director of Community Development or his or her designee shall grant or deny adult business licenses in accordance with these regulations. 
C.  The suspension or revocation of any adult business license shall proceed in accordance with these regulations. 
D.  Permit applicants shall file a written, signed, and verified application on a form provided by the Planning Department. Such application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents: 
1.  If the permit applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, and address, and shall submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age; 
2.  If the permit applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership's complete name, address, the names of all partners, and whether the partnership is general or limited; and shall attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; 
3.  If the permit applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the State of California, the names and capacities of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent, and the address of the registered office for service of process; 
4.  A signed and verified statement that the permit applicant, if an individual, or partners, officers, directors, if a partnership or corporation, has not pled guilty or nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex or sex-related offense and (a) more than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor; or (b) more than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) more than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period; 
5.  The permit applicant shall sign the application. All persons who sign the application must also provide names, aliases, addresses, and date of birth; 
6.  If the permit applicant intends to operate the adult business under a name other than that of the permit applicant, the permit applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name; 
7.  A description of the type of adult business for which the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult business site; 
8.  The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed; 
9.  A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be oriented to the north or some other designated street or object and drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus 6 inches; 
10.  A diagram of the off-street parking areas and entries to the premises of the adult business, also showing the location of the lighting system required by this chapter. 
E.  The completed application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The amount of such fees shall be set by the City Council. 
F.  The completeness of an application for an adult business license shall be determined by the Director of Community Development or his or her designee within five working days of its submittal. If the Director of Community Development or his or her designee determines that the permit application is incomplete, the Director of Community Development or his or her designee shall immediately notify in writing the permit applicant of such fact and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. Such writing shall be deposited in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid, immediately upon determination that the application is incomplete. Within five working days following the receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the Director of Community Development or his or her designee shall again determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the provisions set forth in this section. Evaluation and notification shall occur as provided herein until such time as the application is found to be complete. 
G.  The fact that a permit applicant possesses other types of State or City permits or licenses does not exempt the permit applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult business license. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 6 (part))  
4.53.040 - Investigation and action on application for adult business license. 
A.  Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and permit fees, the Director of Community Development or his or her designee shall immediately write or stamp the application "Received" and, in conjunction with City staff, shall promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether an adult business license shall be granted. Investigation shall not be grounds for the City to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed application, nor is it grounds to extend the time period to conduct a hearing pursuant to this section. 
B.  Within 21 days of receipt of the completed application, the investigation shall be completed and the Director of Community Development or his or her designee shall notice and conduct a public hearing with notice of such hearing to be made pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65091 and 65905. 
C.  In reaching a decision, the Director of Community Development or his or her designee shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence in the California Evidence Code. 
D.  The Director of Community Development or his or her designee shall render a written decision on the application for an adult business license within two working days of the public hearing required by this section. The failure of the Director of Community Development or his or her designee to render any decision within the time frames established in any part of this section shall be deemed to constitute an approval, subject to appeal pursuant to Section 4.53.050 of this chapter. The Director of Community Development or his or her designee's decision shall be hand delivered or mailed to the applicant at the address provided in the application, and shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
E.  Notwithstanding any provisions in this section regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this section or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the City of the pending application. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the City or constitute failure by the City to provide for prompt decisions on applications. 
F.  The Director of Community Development or his or her designee shall grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows: 
1.  The Director of Community Development or his or her designee shall write or stamp "Granted" or "Denied" on the application and date and sign such notation. 
2.  If the application is denied, the Director of Community Development or his or her designee shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for the denial. 
3.  If the application is granted, the Director of Community Development or his or her designee shall attach to the application an adult business license. 
G.  The Director of Community Development or his or her designee shall grant the application and issue the adult business license upon findings that the proposed business meets, or will meet, all of the development and operational standards and requirements of this chapter, unless the application is denied based upon one or more of the criteria set forth in subsection I of this section. 
H.  If the Director of Community Development or his or her designee grants the application, the applicant may begin operating the adult business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and operational standards and requirements of this chapter. The permit holder shall post the permit conspicuously in the premises of the adult business. 
I.  The Director of Community Development or his or her designee shall deny the application if the applicant fails to establish any of the following: 
1.  The adult business complies with the City's zoning requirements as to its underlying zoning designation. 
2.  The adult business complies with the development, operational or performance standards found in this chapter. 
3.  The permit applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
4.  The required application fees have been paid. 
5.  The application complies with Section 4.53.030(D) of this chapter. 
J.  A person cannot reapply for an adult business license for a particular location within one year from the date of prior denial. 
K.  Any affected person may appeal the decision of the Director of Community Development or his or her designee in writing within five days in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.53.050 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 6 (part))  
4.53.050 - Appeal procedures. 
A.  The decision of the Director of Community Development shall be appealable to the Planning Commission by the filing of a written appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days following the day of mailing of the Director's decision and paying the fee for appeals provided under this Code. All such appeals shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be public records. The Planning Commission, at a duly noticed meeting within 30 days from the date the written appeal was filed, shall independently review the entire record, including the transcript of the hearing and any oral or written arguments which may be offered. No additional testimony or other evidence shall be received or considered by the Planning Commission. At the conclusion of the review, the Planning Commission shall decide to sustain the decision, modify the decision, or order the decision stricken and issue such order as the Planning Commission finds is supported by the entire record. The action of the Planning Commission shall be final and conclusive, shall be rendered in writing within four working days, and such written decision shall be immediately mailed or delivered to the appellant(s) and there shall be no additional right of appeal. The appeal provisions found in this section shall control over any other appeal provisions found within the Montclair Municipal Code. 
B.  Notwithstanding any provisions in this section regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this division or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the City of the pending appeal. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the City or constitute failure by the City to provide for prompt decisions on applications. 
C.  Failure of the Planning Commission to render a decision to grant or deny an appeal of a license denial within the time frames established by this section shall be deemed to constitute an approval of the adult business license. 
D.  The time for a court challenge to a decision of the Planning Commission is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
E.  Notice of the Planning Commission's decision and its findings shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
F.  Any applicant or license holder whose license has been denied pursuant to this section shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
G.  The Planning Commission's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 6 (part))  
4.53.060 - Operating standards. 
A.  Hours of Operation. It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, employee or independent contractor of an adult business to allow such adult business to remain open for business, or to license any employee, independent contractor or performer to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. of any day excepting herefrom an "adult hotel/motel." 
B.  Exterior Lighting Requirements. All exterior areas, including parking lots, of the adult business shall be illuminated at a minimum of 1.5 footcandles, maintained and evenly distributed at ground level with appropriate devices to screen, deflect or diffuse the lighting in such manner as to prevent glare or reflected light from creating adverse impacts on adjoining and nearby public and private properties. Inoperable and/or broken lights shall be replaced within 24 hours. 
C.  Interior Lighting Requirements. All interior areas of the adult business excepting therefrom adult hotels/motels shall be illuminated at a minimum of 1 footcandle, maintained and evenly distributed at floor level. Inoperable and/or broken lights shall be replaced within 24 hours, excepting herefrom an "adult hotel/motel." 
D.  Regulation of Adult Booth/Individual Viewing Area. 
1.  No adult booth/individual viewing area shall be occupied by more than one individual at a time. 
2.  Each adult booth/individual viewing area within the adult business shall be visible from a continuous and accessible main aisle in a public portion of the establishment, and shall not be obscured by any door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror or other device which would prohibit a person from seeing the entire interior of the adult booth/individual viewing area from the main aisle. A manager shall be stationed in the main aisle at all times. Further, no one shall maintain any adult booth/individual viewing area in any configuration unless the entire interior wherein the picture or entertainment that is viewed is visible from one main aisle. The entire body of any patron in any adult booth/individual viewing area must be visible from the main aisle without the assistance of mirrors or any other device. 
3.  No doors are permitted on an adult booth/individual viewing area. No partially or fully enclosed adult booth/individual viewing areas or partially or fully concealed adult booth/individual viewing areas shall be maintained. 
4.  No holes or other openings shall be permitted between adult booths/individual viewing areas. Any such hole or opening shall be repaired within 24 hours using "pop" rivets to secure metal plates over the hole or opening to prevent patrons from removing the metal plates. 
5.  No beds, couches or chairs with a sitting area greater than 24 inches wide shall be permitted in an adult booth/individual viewing area. 
E.  On-Site Manager. All adult businesses shall have a responsible person who shall be at least 18 years of age and shall be on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. No performer may serve as the manager. The individual(s) designated as the on-site manager shall provide his or her name to the Chief of Police to receive all complaints and be given by the owner and/or operator the responsibility and duty to address and immediately resolve all violations taking place on the premises. 
F.  Security. All adult businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards: 
1.  Adult businesses featuring live entertainment shall provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open. 
2.  If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 35 persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty. 
3.  Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of these regulations. Security guard(s) shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of State law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard. 
G.  Interior of Premises. No exterior door or window on the premises of an adult business shall be propped or kept open at anytime while the business is open and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque coverings at all times. 
H.  Signs. All adult businesses shall comply with the following sign requirements, in addition to those of the Montclair Municipal Code. Should a conflict exist between the requirements of the Montclair Municipal Code and this subsection, the more restrictive shall prevail. 
1.  If an adult business does not serve alcohol, it shall post a notice inside the establishment, within 10 feet of every entrance used by customers for access to the establishment, stating that persons below the age of 18 years of age are prohibited from entering onto the premises or within the confines of the adult business. This notice shall be posted on a wall in a place of prominence. The dimensions of the notice shall be no less than 6 inches by 6 inches, with a minimum typeface of 25 points. If the adult business serves alcohol, it shall comply with all notice and posting requirements of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Department. 
2.  No adult-oriented material shall be displayed in window areas or any area where it would be visible from any location other than within the confines of the adult business. 
I.  Regulation of Public Restroom Facilities. If the adult business provides restrooms for patron use, it shall provide separate restroom facilities for male and female patrons. The restrooms shall be free from adult-oriented material. Only one person shall be allowed in each restroom at any time, unless otherwise required by law, in which case the adult business shall employ a restroom attendant of the same sex as the restroom users who shall be present in the public portion of the restroom during operating hours. The attendant shall ensure that no person of the opposite sex is permitted into the restroom, and that not more than one person is permitted to enter a restroom stall, unless otherwise required by law, and that the restroom facilities are used only for their intended sanitary purposes. Access to restrooms for patron use shall not require passage through an area used as a dressing area by performers. 
J.  Trash. All interior trash cans shall be emptied into a single locked trash bin lined with a plastic bag or with individually bagged trash at least once a day. At least four times a day, the front and rear exteriors of any adult business, along with the parking lot, shall be inspected for trash and debris and any trash and debris found shall be immediately removed and placed into a single locked trash bin lined with a plastic bag. 
K.  Adult Business Offering Adult Live Entertainment—Additional Operating Requirements. The following additional requirements shall apply to adult businesses providing adult live entertainment: 
1.  No person shall perform adult live entertainment for patrons of an adult business except upon a permanently fixed stage at least 18 inches above the level of the floor, and surrounded with a 3-foot-high barrier or by a fixed rail at least 30 inches in height. No patron shall be permitted on the stage while the stage is occupied by a performer(s) and/or adult cabaret dancer(s). This provision shall not apply to an individual viewing area where the performer is completely separated from the area in which the performer is viewed by an individual by a permanent, floor-to-ceiling, solid barrier. 
2.  No performer or adult cabaret dancer shall be within 6 feet of a patron, measured horizontally, while the performer or adult cabaret dancer is performing adult live entertainment. While on stage, no performer or adult cabaret dancer shall have physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact with any performer or adult cabaret dancer. 
3.  As to off-stage performances, no performer or adult cabaret dancer shall perform "adult live entertainment" off stage. As to an adult cabaret dancer performing off stage, a distance of at least 6 feet shall be maintained between the adult cabaret dancer and the patron(s) at all times. During off-stage performances, no adult cabaret dancer shall have physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact with any adult cabaret dancer. 
4.  In addition, while on the premises, no performer or adult cabaret dancer shall have physical contact with a patron and no patron shall have physical contact with a performer or adult cabaret dancer, which physical contact involves the touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, cleft of the buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast with any part or area of any other person's body either before or after any adult live entertainment or off-stage performances by such performer or adult cabaret dancer. Patrons shall be advised of the no touching requirements by signs and, if necessary, by employees, independent contractors, performers, or adult cabaret dancers of the establishment. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching. 
5.  Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by signs conspicuously displayed and placed on the barrier between patrons and performers and utilizing red or black printing of letters not less than 1 inch in size. And, if necessary, patrons shall also be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by employees or independent contractors of the establishment. 
6.  All employees and independent contractors of the adult facility, except therefrom performers while performing on the fixed stage, while on or about the premises or tenant space, shall wear at a minimum an opaque covering which covers their specified anatomical areas. 
7.  Patrons shall not throw money to performers, place monies in the performers' costumes or otherwise place or throw monies on the stage. If patrons wish to pay or tip performers, payment or tips may be placed in containers. Patrons shall be advised of this requirement by signs conspicuously displayed and placed on the barrier between patrons and performers and utilizing red or black printing of letters not less than 1 inch in size. If necessary, patrons shall also be advised of the tipping and gratuity requirements by employees or independent contractors of the adult business. 
8.  The adult business shall provide dressing rooms for performers that are separated by gender and exclusively dedicated to the performers' use and which the performers shall use. Same-gender performers may share a dressing room. Patrons shall not be permitted in dressing rooms. 
9.  The adult business shall provide an entrance/exit to the establishment for performers that is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons, which the performers shall use at all times. 
10.  The adult business shall provide access for performers between the stage and the dressing rooms that is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult business shall provide a minimum 3-foot-wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the performers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and performers and the patrons must also be 3 feet away from the walk aisle. Nothing in this section is intended to exempt the adult business from compliance with the provisions of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations pertaining to disabled accessibility. 
L.  Adult Motion Picture Theater—Additional Operating Requirements. The following additional requirements shall apply to adult motion picture theaters: 
1.  If the theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall comply with each of the following provisions: 
a.  Have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area; 
b.  Have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating areas in order that each person seated in the hall or auditorium area shall be visible from the aisle at all times; 
c.  Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the hall or auditorium area that lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area. 
2.  If an adult motion picture theater is designed to permit outdoor viewing by patrons seated in automobiles, it shall have the motion picture screen so situated, or the perimeter of the establishment so fenced, that the material to be seen by those patrons may not be seen from any public right-of-way, child day-care facility, public park, school, or religious institution or any residentially zoned property occupied with a residence. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 6 (part))  
4.53.070 - Transfer of adult business license. 
A.  A license holder shall not operate an adult business under the authority of an adult business license at any place other than the address of the adult business stated in the application for the license. 
B.  In the event of a transfer of ownership of the adult business, the new owner shall be fully informed of the requirements of this chapter, including the operational and development standards herein. 
C.  In the event of a transfer of the adult business or the adult business license, the transferee must provide the Director of Community Development with the following information within seven days of the transfer: 
1.  If the transferee is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, and address, and shall submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age. 
2.  If the transferee is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership's complete name, address, the names of all partners, and whether the partnership is general or limited; and shall attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any. 
3.  If the transferee is a corporation or limited liability corporation (LLC), the entity shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation or organization, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of the State of California, the names and capacities of all officers and directors, managers or members asserting supervisory or managerial control over the facility, the name of the registered agent, and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 6 (part))  
4.53.080 - Suspension or revocation of adult business license. 
A.  On determining that grounds for license suspension or revocation exist, the Chief of Police or his or her designee shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the license holder. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Municipal Code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the license holder, or shall be delivered to the license holder personally, at least 10 days prior to the hearing date. Hearings pursuant to this section shall be conducted by the City Manager or a Designated Hearing Officer designated by him or her which can include a retired judge. Hearings pursuant to this section shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the City Manager or Designated Hearing Officer but, at a minimum, shall include the following: 
1.  All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing upon the issues and may be represented by counsel. 
2.  The City Manager or Designated Hearing Officer shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. 
3.  Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness at the request of the license holder. Extensions of time or continuances sought by a license holder shall not be considered delay on the part of the City or constitute failure by the City to provide for prompt decisions on license suspensions or revocations. 
4.  The City Manager's or Designated Hearing Officer's decision may be appealed in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 4.53.050 of this chapter. 
B.  A license may be suspended or revoked based on the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the license holder, or an employee, independent contractor, partner, director, or manager of the license holder: 
1.  The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the adult business fails to comply with all provisions of these regulations and this section relating to adult businesses, including the adult business operational standards contained in Section 4.53.050 of this chapter and the zoning requirements of Chapter 11.40 of this Code, and all other applicable building, fire, electrical, plumbing, health, and zoning requirements of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
2.  The license holder has failed to obtain or maintain all required City licenses. 
3.  The license holder has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult business license. 
4.  The license is being used to conduct an activity different from that for which it was issued. 
5.  That an individual employed by, or performing in, the adult business (whether classified as an employee or independent contractor) has been convicted of two or more sex-related offenses that occurred in or on the licensed premises within a 12-month period and was employed by, or performing in, the adult business at the time the offenses were committed. 
6.  That the use for which the approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for six months or more. 
7.  That the transferee/new owner of an adult business or adult business license failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
8.  The license holder, partner, director, or manager has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult business; or a licensee has been convicted of violating any of the following State laws on the premises of the adult business: 
a.  Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation; 
b.  Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur; 
c.  Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code; 
d.  The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, and 318 of the California Penal Code; 
e.  Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including, but not limited to, Sections 311 through 313.4; 
f.  Any act constituting a felony involving the sale, use, possession, or possession for sale of any controlled substance specified in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
g.  An act or omission in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter if such act or omission is with the knowledge, authorization, or approval of the license holder or is as a result of the license holder's negligent supervision of the employees or independent contractors of the adult facility. This includes the allowance of activities that are or become a public nuisance, which includes the disruptive conduct of business patrons whether on or immediately off the premises where such patrons disturb the peace, obstruct traffic, damage property, engage in criminal conduct, violate the law and otherwise impair the free enjoyment of life and property. 
C.  After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the City Manager or Designated Hearing Officer finds and determines that there are grounds for suspension or revocation, the City Manager or Designated Hearing Officer shall impose one of the following: 
1.  Suspension of the license for a specified period not to exceed six months; 
2.  Revocation of the license. 
The City Manager or Designated Hearing Officer shall render a written decision that shall be hand delivered or overnight mailed to the license holder within five days of the public hearing. 
D.  In the event a license is revoked pursuant to this section, another adult business license to operate an adult business shall not be granted to the licensee within 12 months after the date of such revocation. 
E.  The time for a court challenge to a decision of the City Manager or Designated Hearing Officer is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
F.  Notice of the City Manager's or Designated Hearing Officer's decision and its findings shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
G.  Any applicant or license holder whose license has been suspended or revoked pursuant to this section shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 6 (part))  
4.53.090 - Employment of and services rendered to persons under the age of 18 years prohibited, 21 if liquor is served. 
A.  Employees/Independent Contractors. Employees and independent contractors of an adult business must be at least 18 years of age. It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a 10 percent or greater interest, employees, or other person in charge of any adult business to employ, contract with, or otherwise retain any services in connection with the adult business with or from any person who is not at least 18 years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, employees and independent contractors of the adult business must be at least 21 years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, it is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a 10 percent or greater interest, employee, or other person in charge of any adult business to employ, contract with, or otherwise retain any services in connection with the adult business with or from any person who is not 21 years of age. And such persons shall exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of persons seeking to contract with, be employed by, or otherwise service the adult business. 
B.  Patrons. Patrons of an adult business must be at least 18 years of age. It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a 10 percent or greater interest, employee, independent contractor, or other person in charge of any adult business to permit to enter or remain within the adult business any person who is not at least 18 years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, patrons must be at least 21 years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, it is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a 10 percent or greater interest, employee, independent contractor, or other person in charge of any adult business to permit to enter or remain within the adult business any person who is not at least 21 years of age. And such persons shall exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of persons entering the adult business. 
C.  X-Rated Movies. The selling, renting and/or displaying of x-rated movies, videotapes, digital video discs (DVDs), compact discs (CDs) and laser discs shall be restricted to persons over 18 years of age. If an establishment that is not otherwise prohibited from providing access to the establishment to persons under 18 years of age sells, rents, or displays movies, videos, DVDs, CDs, or laser discs that have been rated "X" or rated "NC-17" by the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), or which have not been submitted to the MPAA for a rating, and which consist of images that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, such movies, videos, DVDs, CDs, and laser discs shall be located in a specific section of the establishment where these items are not visible to persons under the age of 18 and from which persons under the age of 18 shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 6 (part))  
4.53.100 - Regulations nonexclusive. 
The provisions of this chapter regulating adult businesses are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other provisions of the Municipal Code and/or any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the City Council of the City of Montclair. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 6 (part))  
4.53.110 - Violations. 
A.  Any person or entity violating or failing to comply with any of the license and/or permit requirements of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
B.  In addition to the penalties provided in Chapter 1.12 of this Code, any licensee, owner, operators, manager, employee, or independent contractor of an adult business violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter regulating adult businesses shall be subject to any and all other remedies (administrative, civil, and equitable) as allowed by law or in equity. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
C.  In addition to the remedies set forth in subsections A and B of this section, any adult business that is operating in violation of these provisions regulating adult businesses is declared to constitute a public nuisance and may be abated or enjoined. 
(Ord. 06-889 § 8: Ord. 06-873 § 6 (part))  
4.53.120 - Public nuisance. 
In addition to the penalties set forth in this chapter, any adult business that is operating in violation of these provisions regulating adult businesses is declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 6 (part))  
Chapter 4.56 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE TECHNICIANS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, adopted July 6, 2015, repealed the former Chapter 4.56, §§ 4.56.010—4.56.140, and enacted a new Chapter 4.56 as set out herein. The former Chapter 4.56 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code §§ 5-10.21—5-10.35; Ord. No. 99-791 and Ord. No. 02-821. 
 
4.56.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The City Council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  The permit requirements and restrictions imposed by this chapter are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City, while recognizing massage as a legitimate business interest that provides benefits to its patrons in a therapeutic setting. 
B.  This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of the State Constitution, California Government Code Sections 37100 and 51030 et seq.; California Business and Professions Code Sections 460, 4600 through 4620 and Section 16000; Section 13 of the Chiropractic Act (initiative measure approved by the electors November 7, 1922, as amended); and AB 1147 (2014). 
C.  There is a significant risk of injury to massage clients by persons improperly trained and/or educated in providing massage services, and this chapter provides reasonable safeguards against injury and economic loss. 
D.  There is opportunity for acts of prostitution, lewdness, and other unlawful sexual activity to occur in massage establishments, as well as problems relating to human trafficking in massage establishments. Courts have long recognized massage as a pervasively regulated activity and that massage establishments are often brothels in disguise. The establishment of reasonable standards for issuance of permits and restrictions on operations would serve to reduce the risk of illegal activity and would thereby benefit the public health. 
E.  The provisions of this chapter are intended to enhance the efficient processing of permits for massage establishments, owners and managers and the ongoing regulation of those permittees and certificate holders by the City of Montclair. The provisions of this chapter in no way limit the authority of the City to inspect massage establishments or conduct investigations to ensure permittees are complying with applicable rules and regulations. 
F.  The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter are intended to stop the practice of businesses quickly changing ownership in name upon the discovery of criminal activity by the City. 
G.  The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter are intended to be in addition to the requirement of a valid business license issued pursuant to Chapter 4.04 of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
H.  The regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter are intended to discourage massage establishments from degenerating into houses of prostitution, and the means utilized in this chapter bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the goals sought to be achieved within the confines allowed by state law. 
I.  The provisions of this chapter are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any state or local laws or regulations that are uniformly applied to other professional or personal service businesses. 
J.  The California Massage Therapy Council ("CAMTC") can better, and more efficiently, regulate massage technicians in order to best protect the public and it is in the public interest to require that all persons providing massage in the City have a certificate from the CAMTC. 
K.  The operational regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter are intended to apply to both new and existing massage establishments and practitioners in the City, provided, however, that the conditional use permit requirement and other zoning and land use district restrictions shall be applicable to existing massage establishments on the second anniversary of the effective date of this chapter pursuant to Section 11.10.020 of this Code regarding existing uses. The Council finds that said two-year period constitutes a reasonable amortization period for existing legal nonconforming massage uses. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
4.56.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
California Massage Therapy Council or CAMTC means the nonprofit organization created to regulate and issue massage practitioner and therapist certificates pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq. 
CAMTC Certificate means a massage practitioner or massage therapist certificate issued by the CAMTC. 
Certificate of operation means the certificate issued by the Finance Director entitling a business to be operated as a massage establishment. 
Chief of Police means the Chief of Police of the City of Montclair, or his or her designee. 
City means the City of Montclair. 
City Manager means the City Manager of the City of Montclair, or his or her designee. 
Compensation means the payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, exchange, or gift of money or anything of value. 
Conviction or convicted means a conviction following a guilty plea, nolo contendere plea, or judgment or verdict where the time for appeal has elapsed or conviction has been affirmed on appeal, irrespective of an order granting probation following that conviction, suspending the imposition of sentence, or of a subsequent order under California Penal Code Section 1203.4 allowing the applicant to withdraw his or her plea of guilty or nolo contendere and to enter a plea of not guilty, or dismissing the accusation or information. 
Employee means any person, other than a massage practitioner, massage therapist, or operator, who renders any service, with or without compensation, to the operator or agent of an operator of a massage establishment relating to the day-to-day operation of the massage establishment whether as an employee or independent contractor. 
Finance Director means the Finance Director of the City of Montclair, or his or her designee. 
Main entry door means a door from the outside of the establishment leading into the reception area. 
Manager means the person(s) designated by the owner of the massage establishment to act as the representative and agent of the owner in managing day-to-day operations with corresponding responsibilities. Evidence of management includes, but is not limited to, the ability of the individual to direct or hire and dismiss employees, control hours of operation, create policy or rules or purchase supplies, and ensure that the massage establishment complies with the requirements of this Code and of other laws. A manager may also be an owner as defined herein. A manager must have a valid operator permit. 
Massage means any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, health, hygienic, or relaxation purpose. Massage includes, but is not limited to, treatment by means of manual pressure, acupressure, friction, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, with or without the aid of or by means of any mechanical, electronic, or electrical apparatus or appliance, and with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments, aromatics, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations. Massage specifically includes the application of any of these methods to the scalp, neck, or feet of any individual. (Some persons practicing massage may be exempt from all or parts of the permit requirements pursuant to Section 4.56.030 herein.) 
Massage establishment means any enterprise or establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, any of the activities set forth in the definition of massage in this section. 
Massage practitioner means a person who is certified as such by the CAMTC in accordance with the Massage Therapy Act. 
Massage technician means a massage practitioner or massage therapist certified by CAMTC. 
Massage therapist means a person who is certified as such by the CAMTC in accordance with the Massage Therapy Act. 
Massage Therapy Act refers to Chapter 406 of the 2013-2014 Legislative Session, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Operator means all persons who own or manage a massage establishment. 
Operator permit means the permit issued by Chief of Police allowing a person to own or manage a massage establishment. 
Out-call massage means any business or enterprise that engages in or performs massage for any form of consideration or in exchange for anything of value whatsoever at a location other than a massage establishment. 
Owner means all of the following: 
1.  The sole proprietor of a massage establishment, i.e., where the owner is the only person performing massage at that establishment; 
2.  In the case of a general business, each owner of the business; 
3.  In the case of a corporation, each stockholder holding more than 10 percent of the corporation and each officer and director of the corporation; 
4.  In the case of a partnership, each partner, excluding limited partners owning less than 10 percent of the partnership, and where a partner is a corporation, the provisions pertaining to a corporate applicant in subsection 3 above apply. 
Patron means an individual on the premises of a massage establishment for the purpose of receiving a massage. 
Permit means an operator permit or certificate of operation, unless the context indicates otherwise. 
Permittee means any person who has obtained a certificate of operation or operator permit from the City. 
Person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct means a person who: 
1.  Within 10 years preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within 10 years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following: 
a.  A violation of any provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of California Penal Code Section 290; 
b.  Conduct in violation of California Penal Code Sections 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, 653.22, 653.23, or Section 647(a), (b) or (d); 
c.  An attempt to commit or conspiracy to commit any of the above mentioned offenses; 
d.  When the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of a violation of California Penal Code Sections 415, 602 or any lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, any of the previously listed crimes; 
e.  Any crime committed while engaged in the management or ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage; 
f.  A violation of California Health and Safety Code Section 11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution or possession of a controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058; or 
g.  Any offense under a statute of any state or ordinance of any City or county, which is the equivalent of any of the aforementioned offenses, including California Business and Professions Code Section 4609(a). 
2.  Within 10 years preceding the date of the filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within 10 years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has had any massage establishment, operator, technician, practitioner, therapist or trainee certificate, license or permit issued by any state, local agency or other licensing authority, including the CAMTC: Denied, revoked or suspended for any reason other than lack of sufficient education; or has had to surrender such a certificate, license or permit as a result of pending criminal charges or administrative proceedings for suspension or revocation of any such certificate, license or permit. 
3.  Within five years preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within five years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following: 
a.  Any crime, other than an infraction or those listed above, involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit with the intent to substantially benefit himself or another, or substantially injure another; or 
b.  Any crime, other than an infraction or crimes relating to those offenses listed above, where the crime or act is substantially related to the management or ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage, including a violation of the Massage Therapy Act. 
4.  Has been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11225 through 11235 as the same may be amended from time to time, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the State of California. 
5.  Has been found to be maintaining a nuisance in connection with the same or similar type of business. 
6.  Within five years preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within five years preceding the date of the revocation notice: 
a.  Has engaged in the exposing of specified anatomical areas of oneself or of another person to view, or in touching the specified anatomical areas of oneself or of another person, while providing massage services or while within view of a customer or patron of the massage establishment; or 
b.  Has been the owner, manager, or other similar position, in an establishment where the conduct described in subsection (6)(a) above has occurred. 
7.  Disqualifying conduct does not include the failure to obtain a certificate of operation or operator permit without any prior oral or written notification by the City that such was required, provided that the business and/or person cease operations immediately upon notification. 
Proof of bona fide employment means proof of an employer-employee relationship between the operator of the massage establishment and any person working at the massage establishment. Satisfactory proof of bona fide employment must be shown by written payroll documentation evidencing the employer's compliance with California Employment Development Department (EDD) requirements for the withholding of California income tax, unemployment insurance contributions and disability contributions from the employee and written payroll documentation of the employer's compliance with Internal Revenue Service (IRS) requirements for the withholding of federal income taxes, Social Security (FICA) and Medicare contributions from the employee. Such written documentation can include, but is not limited to, W-2 wage and tax statements. 
Reception area means an area immediately inside the main entry door of the massage establishment dedicated to the reception and waiting of patrons and visitors of the massage establishment and which is not a massage room or otherwise used for the provision of massage services. 
Residence address means the actual physical home address and shall not include a P.O. box, mailbox service, or other similar location. 
Sole provider means a massage business where the owner owns 100 percent of the business, is the only person who provides massage services for compensation for that business pursuant to a valid and active CAMTC Certificate, and has no other employees or independent contractors. 
Spa means facilities such as mineral baths, salt rooms, mineral rooms, saunas, steam rooms, whirlpools and other therapeutic baths. 
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following human anatomical areas: Genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae, without a health care referral and written consent of the patron. 
Visitor means a nonemployee who has entered the massage establishment for purposes other than receiving services. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
4.56.030 - Exceptions. 
A.  Complete Exception. The requirements of this chapter shall have no application and no effect upon and shall not be construed as applying to: 
1.  Any physician, surgeon, chiropractor, acupuncturist, osteopath, or physical therapist licensed to practice such profession in the State of California, within the scope of their license. 
2.  Any registered nurse or licensed vocational nurse, licensed to practice under the laws of the State of California, who is an employee of and working under the on-site direction of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist, duly licensed to practice their respective professions in this State. 
3.  Any other person providing massage services who is employed by a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist, shall be required to have a valid CAMTC Certificate, as well as work under the adequate supervision of such physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist as required by State law or regulation. If no specific law or regulation applies, adequate supervision shall have the same meaning as set forth in 16 California Code of Regulations Section 312. 
4.  If a duly licensed acupuncturist wishes to provide massage therapy services to his or her clients by an individual(s) other than his- or her-self, said individual(s) must have a valid CAMTC Certificate and the office of the acupuncturist shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter, as well as any other applicable provisions of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
5.  Any person licensed to practice any healing art under the provisions of California Business and Professions Code, Division 2 (commencing with Section 500) when engaging in such practice within the scope of such license. 
6.  State-licensed hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the State of California, and the employees of such facilities while working on the premises of such state-licensed facilities. 
7.  Accredited high schools, junior/community colleges, and colleges or universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their employment. 
8.  Barbers, beauticians, or manicurists who are duly licensed by the State of California pursuant to the Barbering and Cosmetology Act set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 7300 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time, while engaging in practices within the scope of such license, except that this exemption applies solely for the massaging of the neck, face, and/or scalp of the customer or client of said barber or beautician or, in the case of a licensed manicurist, the massaging of the forearms, hands, calves, and/or feet at a State licensed facility. However, if a state licensed establishment also has a certificate of operation from the City to operate as a massage establishment, the business must also comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
9.  Schools of cosmetology or barbering that comply with the requirements of California Business and Professions Code Section 7362 et seq. when instructors are acting within the scope of their employment or when students are working as unpaid externs pursuant to the requirements of California Business and Professions Code Section 7395.1. 
10.  Any other business or professions exempt by state law. 
B.  Partial Exception. 
1.  Businesses offering massage services that are ancillary to the primary business shall only be required to comply with the provisions set forth in subsection (B)(2) of this section. For purposes of this subsection, ancillary massage services shall be those services where less than 15 percent of the gross floor area of the business is devoted to massage. 
2.  Massage services provided under subsection (B)(1) of this section shall be required to comply with the following: 
a.  Massage services must be performed by the holder of a valid CAMTC Certificate. 
b.  The business shall comply with the following provisions of this chapter: 
i.  Section 4.56.130(A)(1) relating to hours; 
ii.  Section 4.56.130(C) relating to instruments, equipment and personnel; 
iii.  Sections 4.56.130(D)(1) through 4.56.130(D)(3) relating to personnel lists; 
iv.  Section 4.56.130(E) relating to prohibited conduct; 
v.  Sections 4.56.140(A) through 4.56.140(F) relating to building and facility requirements; 
vi.  Section 4.56.150 relating to inspections. 
C.  Any person claiming exception under this section shall furnish satisfactory evidence upon request that he or she is entitled to such exception, including, proof of bona fide employment, or if applicable, a citation to the particular provision of state law upon which that person relies. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
4.56.040 - Business license and other permits required. 
A.  Nothing herein relieves an individual or business from obtaining a City business license, conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 11.78 of this Code, or other permit if otherwise required by law. 
B.  Any individual applying for a business license as a massage practitioner or a massage therapist shall provide proof of a current CAMTC Certificate before being issued a business license. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
4.56.050 - Floor plans required. 
A.  All massage establishments shall be required to submit a scaled floor plan as part of their application for a certificate of operation. 
B.  All businesses that claim a partial exemption from this chapter pursuant to Section 4.56.030(B) shall be required to submit scaled floor plans in order to verify the applicability of the exemption. 
C.  No changes may be made to the approved floor plan without written approval from the Community Development Department, which may require modification of the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
4.56.060 - CAMTC Certificate required. 
A.  No person shall provide massage services, including out-call massage services, from any location in the City without having been issued a CAMTC Certificate, regardless of whether such person has an operator permit or the business has a certificate of operation. 
B.  Any person certified by the state who desires to operate a massage establishment must obtain an operator permit in accordance with Sections 4.56.070 through 4.56.120 herein. 
C.  No operator of a massage establishment shall hire as an employee or utilize as an independent contractor any person to perform massage unless such person has been issued a massage certificate. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
4.56.070 - Certificate and permit required. 
A.  No person shall own or manage any massage establishment in any location within the City without first having obtained an operator permit. 
B.  No massage establishment shall be allowed to operate within the City unless the business first obtains a certificate of operation. No certificate of operation shall be approved until each operator identified in the application has obtained an operator permit. 
C.  Any person desiring to obtain a certificate of operation and/or an operator permit shall make application in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, which application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. 
D.  All applications shall be dated and shall contain the following statements: 
1.  A certification under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct; and 
2.  An authorization for the City, its officers, agents and employees, to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and to ensure continual compliance with all applicable provisions of law. 
E.  The provisions of Sections 4.56.050, 4.56.130, 4.56.140, 4.56.150 and 4.56.160 herein shall apply to any business that operates as a massage establishment, even if such business fails to obtain an operator permit or certificate of operation. The City may immediately order a business that fails to have a certificate of operation or an operator permit to cease operation. 
F.  Within 45 calendar days following receipt of a completed application, the Finance Director shall either issue the certificate of operation and the Chief of police shall issue an operator permit or mail a written statement of the reasons for denial thereof. Notwithstanding the above, failure of the City to act upon a completed application within the time frame set forth above shall not be deemed approval of the application pursuant to this chapter. Any certificate of operation or operator permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed conditional pending the City's receipt of the California Department of Justice report on the applicant's fingerprints. If the fingerprint report demonstrates that the applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the permit application or in any report or record required to be filed therewith, or discloses any disqualifying conduct, the permit(s) shall be subject to denial or revocation pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
4.56.080 - Operator permit. 
A.  Application Contents. Applicants for operator permits shall submit the following information to the Montclair Police Department on a form supplied by the Department: 
1.  The full true name of the applicant; 
2.  A complete statement listing and explaining any and all aliases and fictitious names used by the applicant within the 10 years immediately preceding the application; 
3.  The current residence address and business address and current residence and business telephone number of the applicant; 
4.  A list of all previous residential and business addresses for a minimum of eight years immediately preceding the present address of the applicant and the dates of residence for each address; 
5.  The applicant's place of birth, and original documentation to verify both the applicant's identity and employment authorization (if applicable), as listed under 8 U.S.C. 1324a(b)(1) and 8 C.F.R. 274a.2(b)(1). Documentation to satisfy this requirement may include, but is not limited to, a California driver's license, California identification card, Social Security card, resident alien ("green") card, United States passport (unexpired or expired), unexpired foreign passport that contains a temporary I-551 stamp, or an unexpired employment authorization document issued by the United States Government in compliance with 8 C.F.R. 274a.2(b)(1)(v)(A); 
6.  The history of the applicant as to any similar business or occupation within 10 years immediately preceding the filing of the application. Such information shall include, but not be limited to, the names and addresses of any other massage establishments or similar businesses the applicant has owned, managed, provided massage services at, or worked at, whether the applicant has had a permit or license to operate, manage, provide massage services at, or work at a massage establishment denied, revoked or suspended in any jurisdiction; the reasons for any such denial, revocation or suspension; and the business, activity or occupation the applicant engaged in subsequent to such denial, revocation or suspension; 
7.  All criminal convictions within the last 10 years, excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefor; 
8.  Such other reasonable identification and information as the Chief of Police may require in order to discover the truth of the matter specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
9.  The applicant shall be photographed by the Montclair Police Department or otherwise supply a photograph as directed by the Department; and 
10.  An acknowledgement that by applying for an operator permit, the applicant understands that they are responsible for all violations of employees or independent contractors that may take place in the massage establishment that they own or manage and that such violations are grounds for revocation of the operator permit. 
B.  Once the information required by subsection A of this section is submitted, the applicant shall have his or her fingerprints taken for a criminal history background (Livescan) check in the manner directed by the Montclair Police Department. 
C.  The Chief of Police shall issue the operator permit, unless after investigation he or she makes any of the following findings: 
1.  The applicant has failed to provide information, documentation and assurances required by this chapter or by the Chief of Police; has failed to reveal any fact material to qualification; or has supplied information that is untrue or misleading as to a material fact pertaining to the qualification criteria; or 
2.  The applicant is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct; or 
3.  There is substantial evidence that the applicant has engaged in disqualifying conduct, even if there is no conviction for such conduct; or 
4.  The applicant has violated any provision of this chapter, or any similar ordinance, law, rule, or regulation of any other public agency that regulates the operation of massage establishments; or 
5.  The applicant is not at least 18 years of age; or 
6.  The applicant is delinquent in paying City fees or penalties owed in relation to any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  Permits issued pursuant to this section shall remain in effect, unless revoked, for a period of three years. Applications for the renewal of a permit shall be filed with the Montclair Police Department on a form supplied by the Police Department. Temporary permits shall not be issued and expired permits are not valid unless the Permittee has a written receipt showing that the renewal application was filed at least 30 days prior to expiration, without action having been taken by the Chief of Police. Renewal applications shall be signed under penalty of perjury and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by resolution of the City Council. A Permittee shall be required to update the information contained in his/her original permit application and provide any new and/or additional information as may be reasonably required by the Chief of Police in order to determine whether the permit should be renewed, including all information required by subsections A and B of this section. Failure to provide this documentation shall be grounds for nonrenewal of the permit. 
E.  If the criminal history background check report demonstrates that the applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the permit application or in any report or record required to be filed therewith, or discloses any disqualifying conduct, the permit shall be subject to denial. 
F.  Automatic Issuance and Renewal for CAMTC Certificate Holders. 
1.  Any person who holds a valid CAMTC Certificate shall only be required to provide the following information on a form that includes the statements set forth in Section 4.56.070(D) herein: 
a.  The full true name of the applicant; 
b.  The current residence and business address and current residence and business telephone number of the applicant; and 
c.  The name and address of the massage establishment for which the operator permit is sought. 
2.  A copy of the applicant's CAMTC Certificate and identification shall be provided with the application, along with a fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council. 
3.  The applicant shall be required to have his/her photograph taken as specified above. 
4.  The operator permit shall automatically be issued upon completion of the form and verification of the validity of the CAMTC Certificate by the Police Department. No background check shall be required. 
5.  Renewals shall be required in accordance with subsection D of this section, but such renewals shall be automatic as long as the permittee maintains and provides a copy of his/her valid CAMTC Certificate. 
G.  Every person to whom a permit has been granted pursuant to this chapter shall be issued an identification badge by the Montclair Police Department which shall contain the person's name, photograph, expiration date and any other information deemed necessary by the Chief of Police. The badge shall be worn so as to be readily visible at all times while on the premises of the massage establishment. The identification badge shall be surrendered to the Chief of Police or his/her designee upon request, upon any suspension or revocation pursuant to Section 4.56.100 herein. 
H.  Permits issued pursuant to this chapter may not be assigned or transferred. 
I.  It is the duty of each operator to notify the Finance Department whenever there is a change in information that was required to be submitted in the initial application for the operator permit. Such notification shall be in writing and made within 10 business days of the change on a form provided by the City. 
J.  Each operator of a massage establishment shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees and independent contractors working on the premises of the business. Failure of the employees or independent contractors to comply with this chapter may result in the revocation of the operator permit. 
K.  The operator of the massage establishment is responsible for verifying that all persons hold the appropriate CAMTC Certificate as required by this chapter. 
L.  Any requirement of this chapter applying to an operator shall apply to each and every operator of a massage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
4.56.090 - Certificate of operation. 
A.  Applications for a certificate of operation shall be filed with the Finance Department and shall include the information set forth below: 
1.  The full name of the applicant; 
2.  The name under which the business is to be conducted, which name must match the name of the business under which the corresponding business license is issued under Chapter 4.04 of this Code. No massage establishment business shall operate under any business name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the certificate of operation. If the applicant is a corporation, the name shall be exactly as shown on the articles of incorporation or on a valid DBA ("doing business as"); 
3.  The address of the proposed massage establishment; 
4.  A detailed description of the operation and type of services to be provided by the massage establishment, including other therapies to be provided, and other businesses to be operated on the same premises; 
5.  The full name of each operator of the massage establishment; 
6.  A legal size copy of the floor plan approved as part of the conditional use permit, drawn to scale showing the following: Entrances; exits; windows; interior doors; restrooms; all other separately enclosed rooms with dimensions, including, but not limited to, closets, storerooms, break rooms, and changing rooms; and location of massage tables and chairs; 
7.  The full name, address, and phone number of the legal owner of the property, if other than the applicant, on which the massage establishment is to be located, along with a copy of the signed lease and a notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the property that a massage establishment will be located on his or her property; and 
8.  The hours and days of operation. 
B.  The Finance Director shall issue a certificate of operation upon verification of the following: 
1.  The massage establishment will comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, building, fire, zoning, health and safety regulations, as well as any conditions that have been imposed to comply with such laws; and 
2.  Each person identified as an operator has obtained an operator permit. 
C.  Every massage establishment for which a certificate of operation has been granted pursuant to this chapter shall display the certificate in a conspicuous place so it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. 
D.  A certificate of operation is not transferable to a separate location of the same business, to a different business at the same location, or to the same business under different ownership at the same location, or the same business under a different name. 
E.  It is the duty of each operator to notify the Finance Department whenever there is a change in information that was required to be submitted in the initial application for the certificate of operation. Any sale or transfer of any reportable interest of an owner in a massage establishment, which interest would be required to be reported under subsection A of this section in the first instance, shall render the certificate of operation temporarily suspended and subject to revocation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter unless prior to the effective date of such sale or transfer, the new owner applies for and obtains an operator permit. 
F.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, where a notice of intent to suspend or revoke, or a notice of suspension or revocation has been issued regarding a massage establishment, or the business has otherwise been required to close because of suspension or revocation proceedings against the operator, the Finance Department shall not process or issue a new application for a certificate of operation for said location unless or until the revocation or suspension proceedings are dismissed or a final determination is made that the current certificate of operation should not be suspended or revoked, or a two-year period has passed since the occurrence of the activity which gave rise to the suspension or revocation proceedings or other criminal actions. 
G.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, when a massage establishment has been closed due to criminal activity and such decision is final, no new massage establishment may open in such location and no certificate of operation shall be issued for such location for a period of two years from the date of such final determination. For purposes of this section, closure due to criminal activity includes voluntary closure of the business after there have been arrests at the location or other notices relating to criminal activity or notices relating to suspension or revocation proceedings. This provision is not meant to prohibit the issuance of a certificate of operation to a business which initially failed to obtain a certificate of operation without any prior oral or written notification by the City that such was required. 
H.  Where the applicant for the certificate of operation is not the record owner as shown on the latest county assessment roll, then upon issuance of the certificate, the City shall send written notice to the property owner advising of the issuance of the certificate and the regulations applicable to the massage establishment and the property pursuant to this chapter; this may be accomplished by including a copy of this chapter with the notice. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
4.56.100 - Suspension and revocation of permits and certificates. 
A.  Subject to the procedures set forth in this section, the Chief of Police may suspend or revoke an operator permit issued pursuant to this chapter whenever the Chief of Police determines that any of the following has occurred: 
1.  The permittee, or an employee or independent contractor working on the premises, is conducting operations in a manner contrary to the provisions of this Code; 
2.  The permittee, or an employee or independent contractor working on the premises, is conducting operations in a manner which constitutes a public nuisance; 
3.  The permittee, or an employee or independent contractor working on the premises, is conducting operations in a manner which is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the City or its inhabitants; 
4.  There is substantial evidence of prostitution or other unlawful activity; 
5.  The permittee, or any employee or independent contractor working on the premises, has engaged in disqualifying conduct; or 
6.  The Chief of Police makes any of the findings that would have justified denying the application in the first instance. 
B.  If, in the discretion of the Chief of Police, an alleged violation is minor and capable of correction, then prior to suspension or revocation, a written notice shall be given to the permittee of the alleged violation(s) involved to allow a period of time to correct the alleged violation(s), which period shall not exceed five business days, at the end of which period, an inspection shall be conducted to determine whether the alleged violation(s) has been corrected. For purposes of this section, written notice shall include either a notice of violation or an administrative citation. 
C.  If the Chief of Police determines that an alleged violation is not minor or capable of correction, that an alleged violation(s) continues without correction, or that there have been previous violations of this chapter, even if for different reasons, then the Chief of Police may issue a notice of intent to suspend or revoke, along with an administrative or criminal citation. Examples of a violation that will be determined by the Chief of Police to be not capable of correction include, but are not limited to, substantial evidence of prostitution activity on the massage establishment premises or an immediate threat to public health, safety or welfare. 
D.  Notice of Intent to Suspend or Revoke. A notice of intent to suspend or revoke shall contain a statement of an alleged violation(s) that constitutes the basis for the suspension or revocation, notice of the right of the permittee to respond to the charges in writing to the Chief of Police for a pre-appeal determination, notice of the right to appeal to the City Manager, and notice that a failure to respond in the time specified shall constitute a waiver of the right to respond, but not the right to appeal. If an alleged violation is capable of correction, the notice shall also advise the permittee to correct the alleged violation(s) within the time to respond. 
E.  Response to Notice of Intent/Pre-appeal Determination. 
1.  The time to respond and request a pre-appeal determination shall be five business days from the date of service of the notice, regardless of whether the materials upon which the notice of intent is based are provided to the permittee at that time. 
2.  If there is no response, the operator permit shall be considered suspended or revoked upon the expiration of time in which to respond and request a pre-appeal hearing. 
3.  If there is a response, the operator permit shall remain in effect until a determination is made by the Chief of Police. In no event shall a hearing be conducted until at least five business days have passed from the time the City provides the materials upon which the notice of intent is issued to the permittee. 
F.  Suspension or Revocation. 
1.  If, after consideration of the permittee's response, the Chief of Police determines that the notice of intent to suspend or revoke should be upheld, then the Chief of Police shall issue a notice of suspension or revocation and serve it upon the permittee as well as any other interested person requesting a copy of the same. Where all massage activity is required to cease, notice shall also be served on the owner of the property if different from the operator or certificate holder. The notice shall include information about the right to appeal. 
2.  Upon issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation of a certificate of operation, all massage activity at the massage establishment shall cease and no activity for which the certificate of operation is required shall be conducted while any appeal may be pending. 
3.  Upon issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation of an operator permit, the operator must cease all work at the massage establishment. If there is no other person who has an operator permit who is not the subject of a suspension or revocation proceeding, then all massage activity at the massage establishment shall also cease and no massage activity shall be conducted while any appeal may be pending. 
G.  Surrender of Certificate of Operation and Permits. Any permittee shall immediately surrender his or her operator permit or certificate of operation to the Chief of Police upon its suspension or revocation. The operator shall immediately surrender the certificate of operation upon revocation of an operator permit if there is no other permitted operator. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
4.56.110 - Appeals to City Manager. 
A.  Appeals. 
1.  Appeals shall be in writing and filed with the City Clerk within the following time frames: 
a.  Appeals from any decision of the Chief of Police or Finance Director to deny a permit shall be in writing, shall clearly state the applicable basis for the appeal, and shall be filed not later than 10 calendar days following the giving of the notice of denial. 
b.  Appeals from a notice of intent to suspend or revoke a permit where no response is filed in accordance with Section 4.56.100(E) above shall be filed not later than 10 calendar days following the expiration of the response period. 
c.  Appeals from a notice of suspension or revocation issued after a response is filed in accordance with Section 4.56.100(E) above shall be filed not later than 10 calendar days following the giving of the notice of suspension or revocation. 
2.  The City Clerk shall not accept an appeal from a decision of the Chief of Police, and no hearing shall be conducted, unless the appellant has paid a filing fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council, to defray the cost of such appeal. Any appeal without the timely payment of fees shall be considered to be untimely. 
3.  The scope of the appeal hearing pursuant to this section shall be limited to those issues raised by the appellant in the written appeal, as submitted pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section. 
B.  City Manager Action. 
1.  Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the City Manager. The hearing shall be held not fewer than 10 calendar days nor more than 30 calendar days from the date of the appeal request. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon the mutual consent of the parties. For the purposes of this section, "City Manager" may include a hearing officer appointed by the City Manager, who shall then act in the City Manager's place. 
2.  The appellant shall be provided with notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing, as well as a copy of all relevant materials at least seven calendar days prior to the hearing. 
3.  At the time of such hearing, the City Manager shall review the records and files relating to the decision. 
a.  The City Manager shall permit any interested person to present any relevant evidence bearing on the issues involved in the matter. 
b.  In conducting the hearing, technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses shall not apply. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is material and if it is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule that might make admission of such evidence improper over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be admissible if it is the sort upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they are now, or are hereafter permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant, collateral, and repetitious testimony shall be excluded. 
c.  In determining whether a person should be disqualified for meeting the definition of a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct as set forth in Section 4.56.020 herein, the City Manager may consider: The nature and severity of the act(s) or crime(s); whether there were any additional subsequent act(s) or crime(s); the number of act(s) or crime(s); and how recent the act(s) or crime(s) occurred. 
4.  The appellant shall have the burden of proving that he or she meets the requirements for issuing the permit or certificate in the first instance; the City shall have the burden of proving that grounds exist for revoking or failing to renew a permit. 
5.  Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the City Manager shall determine whether the decision should be affirmed, modified or reversed. 
6.  The City Manager's decision shall be communicated in writing to the appellant within 10 working days after the close of the hearing and submission of the matter to the City Manager for decision. The City Manager's decision shall state whether the decision is affirmed, modified or reversed and shall state the reasons therefor. 
7.  The decision of the City Manager shall include notice that the decision is final and conclusive, that judicial review may be sought therefrom pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, and that any action filed in the Superior Court shall be filed within 90 days following the City Manager's notice pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
4.56.120 - Notices. 
A.  All notices required to be given pursuant to this chapter shall be served on the responsible party (i.e., permittee, applicant, appellant, or a representative thereof) either by personal delivery or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such responsible party as the name and address appear in the most recent application on file with the City. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed on the date deposited in the mail. Notices shall include information regarding appeal rights and a statement that the failure to file an appeal shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
B.  In all cases where the certificate holder is not the property owner, notices shall also be sent to the property owner of record where the notice relates to possible closure of the business due to suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
4.56.130 - Operational requirements. 
A.  Hours and Conditions of Operation. 
1.  No massage establishment shall operate nor shall any massage be administered in any massage establishment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. A massage begun any time before 10:00 p.m. must nevertheless terminate at 10:00 p.m. The hours of operation shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the lobby within the massage establishment and in any front window clearly visible from outside of the massage establishment. These hours of operation may be modified pursuant to a conditional use permit. 
2.  During hours of operation, no person other than a valid permit holder under this chapter, a massage practitioner, a massage therapist, or a patron shall be allowed beyond the reception area of the massage establishment. 
3.  Patrons and visitors shall only be permitted in the massage establishment during the hours of operation as follows: 
a.  Visitors shall only be permitted in the reception area of the massage establishment. 
b.  Patrons shall only be permitted in massage treatment areas if at least one massage technician is on the premises. 
4.  The massage establishment shall be supervised during all hours of operation by a manager who is one of the operators specified in the permit application. The name and photograph (minimum size of four inches by six inches) of the on-duty manager shall be posted in a conspicuous public place in the lobby of the massage establishment at all times that the business is open. This provision shall not apply to sole providers. 
5.  No massage establishment shall be used for residential purposes. There shall be no massage tables, cots, or beds in the establishment other than as shown on the approved floor plan. Locker facilities shall be provided for all employees and independent contractors and all personal items of the employees and independent contractors shall be kept in the lockers while at the massage establishment. 
B.  Posting Requirements. In addition to any other requirements for posting set forth in this chapter, the following shall also apply: 
1.  A recognizable and legible sign complying with the requirements of this Code shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment. 
2.  Each service offered, the price thereof, and the minimum length of time such service shall be performed shall be posted in English and such other languages as may be convenient to communicate such service, in a conspicuous public location in each massage establishment. No services shall be performed and no sums shall be charged for such services other than those posted. Nothing herein prohibits a voluntary tip from being paid by the patron. 
3.  Any posted signs that are in a language other than English shall also be posted in English. 
C.  Instruments, Equipment, and Personnel. 
1.  Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment shall be provided for any instruments used in performing acts of massage and said instruments shall be disinfected and sterilized after each use. 
2.  Unless otherwise approved by a conditional use permit, massages shall be administered only on standard or portable massage tables or chairs that are covered with a durable, washable plastic or other acceptable waterproof material. Beds, mattresses, water beds, futons, sofa beds, any type of portable or convertible beds, and foam pads more than four inches thick or with a width of more than four feet shall not be permitted in the establishment. 
3.  No massage technician shall massage the genitals or anal area of any patron nor shall any operator of a massage establishment allow or permit such a massage to the above-specified areas. 
4.  No massage technician shall massage the breasts of a female patron without the written consent of the person receiving the massage and a referral from a licensed California health care provider, nor shall any operator of a massage establishment allow or permit such a massage to the above-specified area. 
5.  A massage shall not be given and no patron shall be in the presence of any massage establishment staff unless the patron's genitalia and, if a female patron, the female patron's breasts, are fully covered by a fully opaque, nontransparent covering. 
6.  Persons providing services in the massage establishment shall not be dressed in attire that is: Transparent, see-through, substantially exposes the massage technician's undergarments, or exposes the massage technician's breasts, buttocks, or genitals in a manner which has been deemed by CAMTC to constitute unprofessional attire based on the custom and practice of the profession in California; or in swim attire unless such person is providing a water-based massage modality which has been approved by CAMTC. 
7.  All massage establishments shall be so equipped, maintained and operated as to effectively control the entrance, harborage, and breeding of vermin, including flies. When flies or other vermin are present effective control measures shall be instituted for their control or elimination. 
8.  Clean and sanitary towels, sheets and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets; provided, that such paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle. 
9.  All massage tables shall be at least two feet away from all walls at all times. 
D.  Personnel Lists. 
1.  Within seven calendar days of receiving a certificate of operation, the operator shall provide the Police Department with a complete list of all massage technicians who are working or will work, be employed, or provide massage services in the massage establishment along with a copy of their CAMTC certificate and identification card, as well as with the name and residence address of the manager principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment and of any other manager. 
2.  The operator shall have a continuing obligation to notify the Chief of Police in writing of any changes in massage technicians and managers within seven calendar days of such change. 
3.  The operator shall maintain copies of each massage technician's CAMTC Certificate and identification card on file on the premises of the massage establishment, which shall be available to any individual upon request, including, but not limited to, employees of the City. Additionally, the operator shall be required to file copies of each CAMTC Certificate and identification card with the Police Department within seven days of a massage technician commencing work at the massage establishment. Information required by this section shall be maintained at the massage establishment for a minimum of two years following the date that the person ceases providing services/employment at the massage establishment. 
4.  The operator shall maintain on the premises of the massage establishment a register of all non-state certified persons employed, working or providing other services at the massage establishment. The register shall be maintained for a minimum of two years following the time that the person ceases providing services/employment at the massage establishment. The operator shall make the register immediately available for inspection upon demand of a representative of the Police Department, any health officer, or any other official charged with enforcement of this chapter. The register shall include, but is not limited to, the following information: 
a.  Name, nicknames and/or aliases; 
b.  Home address and relevant phone number, including, but not limited to, home, cellular and pager numbers; 
c.  Age, date of birth, gender, height, weight, color of hair and eyes; 
d.  The date of employment, and termination, if any; 
e.  The duties of each person; and 
f.  In a separate portion of the register, Social Security numbers, which shall only be available for review by the Montclair Police Department or other law enforcement personnel, but not health officers or other officials charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
E.  Prohibited Conduct. 
1.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or furnished on the premises of any massage establishment without a valid alcoholic beverage license from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) and a conditional use permit from the City. 
2.  No storage or sale of condoms or spermicides shall be permitted within the massage establishment. 
3.  No operator shall hire, employ or allow a person to perform massage services unless such person possesses a valid CAMTC Certificate. Each operator of a massage establishment shall verify that all persons hold the appropriate CAMTC Certificate required by this chapter. Nothing herein prevents an operator from hiring, employing, or allowing a person to perform services allowed by such person's cosmetology or barber license, if the business has a state establishment license in addition to a certificate of operation. 
4.  No person shall use or possess, nor shall there be any storage of, any sexually-oriented implements or paraphernalia that are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity. 
5.  No electrical, mechanical or artificial device shall be used by any massage establishment staff for audio and/or video recording or for monitoring the performance of a massage, of the conversation or other sounds in the massage rooms, without the knowledge and written consent of the patron. 
6.  No operator of a massage establishment shall place, publish or distribute or allow or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons or clients that any service is available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the premises as required in this chapter, nor shall any massage establishment employ language in the text of any advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective patron that any service is available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the premises as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
4.56.140 - Building and facility requirements. 
A.  The building, or unit within the building where the massage establishment is located, shall comply with all applicable building code requirements. 
B.  All massage rooms and dressing rooms shall be screened off by hinged doors that can open inward. Swinging doors that can open inward, draw drapes, curtain enclosures, or accordion-pleated closures in lieu of doors are acceptable on all inner dressing rooms and massage therapy rooms or cubicles. Except for bathroom doors, interior doors may not have locks on them. 
C.  All rooms in which massages are being provided shall be lit with a minimum of one light fixture emitting at least 210 lumens for every 150 square feet of space during the administration of such services, with the light fixtures being spread throughout the space. No dimmer switches, strobe lights, flashing lights, colored light, or any coverings or other apparatus, other than a lampshade, which changes or darkens the color of the primary light source, shall be used in any room in which massage services are being provided. 
D.  Any locker facilities provided for the use of patrons shall be fully secured for the protection of the patron's valuables and the patron shall be given control of the key or other means of access. 
E.  The walls in all rooms where water or steam baths are given shall have a washable, mold-resistant surface. 
F.  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use. 
G.  One main entry that enters into the reception area shall be provided for patron use. All patrons, and any persons other than those providing services at the massage establishment, shall be required to enter and exit through the front door of the establishment. 
H.  All exterior doors (except rear exterior doors used only for employee entrance to and exit from the massage establishment) shall remain unlocked during business hours, and the establishment shall comply with the provisions of the Montclair Municipal Code pertaining to the posting of signs stating that doors shall remain unlocked during business hours. Exits for fire safety purposes may be allowed where deemed necessary by the appropriate public safety agency. Notwithstanding the above, the front door may be locked if there is no staff available to assure security for the clients and massage staff who are behind closed doors, provided that the massage establishment is owned by one individual with one or no employees or independent contractors. 
I.  There shall be no buzzer, alarm, or intercom system. 
J.  No massage business located in a building or structure with exterior windows fronting a public street, highway, walkway, or parking area shall block visibility into the interior reception and waiting area through the use of curtains, closed blinds, tints, painted signs, decals, graphics, or any other material that obstructs or darkens the view into the premises or by signs that cover more than 25 percent of any window pane. The interior of the business shall be plainly visible from the exterior of the business by passing vehicles and pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
4.56.150 - Inspections. 
A.  Representatives of the City's Police Department, Fire Department, Community Development Department, and Finance Department, and agents for the City from the County Health Department and representatives of any state or local agencies with regulatory authority over massage establishments, shall have the right to enter massage establishments from time to time, during regular business hours or at any time that the massage establishment is occupied or open for business, to verify the massage establishment is in compliance with all applicable laws without the need for an inspection or abatement warrant. 
B.  The operator shall cause to be conspicuously posted so that the same may be readily visible to persons in the reception area of the massage establishment, in letters that are a minimum of one inch in height, a notice in English that provides substantially as follows: 
THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY CITY AND HEALTH OFFICIALS WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE 
In addition, operators are encouraged to post this notice in language(s) that are best understood by the customers of the massage establishment. 
C.  No person shall refuse to permit, cause delay of, or interfere with, a lawful inspection or compliance check of the premises by the officials listed in subsection A of this section at any time. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
4.56.160 - Penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in conduct that violates any provision of this chapter, to engage in conduct which fails to meet the standards set forth in this chapter, or to own, manage, or operate a massage establishment that is not fully in compliance with the operational standards set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor unless, in the sole discretion of the City Prosecutor, it is charged as, or reduced to, an infraction. Citations and warning notices may be utilized as determined appropriate to the circumstances by the enforcing personnel. 
C.  In addition to the above, any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the City may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this chapter, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, including any code enforcement procedures established pursuant to the laws of the State of California or the City of Montclair; and may take such other steps and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. If an injunction is sought, attorney's fees and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court against the party subject to said injunction. 
D.  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. 
(Ord. No. 15-951, § 1, 7-6-15)  
Chapter 4.60 - MOBILE HOME RENT REGULATION 
Sections: 
 
4.60.010 - Scope and purpose. 
A.  The conditions which caused the City to adopt the provisions of this chapter regulating rent increases for spaces in mobile home parks continue to exist. Mobile home owners, unlike apartment tenants or residents of other rental stock, are in the unique position of having made a substantial investment in a mobile home for which they must rent a space in a mobile home park. Alternative sites for the relocation of mobile homes are difficult to find due to the shortage of vacant spaces; the restrictions on the age, size or style of mobile homes permitted in many parks; and requirements related to the installation of mobile homes, including permits, landscaping, and site preparation. Additionally, the cost of moving a mobile home is substantial and the risk of damage in moving is significant. The result of these conditions is the creation of a captive market of mobile home owners and tenants. Their immobility, in turn, contributes to the creation of an imbalance in the bargaining relationship between park owners and mobile home park tenants. Because mobile homes are often owned by senior citizens, persons on fixed incomes, and persons of low and moderate income, exorbitant rent increases fall upon these individuals with particular harshness. 
B.  The purpose of this chapter and the amendments in this chapter is to protect mobile home owners from excessive space rent increases and also protect the mobile home owners' investments in their mobile homes, while at the same time providing a just and reasonable return to park owners. 
C.  In administering the existing provisions of this chapter, the City has found that some provisions and procedures should be simplified or clarified in order to implement the purposes of this chapter more efficiently. The amendments in this chapter effect such clarification and simplification and will benefit both mobile home owners and park owners by simplifying rent-adjustment procedures. 
D.  The City Council has determined that park owners are requiring prospective mobile home owners in mobile home parks located in the City to enter into or assume long-term leases or rental agreements as a condition to locating in the mobile home park. By requiring such long-term leases, which the park owners claim are exempt from local rent control under Civil Code Section 798.17, park owners appear to be attempting to circumvent the benefits and protections provided by the City of Montclair Mobile Home Rent Regulation Ordinance. 
E.  The City Council has further determined that as a result of the park owners' requirements of long-term leases by prospective mobile home owners, current mobile home owners are having extreme difficulty selling their mobile homes. Prospective purchasers of mobile homes may lose interest in the sale when faced with a long-term lease requirement, which includes a rent schedule not subject to City review or regulation. 
F.  The City Council has further determined that as a result of the park owners' requirements that prospective mobile home owners sign or assume long-term leases, which may be exempt from City rent regulation, prospective mobile home owners are being precluded from receiving the benefits and protections intended by this chapter. 
G.  The City Council has further determined that because the current Ordinance provides for "vacancy decontrol" (e.g., permits a park owner to raise space rents without regulation whenever a mobile home located in the park is sold or transferred), certain park owners have informed prospective mobile home owners that his/her initial space rents will be substantially increased above space rents which could be charged to the existing mobile home owner and far in excess of the space rents which could be charged if the space rents were at all times regulated. 
Alternatively, certain park owners have used the threat of these increased initial space rents to coerce prospective home owners to enter into long-term leases, which provide for future unregulated space rents far in excess of the space rents which could be charged under this chapter. 
The increased space rents on sale or transfer due to vacancy decontrol have discouraged and frustrated sales of mobile homes. In order to sell under such circumstances, many existing home owners have been forced to substantially lower the price of their mobile homes, thereby jeopardizing their investments. Other existing home owners, particularly those who are elderly, are very concerned and worried they also will be unable to sell their mobile homes when the need arises. 
The presence of vacancy decontrol has also caused hardship to prospective mobile home owners who have no protection from initial excessive mobile home space rents. In addition, these prospective mobile home owners, no less than existing mobile home owners, need protection against unregulated rent increases when they sell; and the City also has a legitimate interest in protecting the investments that these prospective home owners make in their homes. Prospective as well as existing home owners tend to be either senior citizens living on fixed incomes or young families struggling to pay for their first homes. In either case, both need protection against excessive space rents and for their investments in their mobile homes. 
This situation has the potential to cause, if it has not already caused, adverse effects on the health and welfare of Montclair citizens. 
H.  As a response to the above findings, the City Council has determined that in addition to the protections already provided by this chapter, it is necessary to protect current home owners' investments in their mobile homes by precluding park owners from (1) requiring prospective mobile home owners to sign long-term leases, therefore adversely affecting sales of mobile homes; and (2) raising space rents upon sales or transfers of mobile homes in a park. It is further necessary to (2) protect prospective mobile home owners from excessive rents by providing (1) for lease options in order to give each prospective home owner a real choice between an exempt long-term lease and a lease subject to the protections of this chapter; and (2) that a park owner may not raise space rents upon the sales or transfers of mobile homes in a park. It is further necessary to protect prospective home owners' future investments in their mobile homes by precluding park owners from (1) affecting future sales of such mobile homes through a long-term lease requirement imposed upon the subsequent purchasers; and (2) raising space rents upon sales or transfers of mobile homes in a park. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-19.01)  
4.60.020 - Rent-Review Administrator. 
In addition to the specific duties described elsewhere in this document, the Rent-Review Administrator (RRA) shall: 
A.  Adopt procedures and guidelines for the implementation of this chapter; 
B.  Select an Arbitrator for any proceeding under Section 4.60.100 in this chapter; 
C.  Take all reasonable and necessary measures to effect the purposes and intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-19.03)  
4.60.030 - Existing leases. 
Rents agreed to under a written agreement in existence on July 1, 1985, may be collected until the expiration of the lease agreement. 
(Prior code § 5-19.04)  
4.60.040 - Permitted rent. 
A.  A park owner shall not demand, accept or retain rent for a mobile home space exceeding the rent in effect on January 1, 1985, plus any increase of no more than 6 percent which was validly noticed pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.30 between January 1, 1985, and December 18, 1985, except as provided in this chapter. 
B.  No park owner shall reduce or eliminate any park service to any mobile home space unless and until the cost savings resulting therefrom is passed on to the affected homeowners in rent adjustments approved pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  This chapter shall not apply to the rent for a mobile home space which is exempt from space-rent regulation pursuant to State or Federal law (e.g., California Civil Code Sections 798.17, 798.21 and 798.45). 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-19.05)  
4.60.050 - Space rental increases upon sale or transfer by owner. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no park owner shall, upon the sale or transfer of ownership or occupancy of a mobile home located in the park, increase the space rental for such space to an amount greater than the current space rent in effect as of the date of sale or transfer plus a percentage increase of the currently lawfully collected space rent. This percentage increase shall not exceed the greater of: (1) 3 percent or (2) 100 percent of the most current annual CPI percentage increase, up to a maximum of 8 percent. 
B.  If there was no space rent in effect on the date the ownership or occupancy of a mobile home was transferred, the new space rent shall be the space rent that was charged for that space on the last date that space rent was charged for that space. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-19.06)  
4.60.060 - Termination or reduction of services or benefits. 
No mobile home park owner shall reduce or eliminate any service or benefits to any mobile home space so long as this chapter is in effect, unless and until the cost savings resulting from such reduction or elimination is passed on to the mobile home owner in the form of a decrease in space rent. 
(Prior code § 5-19.07)  
4.60.070 - Rent increases for regulated utility services. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no park owner shall seek a rent increase for the operation, maintenance, installation, upgrading, or replacement of a utility to the extent that the rates authorized to be charged by the park owner to the mobile home owner for that utility already take into account the park owner's costs and need for a fair return in operating, maintaining, installing, upgrading, and replacing such utility. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-19.08)  
4.60.080 - Rent adjustments pursuant to administrative application. 
A.  Annual Adjustment. Beginning 60 days after the effective date of Ordinance No. 89-671, the rent for a mobile home space may be increased once each calendar year by 6 percent of the rent lawfully collected during the preceding 12 months or 80 percent of the increase in the CPI during the preceding 12 months, whichever is less, upon application to the RRA. The application may be for one or more spaces and shall be approved by the RRA within 15 days if it complies with this subsection. If the application does not comply with this subsection, the RRA shall notify the applicant of the reason for rejection, in writing, within 15 days of receipt of the application. 
B.  Rent Adjustment Based on Increase in Certain Costs. An application may be filed with the RRA for a per-space increase for the proportionate share of: 
1.  An increase in the amount due under a land lease which the park owner is obligated to pay pursuant to a lease made on or before January 1, 1985; and/or 
2.  An increase in a City special tax, benefit assessment, or service charge, excluding water, sewer and trash. 
Only one rent adjustment per calendar year may be granted pursuant to this subsection. The application shall be approved by the RRA within 30 days if it meets the criteria set forth in this subsection. If it does not meet the criteria in this subsection, the RRA shall give written notice of rejection to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application specifying the reasons for the rejection. 
C.  Rent Adjustment Based on Completed Capital Improvements. An application may be filed for a rent adjustment based on completion of a "capital improvement" as defined by Chapter 4.02. This application shall be approved by the RRA pursuant to this subsection if: 
1.  The park owner has consulted with the park mobile home owners prior to initiating construction of the improvements regarding the nature and purpose of the improvements and the estimated cost of the improvements; 
2.  The park owner has obtained the prior written consent of at least one adult resident from a majority of the mobile home rental spaces subject to this chapter. Evidence of such consent must be presented at the time of filing the application seeking a rent adjustment based on such a capital improvement expenditure; and 
3.  The application satisfies the definition of "capital improvement" in Chapter 4.02. Any increase granted shall be amortized over the useful life of the improvement and apportioned equally among all the rental spaces in the mobile home park by dividing the verified cost of the improvement by its useful life (in years), dividing that result by 12 and further dividing that result by the total number of affected spaces in the mobile home park. Any rent increase granted under this subsection shall remain in effect only during the useful life of the improvement. If the RRA determines that a rent increase application filed under this subsection meets the criteria in this chapter, the rent increase shall be granted within 30 days of receipt of the application. If the RRA determines that the application does not meet the criteria set forth in this chapter, the RRA shall give written notice thereof, specifying the reason for rejection, within 30 days of receipt of the application. 
D.  Rent Adjustment Based on Termination or Reduction of Services. A park owner may apply to decrease or eliminate park services to a mobile home space or spaces based upon a rent decrease equal to the cost savings effected by the decrease in, or elimination of, park services to a mobile home space or spaces. An affected home owner or home owners may also file an application for a rent decrease based on a decrease or elimination of park services. The application shall be approved by the RRA if the rent decrease proposed equals the cost savings, apportioned among the affected spaces, of the park service which has been reduced or eliminated. If a mobile home park owner who provides utility services reduces or eliminates such service by separate metering, or other lawful means of transferring to the resident the obligation for payment for such services, the cost savings shall be deemed to be the cost of such transferred utility service for the 12 months prior to the installation and use of the submetering system. The RRA shall deny or approve the application, with or without modifications, and shall give written notice thereof to the applicant within 30 days after it has been filed. 
E.  Any application under subsections A, B, C or D of this section may be rejected on the grounds that it is not complete. Written notice, specifying the information needed to complete the application, shall be given to the applicant within the time period specified in the relevant subsection for acting on the application. 
F.  A decision of the RRA pursuant to subsections A through D of this section may be appealed to the City Council by filing an application therefor with the RRA within 15 days of the date the notice rejecting the application, denying the increase, or granting a modified increase was mailed. The application shall be filed on a form prescribed by the RRA and shall be accompanied by an application fee of One Hundred (100) Dollars and a statement setting forth specifically wherein the RRA's findings and decision are claimed to be in error and failed to follow the provisions set forth in this chapter. The appeal shall be considered and determined by the City Council within 30 days of its filing with the RRA. Notice of the date the appeal will be heard shall be mailed to the park owner and affected home owners within five days after the appeal is filed. The notice shall inform the affected owner and residents of the right to file a written statement in response to the appeal no later than 10 days prior to the date the appeal will be considered. No new evidence, testimony or argument will be considered on appeal and the City Council shall be limited to considering the material submitted to the RRA and any statements filed concerning the appeal. The City Council may grant the appeal, in whole or in part, deny the appeal or modify the decision of the RRA. Any such appeal shall be governed by the procedures in Section 4.60.110 of this chapter. 
G.  Before an application for a rent increase under this section will be deemed complete, the mobile home park owner shall submit to the RRA copies of all current leases between the park owner and mobile home owners in the park in order that the RRA can verify which spaces, if any, are exempt from this chapter under Civil Code Section 798.17 or any other provision of any applicable statute or ordinance. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-19.09)  
4.60.090 - Rent adjustments based on mediation. 
A.  An application may be filed with the RRA for a rent adjustment for one or more spaces in a mobile home park in addition to the rent adjustments permitted under Section 4.60.080 pursuant to the mediation procedures of this section. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the RRA and shall specify the address and numbers of all spaces for which a rent adjustment is sought. All applications shall be verified under penalty of perjury. 
B.  Mediation of the rent adjustment shall be conducted by the Park Mediation Committee, which shall be composed of two members of representatives of the park owner, two members designated by a majority vote of the affected home owners, with one vote per mobile home space, and one mediator appointed by the RRA. The mobile home owners in each mobile home park in the City shall select designated representatives to serve on the Park Mediation Committee within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter. 
C.  The RRA shall appoint a mediator and mail a notice of the application to the members of the Park Mediation Committee, the mobile home park owner, and the affected home owners within five days of receipt of the application. Such notice shall include the amount of the requested rent adjustment and a brief summary of the justification for the request. 
D.  The Park Mediation Committee shall establish procedures for the conduct of its affairs not otherwise in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Three affirmative votes shall be required to take or effect any action. The Park Mediation Committee shall meet and confer on the rental adjustment application within 20 days from the date the notice set forth in subsection C of this section was mailed to the Committee. 
E.  If the Park Mediation Committee fails to reach an agreement within 20 days from the date of the filing of notice set forth in subsection C of this section, written notice of this fact shall be given forthwith to the park owner and affected residents. 
F.  If the Park Mediation Committee reaches a proposed agreement, written notice thereof shall be given forthwith by mail or personal delivery to all of the affected home owners of the park and the park owner. Within five days of the date such notice was mailed or delivered, the affected home owners shall vote on the proposed agreement by a secret ballot, with one vote per mobile home space. 
G.  If at least 50 percent plus one of the affected mobile home spaces of the park approve the agreement and the park owner approves the agreement, then it shall be deemed approved. If fewer than 50 percent plus one of the affected mobile home spaces of the park vote in favor of the agreement, or the park owner rejects the agreement, then it shall be deemed disapproved. The results of the vote shall be supplied to the RRA on the date the vote is completed. Unoccupied spaces shall not be counted in determining the percent required for approval. 
H.  If the agreement is approved as provided in subsection G of this section, it shall be implemented in accordance with the terms of the agreement and any applicable law. 
I.  If the agreement is rejected as provided under subsection G of this section, or if no agreement is reached, the park owner may request arbitration pursuant to Section 4.60.100 of this chapter by filing an application for arbitration within 10 days of the mailing of the notice of rejection. 
J.  All applications submitted under this section shall be deemed rejected if the Park Mediation Committee fails to negotiate a proposed agreement relating to a proposed rental adjustment within 25 days of the date of mailing the notice set forth in subsection C of this section. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-19.10)  
4.60.100 - Rent adjustments pursuant to arbitration. 
A.  If a mediated settlement pursuant to Section 4.60.090 is not reached, a park owner may file a rent-adjustment application with the RRA for one or more mobile home spaces pursuant to this section. Only one increase per calendar year may be granted under this section, but rent adjustments granted pursuant to Section 4.60.080 shall not preclude an adjustment pursuant to this section. The application shall be filed within the time period specified in Section 4.60.090(I). 
B.  An application for a rent adjustment pursuant to this section shall be filed upon a form prescribed by the RRA and shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee of Ten (10) Dollars per space for which an application for a rent adjustment is made. The fee shall be applied toward the costs of arbitration. Any additional costs shall be borne equally by the park owner and the affected home owners. If any part of the Ten (10) Dollars per space application fee exceeds the cost of arbitration, it shall be refunded to the applicant. Such application shall specify the address of the mobile home park, the space number or numbers for which rent is requested to be adjusted, the amount of the requested rent adjustment, and the facts supporting the requested adjustment. 
C.  The RRA shall establish a panel of Arbitrators to serve as an Arbitrator in rent adjustment matters. Within 10 days of receipt of an arbitration application, the RRA shall give written notice of the appointment of an Arbitrator to the park owner and affected home owners by mail or personal delivery. At the same time, the RRA shall mail a copy of the adjustment application to the affected home owners together with a notice of the right to submit a written response to the application within 15 days of the date of mailing the notice. 
D.  The hearing by the Arbitrator shall be held not sooner than 20 days and not more than 30 days after the date the notice of appointment of Arbitrator is mailed or delivered to the park owner and affected homeowners. 
E.  The applicant shall produce, at the request of the Arbitrator, any records, receipts, or other documents that the Arbitrator may deem necessary for a full disclosure of facts. The arbitration application shall be made under penalty of perjury and supporting documents shall be verified under penalty of perjury if requested by the Arbitrator. 
F.  At the hearing, the park owner and the affected home owners may offer any testimony relevant to the requested rent adjustment. The applicant shall produce any records, receipts, or other documents that the Arbitrator may deem necessary to approve a rent adjustment. The parties to the arbitration may offer documents, written declarations, or other written evidence for the first time at the hearing only if good cause is shown why such evidence was not filed prior to the hearing. Formal rules of evidence shall not be applicable to such proceedings; however, evidence to be admissible shall be of the type upon which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. The Arbitrator shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations. The party requesting the arbitration shall present his/her/its position first and shall have the burden of proof at the hearing. The parties may be represented by counsel or other spokesperson; however, only one spokesperson may be designated for each party. 
G.  The Arbitrator shall approve such rent adjustments as he/she determines to be just, fair and reasonable. The Arbitrator shall consider, but is not to be limited to, the following factors in making such determinations: 
1.  Changes in the CPI for the latest 12 month period ending at least 30 calendar days prior to the application for the proposed increase; 
2.  The rent lawfully charged for comparable mobile home spaces in the City and the surrounding communities; 
3.  Prior rent adjustments of the park and any prior arbitration proceedings; 
4.  Changes in property taxes and other taxes related to the subject mobile home park; 
5.  Changes in the rent paid by the park owner for the lease of the land on which the subject mobile home park is located; 
6.  Changes in the utility charges for the subject mobile home park; 
7.  Changes in operating and maintenance expenses; 
8.  Changes in the park services provided to the affected home owners; and 
9.  A just and reasonable return on the park owner's investment, except that increased investment due to acquisition of the park after December 1, 1985, shall not be considered grounds for a rent increase. 
H.  The costs incurred by the parties in proceedings under this section shall not be recoverable by either party nor justification for a rent adjustment. 
I.  The Arbitrator's decision shall be in writing and shall include findings of fact on the factors relied upon in reaching a decision. The Arbitrator's decision shall be mailed to the park owner and all affected homeowners within 10 days of the close of the hearing. Any appeal thereof must be filed with the RRA within 10 days of the date notice of the Arbitrator's decision is mailed or delivered to the park owner and affected homeowners. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-19.11)  
4.60.110 - Appeal to City Council. 
A.  An appeal of the RRA's decision pursuant to Section 4.60.080 or the Arbitrator's decision pursuant to Section 4.60.100 shall be filed within the time periods specified in those sections. 
B.  The appeal shall be filed with the RRA in triplicate and shall set forth specifically wherein the Arbitrator's findings were in error and wherein the Arbitrator failed to follow the policies or standards set forth in this chapter. 
C.  Notice. The RRA shall mail the statement of appeal and notice of the date the appeal will be considered by the City Council to each affected home owner and to the park owner within five days of receipt of the statement of appeal. 
D.  Written Response. Affected home owners and the park owner shall have 15 days after the date of mailing the notice of hearing within which to submit to the RRA written responses, points and arguments concerning the appeal. No new evidence or documents shall be submitted; and the appeal to the City Council shall be limited to the evidence and material submitted to the Arbitrator or considered by him or her in reaching his or her determination as well as the written response, points and arguments submitted by the affected home owners and park owner. There shall be no oral testimony nor oral argument before the City Council. 
E.  The City Council shall consider and determine the appeal no later than 30 days after receipt thereof by the RRA. 
F.  Decision. The decision of the RRA or the Arbitrator shall be sustained unless the City Council finds and determines that the RRA or the Arbitrator failed to follow the procedures and guidelines established in this chapter for determination of a rent adjustment or that such determination is not supported by substantial evidence. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-19.12)  
4.60.120 - Review of City Council's decision. 
Any party who is aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may seek review of that decision pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq. 
(Prior code § 5-19.13)  
4.60.130 - Lease agreements. 
A.  Expiration of Lease or Rental Agreement. Upon expiration of a current lease or rental agreement, or upon entering an initial rental agreement, a "mobile home owner" or a "prospective mobile home owner," as defined in Chapter 4.02, shall be offered a lease or rental agreement for (1) a term of 12 months; (2) a lesser period as the home owner may request; or (3) a longer period as mutually agreed upon by both the home owner and management. 
B.  No Requirement for Assumption of Lease. No lease or rental agreement or other contract entered into after the effective date of this chapter (April 5, 1994) shall require a "prospective mobile home owner" as defined in Chapter 4.02 to assume a lease. Any provision which requires a prospective mobile home owner to assume a lease as a condition of residence in a park shall be void. 
C.  Long-Term Leases Exempt from Rent Regulation. Spaces in a mobile home park subject to lease or rental agreements which are otherwise valid and meet all the specific criteria of Civil Code Section 798.17 are exempt from local rent control regulation under State law. Any lease agreements not meeting the specific requirements of Civil Code Section 798.17, or which are otherwise invalid, shall not be exempt from this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-19.14)  
4.60.140 - User fee. 
A.  Mobile home park owners shall pay to the City an annual user fee, as may be established by resolution of the City Council, for each mobile home rental space within the park, except such spaces that are exempt from such fee under applicable law (e.g., Civil Code Section 798.17(e)). The annual user fee shall be paid by June 1st of each year. Along with the fee, the mobile home park owner shall, if he/she has not already done so within the calendar year in connection with a rent increase application, submit to the RRA copies of all current leases between the park owner and mobile home owners in the park in order that the RRA can verify which spaces, if any, are exempt from this chapter under Civil Code Section 798.17. If the park owner claims exemption from this chapter under any other provision (e.g., Civil Code Section 798.21 or 798.45), he/she shall also provide the RRA with sufficient documentation so that any additional exemptions may be verified. 
B.  Park owners shall be permitted to pass through to each affected space of the park the first Twenty-Five (25) Dollars of the user fee. The City Council shall determine by resolution any allowable pass-through adjustment of the registration fee over and above Twenty-Five (25) Dollars. Absent such resolution, park owners shall not be permitted to pass through any portion of the user fee beyond Twenty-Five (25) Dollars per affected space. 
C.  If a park owner does not pay the fee provided for in subsection A of this section within the time period established therein, a late charge shall be assessed in an amount equal to One (1) Dollar for each mobile home rental space within the park for each month or fraction thereof that such payment is delinquent. 
D.  No application will be accepted from any park owner for a space-rent adjustment of any kind, no hearing or other proceeding shall be scheduled or take place, and no space rent adjustment shall be granted or take effect for any mobile home park for which there is an unpaid user fee. 
E.  The user fee provided by this section is intended to defray costs associated with the general administration of this chapter and is not intended to replace or preclude additional fees and costs associated with specific rent-adjustment applications (e.g., Sections 4.60.080(B) and (F)). 
F.  The City Manager is directed to maintain an accurate accounting of all direct and indirect costs of administering the regulations contained in this chapter. The City Manager shall submit a report to the RRA and City Council of such costs and any recommendation for a change in the user fee at least annually from and after the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-19.15)  
Chapter 4.64 - PRIVATE PATROL SERVICES 
Sections: 
 
4.64.010 - Business license required. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on the business of a private investigator, pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 7521, or private patrol operator, pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 7582.1, without first obtaining a business license. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-3.01)  
4.64.020 - Uniforms. 
It is unlawful for any person performing the duties of a private investigator or private patrol operator to wear a uniform or drive a vehicle that is similar or the same as the uniforms and vehicles used by peace officers of the Montclair Police Department. Uniforms worn and vehicles used by private investigators or private patrol operators shall be clearly distinguishable form the uniforms worn or vehicles used by peace officers of the Montclair Police Department. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-3.10)  
Chapter 4.68 - TAXICABS 
Sections: 
 
4.68.010 - Business license required. 
Every person operating a taxicab within the City shall obtain a business license therefor and pay to the City the business license fee provided for by Chapter 4.04 of this Code. The business license shall be issued in the manner provided by said Chapter 4.04 for the issuance of other business licenses but shall not be issued for the use of any taxicab until a permit for the use of such taxicab has been obtained as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-5.02)  
4.68.020 - Permit required. 
No owner shall operate any taxicab owned or controlled by such owner in the business of carrying passengers for hire or maintain any taxicab stand unless such owner has a permit so to do as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-5.03)  
4.68.030 - Permit application. 
Any owner desiring to obtain a taxicab permit shall make an application therefor to the Council. Each application shall be accompanied by a bond or policy of insurance and the permit fee required and shall be in writing setting forth the following information: 
A.  The name, age, and business and residence addresses of the applicant, if a natural person; if a corporation, its name, the date and place of incorporation, the address of its principal place of business, and the names of its principal officers, together with their respective residence addresses; or if a partnership, association, or unincorporated company, the names of the partners or of the persons comprising such association or company and the business and residence address of each partner or person; 
B.  A description of each taxicab which the applicant proposes to use, the name of the manufacturer, the engine and serial numbers, and the State license number thereof; 
C.  The name, monogram or insignia proposed to be used on each taxicab; 
D.  The schedule of rates of fare proposed to be charged for carrying passengers in such taxicabs; 
E.  The street number and exact location of the place or places where the applicant proposes to stand each taxicab; 
F.  If the applicant desires a taxicab stand upon a public street within the City, the applicant shall so state in his or her application and shall set forth the names and respective addresses of all lessees, sublessees and owners in actual or constructive possession of the ground floor of any building or parcel of real property contiguous to that portion of the street where the taxicab stand is proposed to be located; the applicant shall also accompany the application with the written consent of all such lessees, sublessees and owners of the building or parcel of real property to the location of such taxicab at the proposed location; the signatures of such lessees, sublessees and owners shall be acknowledged before a duly commissioned notary public; 
G.  Such additional information as the Council may require; and 
H.  If the Council requires, the applicant shall appear personally before the Council, if the applicant shall be an individual, and the officers of such applicant shall so appear personally if the applicant shall be a corporation. 
(Prior code § 5-5.04)  
4.68.040 - Permit approval. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application for a taxicab permit, the Council shall make an investigation and may thereafter grant the same if it shall find: 
1.  That the bond or policy of insurance required by the provisions of this chapter has been furnished, that the same is in the form required, and that the surety thereon is approved by the Council; 
2.  That each taxicab described is adequate and safe for the purpose for which it is to be used and is equipped as required by the provisions of this chapter; 
3.  That the applicant is of good moral character, has complied with all the terms and conditions of this chapter, and is competent to operate a taxicab business; 
4.  That the public convenience or necessity requires the operation of such taxicabs within the City; 
5.  That the name, monogram or insignia to be used upon the taxicabs is not in conflict with and does not imitate any other name, monogram or insignia used by any other person licensed by the Council in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public; 
6.  If a taxicab stand has been applied for, that the location of the taxicab stand is such that it will not congest or interfere with travel on any street and is not prohibited by any law of the City; and 
7.  That the schedule of rates of fare proposed to be charged is fair and reasonable. 
B.  The granting of the permit shall constitute the approval of the Council of the proposed schedule of rates. 
(Prior code § 5-5.05)  
4.68.050 - Permit fee. 
A permit fee shall be required for every person requesting a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The permit fee shall be in addition to any business license fee which the permittee shall be required to pay. The permit fee shall be Five (5) Dollars when no taxicab stand permit is requested. When a permit for a taxicab stand is requested, an additional sum of Five (5) Dollars shall be required for the stand. In the event an application is denied, the permit fee posted with the application shall be refunded to the applicant after first deducting therefrom all costs sustained by the Council in investigating any action upon the application. 
(Prior code § 5-5.06)  
4.68.060 - Additional taxicabs. 
No permittee shall operate any taxicabs in addition to those specified in his or her permit without making application for a permit so to do and without being granted a permit as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-5.07)  
4.68.070 - Replacement of taxicabs. 
In the event any permittee should desire to replace any taxicab for which he or she has a permit with another taxicab, the permittee shall apply to the Council for a permit so to do. Such application shall be accompanied by all the pertinent information and data required to be furnished by the provisions of this chapter and shall be accompanied by a bond or policy of insurance as required by Section 4.68.200 of this chapter. In the event the Council finds that such taxicab fulfills the requirements set forth in this chapter, it shall grant a permit for such replacement. The findings and decision of the Council upon the application shall be final. 
(Prior code § 5-5.08)  
4.68.080 - Permit and license nontransferable. 
No license or permit granted by the Council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred to another person. 
(Prior code § 5-5.09)  
4.68.090 - Permit revocation. 
A.  Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the Council for violating of the provisions of this chapter or of any other law of the City or of the State, or for the existence of any state of facts which would have been a good reason for denying such permit when applied for, whether the state of facts existed at the time the application was made for such permit or not. 
B.  No permit shall be revoked except in the following manner: 
1.  Notice of Hearing. The Council shall fix a time and place for a hearing on the revocation of the permit and shall cause the City Clerk to serve the permittee with notice of the time and place of hearing, together with a statement of charges which are the basis for rise hearing, at least 10 days before the time fixed for the hearing. 
2.  Notice of Hearing: Service. The City Clerk may serve the notice and statement upon the permittee personally or by delivering the same by registered United States mail, postage prepaid, to the permittee at the address given in his or her application for the permit. 
3.  Hearing. The hearing shall be public, and the permittee shall have the right to produce witnesses on his or her own behalf and to be represented by an attorney. 
4.  Findings and Decision. The findings and decision of the Council upon such hearing shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 5-5.10)  
4.68.100 - Renewal of revoked permit. 
In the event the permit of any person has been revoked by the Council, such person shall not be granted a permit for a period of six months after such revocation. 
(Prior code § 5-5.11)  
4.68.110 - Taxicab driving privileges after revocation. 
In the event the taxicab permit of any person has been revoked by the Council, such person shall not drive any taxicab within the City for a period of six months after the revocation of such permit. 
(Prior code § 5-5.12)  
4.68.120 - Taxicab stands—Designation. 
The Council shall designate in any permit granted by it the exact location of the taxicab stand. Such permit shall also specify the exact number of feet and location of any parking or stand space reserved for the taxicab stand, which reserved space may be at any time changed, diminished or increased by the Council. Every taxicab stand as designated by the Council shall be indicated by red paint or other red material upon the entire curb surface thereof with the words "Taxicabs Only" in white letters thereon. 
(Prior code § 5-5.13)  
4.68.130 - Taxicab stands—Joint use. 
Any taxicab stand may be used jointly by any two or more persons holding permits pursuant to the provisions of this chapter by the mutual consent of the persons, which consent shall be reduced to writing, properly signed, and filed with the City Clerk. 
(Prior code § 5-5.14)  
4.68.140 - Taxicab stands—Change of location. 
No taxicab stand shall be changed without obtaining a permit from the Council after application as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-5.15)  
4.68.150 - Taxicab stands—Failure to use. 
In the event any person holding a permit to operate and maintain a taxicab stand should fail for a period of two consecutive weeks to use such taxicab stand for his or her taxicabs, the Council may revoke such taxicab stand permit after a hearing as provided in Section 4.68.090 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-5.16)  
4.68.160 - Parking of other vehicles in taxicab stands. 
No person shall park any vehicle in any taxicab stand except a taxicab permitted so to do by permit granted by the Council. 
(Prior code § 5-5.17)  
4.68.170 - Taxicab parking. 
No owner or driver of any taxicab shall park or stand the same upon any public street in the City, other than at a taxicab stand for which the owner has a permit, for any period of time longer than is necessary to discharge passengers occupying the taxicab or to receive passengers waiting for the taxicab; provided, however, no taxicab shall be parked for a period longer than five minutes on any street within the City except in a taxicab stand for which the owner has a permit. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any taxicab while the same is engaged by and being paid for by a passenger. 
(Prior code § 5-5.18)  
4.68.180 - Schedule of rates—Charges to conform. 
No owner or driver of any taxicab within the City shall charge any rate different from the schedule of rates on file and approved by the Council. 
(Prior code § 5-5.19)  
4.68.190 - Change of schedule of rates—Hearing. 
Should an owner of a taxicab desire to change his or her schedule of rates, the owner shall make written application to the Council so to do. Upon receiving such application, the Council shall conduct a public hearing upon the application and shall give the applicant at least 10 days' written notice of the time and place of such hearing. Upon the hearing, the Council shall determine whether the rates shall be changed and shall have the right to deny the application or make such changes as it determines the facts warrant. The decision of the Council upon the hearing shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 5-5.20)  
4.68.200 - Bond—Insurance. 
No owner or driver of a taxicab shall drive or operate a taxicab within the City, and no permit for the operation thereof shall be granted, unless there is on file with the City Clerk and in full force and effect at all times while such taxicab is being operated either: 
A.  Bond. A bond of the owner of such taxicab, approved by the Council, with a solvent and responsible surety company authorized to do business in the State as surety in the sum of Fifty-Five Thousand (55,000) Dollars, conditioned that the owner will pay all losses or damages which may result to persons (including passengers in the taxicab) or property from the negligent operation or defective construction of such taxicab or from the violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other law of the City or the State. Recovery on such bond shall be limited to Twenty-Five Thousand (25,000) Dollars for the injury or death of one person and Fifty Thousand (50,000) Dollars for the injury or death of more than one person, and to Five Thousand (5,000) Dollars for injury or destruction of property. The bond shall run to the City and shall inure by its terms to the benefit of any and all persons suffering loss or damage covered thereby and shall provide that suit may be brought thereon in any court of competent jurisdiction by any such person. The board shall provide that there shall be a continuing liability thereon, notwithstanding any recovery thereon. If at any time, in the judgment of the Council, the bond is not sufficient for any reason, the Council may require the owner to replace the bond with another bond or with a policy of insurance, as provided in subsection B of this section, satisfactory to the Council and, in default thereof, the Council may revoke such owner's permit and license; or 
B.  Insurance. A policy of insurance, approved by the Council, in a solvent and responsible company authorized to do business in the State, insuring the owner of such taxicab against losses by reason of injuries or damages which may result to persons (including passengers in the taxicab) or property from the negligent operation or defective construction of such taxicab or from violations of the provisions of this chapter or any other law of the City or of the State. Such policy may be limited to Twenty-Five Thousand (25,000) Dollars for the injury or death of one person, Fifty Thousand (50,000) Dollars for the injury or death of two or more persons in the same accident, and to Five Thousand (5000) Dollars for destruction of property. Such policy of insurance shall guarantee the payment to any and all such persons suffering injuries or damages to persons or property and to those entitled to recover for the death of any such person from any final judgment rendered against such owner within the limits above mentioned, irrespective of the financial condition or any actions or omissions of such owner, and shall inure to the benefit of such persons and those entitled to recover for the death of any such person. If at any time such policy of insurance shall be cancelled by the company issuing the same, or the authority of such company to do business in the State shall be revoked, or in the judgment of the Council the company is insolvent, the Council shall require the owner to replace such policy with another policy or bond, as provided in subsection A of this section, satisfactory to the Council, and, in default thereof, the Council may revoke such owner's permit and license. 
(Prior code § 5-5.21)  
4.68.210 - Taxicab drivers—Qualifications. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate or drive any taxicab in the City unless such person: 
A.  Is over the age of 21 years; 
B.  Is of good moral character; 
C.  Can speak the English language sufficiently to deal with passengers; and 
D.  Possesses a chauffeur's license issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State. 
(Prior code § 5-5.22)  
4.68.220 - Taxicab drivers—Soliciting by outcry. 
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire to advertise such business or solicit patronage therefor by public outcry or oral solicitation on any public street. 
(Prior code § 5-5.23)  
4.68.230 - Taxicab drivers—Hours of employment. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any taxicab for more than 12 hours spread over a total of 16 consecutive hours or to operate or drive any taxicab after having been on duty, either operating or driving a taxicab, or in any office or garage of the holder of any taxicab permit, or at any taxicab stand, or any combination of such acts, for more than 12 consecutive hours spread over a total of 16 consecutive hours. It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any taxicab unless such driver has had at least eight consecutive hours rest, while not on duty, within the last preceding 24 (24) hours, during which eight consecutive hours the driver shall have performed no acts or duties in connection with the taxicab business. 
(Prior code § 5-5.24)  
4.68.240 - Passengers—Refusal to pay fare. 
It is unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any taxicab after having hired the same or to hire any taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired. 
(Prior code § 5-5.25)  
4.68.250 - Passengers—Right to exclusive use. 
It is unlawful for any operator, driver or owner of any taxicab to solicit or carry any passenger after such taxicab shall have been engaged or while in use for another passenger without the consent of the passenger first engaging the same having been first obtained. Passengers engaging such taxicab shall have the exclusive right to the full and free use of the passenger compartment, and the whole thereof, if they desire the same. 
(Prior code § 5-5.26)  
4.68.260 - Safety and sanitation. 
It is unlawful for any owner to drive a taxicab within the City while the taxicab, or any of the equipment used thereon or therewith, shall be in a defective, unsafe or unsanitary condition. Every taxicab shall at all times be subject to the inspection of any police officer or health inspector of the City. 
(Prior code § 5-5.27)  
4.68.270 - Taxicab routes. 
The driver of a taxicab shall carry passengers by the most direct route possible which will carry such passengers safely and expeditiously to their destination. 
(Prior code § 5-5.28)  
4.68.280 - Identification on taxicabs. 
Every taxicab shall have painted or affixed upon the exterior part of a door on each side of the taxicab the name of the owner or the fictitious name under which the owner operates, together with the telephone number of the owner, in distinct letters not less than 2 1/2 inches in height and not less than 5/16-inch stroke. 
(Prior code § 5-5.29)  
4.68.290 - Change of identification—Permit required. 
No person shall change its name, monogram or insignia without first making application to the Council for a new taxicab permit and the granting of such permit. 
(Prior code § 5-5.30)  
Chapter 4.72 - FOOD TRUCK EVENTS AND FOOD TRUCK VENDORS 
 
4.72.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community of Montclair by providing a set of regulations related to the operation of mobile food truck vendors on public or private property within the City. Unless specifically exempted by this chapter, food trucks shall only be allowed in conjunction with an approved food truck vendor permit pursuant to the requirements set herein. 
(Ord. No. 18-976, § 2, 5-21-18)  
4.72.020 - Permits required. 
A.  No person or entity shall operate, allow to operate or contract to operate, a food truck vehicle at any location within the City of Montclair without an approved food truck event permit (short term or extended term) or other entitlement as required by this chapter. Food truck operators shall further be required to obtain a valid business license and food truck vendor permit prior to commencement of operations of any food truck vehicle in the City. Upon being granted a business license and food truck vendor permit, the vendor shall comply with any and all requirements and prohibitions regarding sales, operations, locations, and restrictions contained in this chapter and all other applicable laws and regulations, including State, County, and City rules and regulations. The failure to do so may result in the revocation or suspension of the business license and mobile food vendor permit. 
B.  Exemptions. The food truck event requirements of this chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  Food Truck Events permitted pursuant to another land use entitlement (e.g., conditional use permit); 
2.  Any City-sponsored event where the operator(s) of each food truck are operating pursuant to a valid contract with the City; or 
3.  Events sponsored by the Public School District and held entirely on school property. 
(Ord. No. 18-976, § 2, 5-21-18)  
4.72.030 - Food truck event requirements. 
A.  Sponsors/Applicants. All food truck events shall require written property owner approval, and must be sponsored by a business which is legally established to operate at the site. Only the property owner or a party designated as the owner's agent may submit a food truck event application. The food truck vendor, and event sponsors and/or property owner, shall be jointly responsible to ensure food trucks are in full compliance with the operational standards of this chapter. 
B.  Days and Hours of Food Truck Operations. Food trucks may operate in accordance with the following time frames: 
1.  Monday through Thursday: Between the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
2.  Friday through Sunday and National Holidays: Between Noon to 11:00 p.m. 
The maximum number of hours shall not exceed five consecutive hours of operation per day, allowing 30 minutes for set up, and 30 minutes to clean up and depart the site. 
C.  Short-Term Food Truck Events. 
1.  Allowed in any commercial, industrial, or mixed use district, or within a residential district when held at an established institutional use (e.g., religious, non-profit organizations, public agencies, or other similar uses as determined by the Director). 
2.  A separate food truck vendor permit shall be required for each food truck at each location. 
3.  Maximum of three days per event. 
4.  Maximum of four such events per year, separated by a minimum of 30 calendar days between each event. 
D.  Extended Food Truck Event. 
1.  Allowed in any commercial, industrial, or mixed use district (except at service or gas station sites). 
2.  Maximum operation limited to three days per week. 
3.  Multiple food trucks may be allowed for larger events, if approved by the City. 
4.  A separate food truck vendor permit shall be required for each food truck at each location. 
5.  An extended term food truck event permit is valid for a maximum period of six months at a time. Permit is renewable if no confirmed violations of this chapter have been reported, or have been appropriately resolved. If substantial changes to the event as approved by the original application are proposed, a new application shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 18-976, § 2, 5-21-18)  
4.72.040 - Food truck event site requirements. 
A food truck event shall comply with the following minimum site requirements: 
A.  The proposed site shall be appropriately developed and the surfaces on which food trucks will be parked shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or another impervious surface. Use of vacant and/or undeveloped property for a food truck event shall not be allowed; 
B.  The event location shall not be closer than 500 feet to any public school property or city park, unless as part of an approved event sponsored by the City or school district; 
C.  No food truck shall be located less than 50 feet from the property line of any adjacent residential use, as measured from the closest point of the food truck to the nearest property line of the residential parcel; and 
D.  A minimum distance of at least 100 feet shall be provided from the closest point of the food truck to the front door of any established brick and mortar restaurant or outdoor dining area while the restaurant is open for business. 
(Ord. No. 18-976, § 2, 5-21-18)  
4.72.050 - Food truck event permit application and review. 
Applications for a food truck event (FTE) permit shall be obtained from, reviewed, and approved by the Community Development Director in consultation with other City departments having jurisdiction. A complete application, including a site plan, and application fee, shall be submitted to the City for review at least 10 working days in advance of the proposed food truck event. 
Upon receipt of a completed FTE application, the Community Development Director shall: 
A.  Consult with all applicable City departments having jurisdiction, including but not limited to Community Services, Public Works, Building, Engineering, Police, Fire, and Code Enforcement. 
B.  Determine compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) for the event. A review will determine whether the categorical exemptions of the CEQA Guidelines are applicable. If a categorical exemption for the food truck event cannot be established the event shall be subject to further environmental review. 
C.  Determine whether the event is generally compatible with existing uses on the site and on surrounding properties, and whether the subject property is of adequate size and properly developed to accommodate proposed food truck event so that: 
1.  Confirm that no part of the event or any food truck shall be located within the public right-of-way, and visibility of an intersection, traffic control signals, signs or lights, located on or off the site, shall not be blocked; 
2.  Confirm that an adequate number of, and access to, on-site parking spaces shall be maintained for other uses during regular business hours; 
3.  Confirm that adequate on-site vehicular circulation and emergency access to the site shall be maintained; 
4.  Confirm that access to any disabled person parking space or required path of travel to building entries shall not be impeded; 
5.  Confirm that the site provides adequate lighting for evening events; and 
6.  Confirm Restroom Availability. Food trucks operating for more than one hour at an approved event shall provide customers and employees access to restroom facilities within 200 feet of the food truck location. Restroom facilities shall include operational toilets and hand-washing facilities with potable water, soap, and paper towels. The number of provided restrooms shall meet the minimum required to support the event pursuant to the current adopted California Plumbing Code or as otherwise required by the Building Official. 
D.  Based on the findings from the above review, the Director may approve, request a modification of, or deny the application. In the event of a denial, the Director shall notify the applicant of the department's determination and no permit shall be issued until compliance with all requirements or conditions can be met. 
E.  Where unusual circumstances exist, the Director may require another form of appropriate land use approval where, due to the magnitude or longevity of the event, the food truck even permit is determined to be inadequate to address all impacts. 
(Ord. No. 18-976, § 2, 5-21-18)  
4.72.060 - Operational standards. 
Food truck vendors operating on private or public property shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  All food truck vendors shall obtain, maintain, and display in plain view, a current and valid City of Montclair Business License and San Bernardino County Health Department Permit. Food truck vendors shall be fully responsible for complying with County Health Department requirements for the operation of the food truck, including but not limited to the, storage, cooking, and serving of food items. 
B.  All food trucks shall be occupied and supervised by the permitted owner or authorized operator of said vehicle at all times. 
C.  Food trucks shall only stop, stand, or park on surfaces paved with concrete, asphalt or another impervious surface. 
D.  All food preparation, cooking and storage shall occur inside the permitted vehicle or at an approved commissary off site. 
E.  Only food and non-alcoholic drinks shall be sold from food trucks. Alcoholic beverages may be allowed subject to City approval and authorization from the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC). 
F.  The sale of non-food items, or the performance of professional or personal services, shall not be provided from a food truck. 
G.  No food shall be prepared, sold, or displayed outside of the food truck vehicle. 
H.  Food truck vendors and food truck event organizers shall be responsible for managing customer queuing and for ensuring that safe pedestrian accessibility is maintained. While operating a food truck vehicle, vendors shall keep customers and other patrons from blocking any streets, sidewalks, paths, driveways, doorways, and other avenues of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
I.  Food trucks shall be maintained in a clean and presentable condition at all times free from graffiti, body damage, or obvious signs of deterioration (e.g., peeling paint, rust, etc.). 
J.  All grounds used by a food truck vendor shall be maintained at all times in a clean and presentable condition. Any trash or spills of food by-products shall be immediately cleaned up, and dumping of gray water onto the ground or public streets shall not be allowed. 
K.  Grease and liquid waste shall not be disposed of in or upon unapproved locations, including tree wells, storm drains, sanitary sewer systems or public streets. The food truck vendor shall collect and properly contain any new or used fat, oil, or grease substances, and shall remove from the premises said substances for disposal at an approved facility. 
L.  Trash and recycling containers shall be provided for use by patrons of the food truck vendor. All containers and their contents shall be removed from the site at the conclusion of business activities. No refuse or waste generated during the event shall be disposed in any public trash receptacle. 
M.  The sale or service of alcoholic beverages for an outdoor event associated with food trucks may occur only when specifically permitted by the City, and when appropriate permits from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) have been obtained. 
N.  All food trucks shall be entirely self-sufficient in regards to utilities (e.g., gas, electricity, water, etc.) necessary to operate independently and efficiently. 
O.  No off premise signs, including free standing signs, may be displayed. Signs on or within the truck may be exhibited. 
P.  Food trucks and associated events are subject to the City of Montclair Noise Ordinance. No horns, amplification systems, sound-producing devices/music systems, radios, televisions, which can be heard outside of the immediate area of any mobile food truck, may be used. 
Q.  Outdoor live entertainment as defined by the Montclair Municipal Code shall be subject to separate review and approval of an Entertainment Permit by the Community Development Director and Chief of Police. 
R.  No tables, chairs, furniture or other devices to provide customer seating shall be allowed unless expressly authorized by the City. 
S.  Restroom facilities shall be maintained in a clean working order for employee and customer use, including operational toilets and hand-washing facilities with potable water, soap, and paper towels. 
T.  No overnight parking of a food truck or trailer shall be permitted. Food trucks shall be removed from the site when not in operation and/or at the end of an approved event. 
(Ord. No. 18-976, § 2, 5-21-18)  
4.72.070 - Prohibited activities. 
No food truck vendor, or sponsor of a food truck event, shall: 
A.  Operate a food truck event in a manner that would create a public or private nuisance; 
B.  Knowingly allow any person on the site of a food truck event, to cause or create a disturbance in, around, or near the location of the event by offensive or disorderly conduct; 
C.  Knowingly allow any person to consume, distribute, possess, or sell any alcoholic beverage on the site of the food truck event, except as expressly allowed as a condition of the permit and in compliance with the laws and regulations enforced by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control; or 
D.  Knowingly allow any person to illegally consume, distribute, possess, or sell any controlled drug or dangerous substance in, around, or near any location of a food truck or food truck event. 
(Ord. No. 18-976, § 2, 5-21-18)  
4.72.080 - Expiration and non-transferability of permits. 
A.  A food truck event permit shall expire in compliance with the terms of the permit. A food truck event permit shall not be transferable to any other date, organization, person, place, or time. 
B.  A food truck vendor permit shall not be assignable in whole or part, nor any portion of the food truck sublet to another vendor. 
(Ord. No. 18-976, § 2, 5-21-18)  
4.72.090 - Suspension or revocation of a food truck event or food truck vendor permits. 
The Director may suspend or revoke, any food truck event, or food truck vendor permit issued pursuant to this chapter based upon reasonable cause, which may include any one or more of the following reasons: 
A.  Nonpayment of required fees or deposits to the City; 
B.  Violation of any permit condition; 
C.  Violation of any law involving the operation of the food truck event; or 
D.  An emergency situation constituting an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare as determined by the Director and/or Chief of Police. 
(Ord. No. 18-976, § 2, 5-21-18)  
4.72.100 - Appeals. 
The Director's decision to approve, condition, deny, suspend or revoke any food truck event permit may be appealed to the City Manager by filing written notice with the City Clerk on forms provided by the City. 
All appeals shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: (a) name(s) of the person filing the appeal (appellants); (b) a brief statement in ordinary and concise language of all grounds for the appeal; and (c) the signatures of all parties named as appellants and their mailing addresses. A uniform fee, as established by the city council by resolution, shall be paid to the city upon the filing of each appeal. 
After receiving a complete written appeal, the Director shall schedule a hearing before the City Manager. The City Manager may then review the determination or decision of the director in the matter appealed from, and may approve, disapprove or modify such determination or decision. The action of the City Manager under this section shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 18-976, § 2, 5-21-18)  
4.72.110 - Violation and penalties. 
All violations of this chapter are declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the city in such manner as provided by law. All violations of this chapter are declared to be a misdemeanor, pursuant to City Code, and may be punished as provided therein. The remedies set forth in this chapter are non-exclusive and the city may seek any and all legal and equitable relief permitted by law in addition to those remedies set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 18-976, § 2, 5-21-18)  
Title 5 - ANIMALS  
Chapter 5.02 - DEFINITIONS 
 
5.02.010 - Domestic animals. 
For the purposes of this title, "domestic animal" means an animal of a species of vertebrates that has been domesticated by humans so as to live and breed in a tame condition and depend on humankind for survival. Domestic animals shall include, but not be limited to, any dog, cat, equine or bovine animal, goat, sheep, swine, poultry, or other domesticated beast or bird. 
(Ord. No. 14-941, § 1, 2-18-14)  
5.02.020 - Enforcing Officer defined. 
For the purposes of this title, "Enforcing Officer" means the City Manager, the Chief of Police, the Humane Officer, the Health Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer, the NPDES Environmental Compliance Inspector, or such other person as the City Council may designate. The City Council, by contract, may delegate to a humane society or other person the collection of license fees and the performance of any of the duties of the Enforcing Officer. 
(Ord. No. 14-941, § 1, 2-18-14)  
Chapter 5.04 - ANIMAL DEFECATION[1] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-941, § 1, adopted February 18, 2014, repealed the former Chapter 5.04, § 5.04.010, and enacted a new Chapter 5.04 as set out herein. The former Chapter 5.04 pertained to animals generally and derived from prior code § 6-1.01 and Ord. No. 99-791. 
 
5.04.010 - Prohibited acts. 
A.  A person having custody of a domestic animal shall not permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, any such domestic animal to defecate upon sidewalk of any public right-of-way; or upon the floor of any common hall in any apartment building, condominium, townhome hotel, or other multiple dwelling; or upon any entranceway, stairway immediately abutting on a public sidewalk; or upon the floor of any shop, store, office building, or other building used in common by the public; or upon the floor or stairway of any public transportation station or public waiting room; or upon the floor, stairway, entranceway, office, lobby, or patio used in common by the public; or, without the consent of the owner or person in lawful occupation thereof, any lawn, yard, or any other private property whatever, which is either improved or occupied. 
B.  It is unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any domestic animal to permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, any such domestic animal to defecate and to allow such feces to thereafter remain upon any public or private property not owned or possessed by the owner or person in control of the animal, provided that the person who owns, harbors, keeps or has charge or control of a domestic animal shall immediately and securely enclose all feces deposited by such domestic animal in a bag, wrapper, or other container and dispose of the same in a sanitary manner. Any person who has charge or control of a domestic animal in a location other than on the property of such person or the property of the owner of the domestic animal shall have in his possession a suitable wrapper, bag, or container (other than articles of personal clothing) for the purposes of complying with the requirements of this section. Any violation of this section, including failure of such person to carry such wrapper, bag, or container when in charge or control of a domestic animal in a location other than on property of such or the property of the owner of the domestic animal shall subject said person to penalty as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-941, § 1, 2-18-14)  
Chapter 5.08 - DOGS 
Sections: 
 
5.08.010 - Licensing and vaccination required. 
Each dog over the age of four months harbored within the City shall be licensed and vaccinated for rabies. The owner or harborer of any such dog shall be required to present to the Enforcing Officer upon request a valid license and vaccination certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian. Such vaccination shall be made each year unless a chick embryo vaccine approved by the Department of Public Health of the State has been given by a licensed veterinarian within the past two years. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-1.02)  
5.08.020 - License fees and tags. 
A.  Fees. Every person owning or harboring any dog in the City shall annually or biennially, upon the date the license shall fall due, pay to the City or to such organization or person as the City Council may designate by contract as collection agent, an annual or biennial license fee as set forth by Council resolution. 
B.  Penalty Fees. A penalty fee, as set forth by City Council resolution, shall be added to each license fee for failure to pay the same within 30 days after the date the same shall fall due. 
C.  Issuance: Tags. Upon receipt of the license fee, a copy of the rabies vaccination certificate, an application in writing giving the name and address of the owner or harborer of the dog, and a brief description of the dog, the Enforcing Officer shall issue to such applicant a license certifying the payment of such fee, the name and address of the applicant, a brief description of the dog, and the number assigned to such dog and shall, at the same time, provide to such applicant a metal tag which shall set forth the date of expiration of such license. It shall be the duty of the owner or harborer of such dog to maintain such tag on such dog. 
D.  Transfer. Upon receipt of documentary proof that a dog has been validly licensed in another city or county in the State, and has a current dog license from such other city or county, and has, since the issuance of that license, been brought within the City, the City shall, for a fee of One (1) Dollar, transfer such license and provide to the owner a City license and metal tag as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-1.03)  
5.08.030 - Dogs at large. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person owning or having the charge, care, custody or control of any dog to cause, permit or allow such dog to be or to run at large upon any highway, street, lane, alley, court, or other public place in the City or upon any private property or premises other than those of the person owning or having the charge, care, custody or control of such dog unless such dog shall be restrained by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding 6 feet in length and is in she charge, care, custody and control of a competent person. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit permitting or allowing dogs to run at large on the premises of the owner or person having the charge, care, custody or control of such dogs, or prohibit permitting or allowing dogs, other than unspayed female dogs during the copulating season, to run at large on any ranch or undeveloped property where, within a radius of 500 feet therefrom, there shall be situated not more than five residential or commercial establishments other than the residence of the person owning or having the charge, care, custody or control of such dogs. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-1.04)  
5.08.040 - Impounding unlicensed dogs and dogs at large. 
A.  Duty to Impound. It shall be the duty of the Enforcing Officer to impound any dog for which a license is required if such dog shall not be wearing a dog license tag, or any dog running at large upon a public street or sidewalk or upon private property or any public place contrary to the provisions of this chapter, and the Enforcing Officer shall keep such dog impounded until it is claimed or destroyed. 
B.  Reclaiming Impounded Dogs by Owner. The owner of the dog so impounded may reclaim such dog upon the payment of the required license fees, pick-up fees, and boarding fees as set by City Council resolution. 
C.  Reclaiming Impounded Dogs by Other than Owner. If a dog shall have been impounded for a period of five days and shall not have been reclaimed by the owner, the Enforcing Officer, after a reasonable and diligent search for the owner and the notification of the owner, if known, by registered mail within 24 hours after impoundment, may, in lieu of killing such dog, offer such dog for adoption. The Enforcing Officer of the humane society may, however, with the approval of a licensed veterinarian, humanely destroy any impounded animal on the same day it is impounded if, in the opinion of the State Humane Officer, it is in great pain or discomfort due to an injury or infectious disease which may contaminate and be detrimental to the health of the animals at the animal shelter. 
D.  Destruction of Impounded Dogs. If an impounded dog is nor claimed or adopted pursuant to subsections B or C of this section, it shall be the duty of the Enforcing Officer to cause such dog to be destroyed. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-1.05)  
5.08.050 - Vicious dogs. 
It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep any vicious dog in the City. 
(Prior code § 6-1.06)  
5.08.060 - Examination of dogs for rabies—Quarantine. 
A.  Examination of Dogs Suspected of Having Rabies. The Enforcing Officer shall have the right to seize any dog within the City having or suspected of having rabies and cause the same to be examined by the Health Officer, and it shall be the duty of the Health Officer to examine such dog for the purpose of determining if such dog is afflicted with rabies. If it shall be determined that such dog does not have rabies, it shall be returned to the owner or person harboring the same. 
B.  Quarantine. Whenever it has been shown that any dog has bitten any person, the owner or person having the custody or possession of such dog shall, upon the order of the Health Officer, quarantine it and keep it securely chained for a period of 12 days and shall permit the Health Officer to make an inspection or examination thereof at any time during such period. Dogs quarantined shall not he removed from the premises without the permission of the Health Officer; provided, however, the Health Officer, in the interests of protecting the person bitten, may order the dog quarantined for a period of 12 days at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-1.07)  
5.08.070 - Right of entry. 
The Enforcing Officer or any peace officer of the City shall have the right to enter upon any private or public property to ascertain whether any dog is harbored in violation of the provisions of this chapter or is afflicted with rabies. 
(Prior code § 6-1.08)  
5.08.080 - Dogs used by the Police Department. 
It is unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously torture, tease, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the Police Department in the performance of its functions or duties or to unwarrantably interfere with or meddle with any such dog while being used by the Police Department or any officer or member thereof in the performance of any of the functions or duties of the Police Department or of such officer or member. 
(Prior code § 6-1.09)  
5.08.090 - Noisy animals. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person owning or having the charge, care, custody or control of any dog, cat, or other animal or fowl, whether licensed or not, to permit the same to habitually howl, bark, yelp, or make other noise which disturbs or annoys any considerable or significant number of persons in the neighborhood. 
B.  The keeping or harboring of any dog, cat, or other animal or fowl, whether licensed or not, which by habitual howling, barking, yelping, or other noise disturbs or annoys any considerable or significant number of persons in the neighborhood is unlawful and is declared to be a public nuisance. Whenever it shall be affirmed in writing by three or more persons having separate residences or regularly employed in the neighborhood that any animal or fowl is a habitual nuisance by reason of its howling, barking, yelping, or other noise or is by its actions potentially dangerous or vicious or in any other manner causing undue annoyance, the Enforcing Officer, if he or she finds such nuisance to exist, may impound any such animal or fowl. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-1.10)  
5.08.100 - Commercial kennels defined? License required—Reports. 
A.  Definition. For the purposes of this section, "commercial kennel" means a place where five or more dogs are kept for the purpose of boarding, breeding, training or marketing. 
B.  License Fees. Every person engaging in the business of operating a commercial kennel shall obtain a license from the Business License Clerk and pay an annual license fee for each calendar year as set forth in the then current Business License Fee resolution. 
C.  Dog Licenses. All dogs owned by or kept in commercial kennels shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter upon attaining the age of four months. 
D.  Sale of Puppies. The sale of each dog before it has attained the age of four months by a commercial kennel shall be reported by each commercial kennel operator on a form to be furnished by the Health Officer, which form shall include information as to the name and address of the person to whom the dog is sold, a description of the dog, the age of the dog, and such other pertinent data as the Health Officer may require. The Business License Clerk shall have the authority, upon giving 10 days' notice by United States mail to any commercial kennel licensee, to revoke any license granted to a commercial kennel operator for violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-1.11)  
Title 6 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.02 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.02.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this title: 
A-weighted sound level means the total sound level in decibels of all noise as measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighing network scale. The unit of measurement shall be defined as dB(A). 
Ambient noise level means the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made. 
Business means a commercial or public entity including, but not limited to, a firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint-stock company, corporation, or association that is organized as a for-profit or nonprofit entity, strip mall, school, school district, special district, federal, state, local, regional agency or facility. "Business" also includes a multifamily residential dwelling or mobile home park of five or more units. 
Cumulative time period means a period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit of level which denotes the ratio between two quantities which are proportional to power. The number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is 10 times the logarithm to the base 10 of this ratio. 
Emergency alarm means any alarm used, employed or generated in an effort to protect, provide or restore safety conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
Emergency machinery means any machinery used, employed, performed or generated in an effort to protect, provide or restore safety conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
Emergency vehicle means any vehicle used, employed, performed or generated in an effort to protect, provide or restore safety conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
Emergency work means any work used, employed, performed or generated in an effort to protect, provide or restore safety conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
Fireworks mean any device containing chemical elements and chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and producing audible, visual, mechanical or thermal effects which are useful as pyrotechnic devices or for entertainment. 
The term "fireworks" includes, but is not limited to, devices designated by the manufacturer as fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, rockets, Daygo bombs, sparklers, party poppers, paper caps, chasers, fountains, smoke sparks, aerial bombs and fireworks kits, including those described as "safe and sane fireworks." 
Fixed noise source means a stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including, but not limited to, residential, agricultural, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans compressors, generators, air conditioners, and refrigeration equipment. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Highway means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public, for the purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" shall include "street." 
Noise means any sound that is loud or disturbing or that interferes with one's ability to hear some other sound. 
Noise level means the A-weighted sound pressure level as measured using the slow dynamic characteristic for sound level meters specified in ANSI/ASA S1.43-1997 (R2007), American National Standard Specifications for Integrating-Averaging Sound Level Meters, or latest revision. 
Official sign , when applied to skateboards and roller skates, means a sign which meets the specifications set by the City and which prohibits operating skateboards or roller skates on the posted property. 
Organic waste means food waste, green waste, landscape and pruning waste, nonhazardous wood waste, and food-soiled paper waste that is mixed in with food waste. 
Owner of land , as applied to abandoned/dismantled/inoperative vehicles, means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located as shown on the last equalized assessment role. 
Owner of the vehicle , as applied to abandoned/dismantled/inoperative vehicles, means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
Public property shall not include "highway." 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body waste) including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, waste material, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Roller skates , when applied to skateboards and roller skates, means any footwear or device which may be attached to the foot or footwear to which wheels are attached and such wheels are used by the wearer to move. The definition of this term shall include in-line skates, roller blades, single roller skate, or parts thereof. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste including but not limited to paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
Scavenging means engaging in any of the following activities: 
1.  Tampering or meddling with a container used for disposal of solid waste including recyclable materials. 
2.  Tampering or meddling with the contents of any container used for disposal of solid waste including recyclable materials. 
3.  Removing the contents of any container used for disposal of solid waste including recyclable materials. 
4.  Removing any container used for disposal of solid waste, including recyclable materials, from the location where the container has been placed by the owner of the container or owner's agent or employee. 
5.  Removing, tampering, or meddling with solid waste, including recyclable materials, set out for collection pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6.16 on private property or on any sidewalk, street, or public right-of-way. 
Skateboard , when applied to skateboards and roller skates, means any board of any material which has wheels attached to it where such wheels are used for human movement or propulsion. 
Vehicle means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Waste materials mean and include but is not limited to paper, cardboard, carpets, rugs, clothing, books, boots, shoes, straw, packing barrels, furniture, cans, bottles, glass, wire, scrap metal, ashes, discarded building materials and the like, except flammable liquids such as gasoline, kerosene and similar toxic substances shall not be included. 
(Ord. 05-865 § 1; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-8.08: prior code §§ 4-4.1801, 5-4.01, 5-8.02) 
(Ord. No. 09-909, § 1, 7-6-09; Ord. No. 19-985, § I, 6-17-19)  
Chapter 6.04 - ABANDONED, DISMANTLED AND INOPERATIVE VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Findings and determinations. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State pursuant to the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the State to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, as public nuisances, the City Council makes the following findings and declarations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly permitted by the provisions of this chapter, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may he abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-8.01)  
6.04.020 - Exceptions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  A vehicle, or part thereof, which is completely enclosed within an enclosure in a lawful manner where it is not visible form the street or other public or private property; or 
2.  A vehicle, or part thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined pursuant to provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code of the State and this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-8.03)  
6.04.030 - Effect on other laws. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the City. The provisions of this chapter shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and laws heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Prior code § 5-8.04)  
6.04.040 - Administration and enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Fire Chief. In the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, such officer may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle, and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle, or the parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-8.05)  
6.04.050 - Right of entry of certain persons. 
When the City Council has contracted with any authorized towing service, such towing service shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove, or cause the removal of, a vehicle or part thereof, declared to he a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-8.06)  
6.04.060 - Administrative costs. 
The City Council shall, by resolution, determine the amount to be assessed as administrative costs. Such administrative costs shall be in addition to the actual cost of the removal of any vehicle, or part thereof. Revenue from such administrative costs shall be used for the purposes of administering the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-8.07)  
6.04.070 - Authority to abate and remove. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private or public property within the City, the Fire Chief shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-8.08)  
6.04.080 - Notice of Intention to Abate and Remove. 
A Notice of Intention to Abate and Remove shall be mailed by registered/certified mail to both the owner of the land on which the vehicle or parts thereof are located, and to the owner of the vehicle or parts thereof, if such ownership can be determined. Such Notice of Intention to Abate shall advise the property owner and vehicle owner that the City will abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance 10 days following the mailing of said Notice of Intention, and shall advise the property owner and vehicle owner of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-8.09)  
6.04.090 - Hearings—Notices. 
If a request by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land is received by the Fire Chief within 10 days after the mailing of the Notice of Intention to Abate and Remove, a public hearing shall be held by the Fire Chief on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the costs of removal of the vehicle, or parts of a vehicle, against the property on which it is located. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn statement, in writing, denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land within such 10-day period, said statement shall be considered to be a request for a hearing which does not require his/her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to both the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said 10 days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-8.10)  
6.04.100 - Hearings—Determinations. 
All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the Fire Chief, who shall hear all facts and testimony he/she deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle, or parts thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on the said property, public or private. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn statement, in writing, in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
The Fire Chief may impose such conditions and take such other action as he/she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He/she may delay the time for removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, if in his/her opinion the circumstances justify it. The Fire Chief may find that a vehicle, or parts thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter, and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available. 
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he/she has not subsequently acquiesced to its presence, the Fire Chief shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land, but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the Fire Chief but does not appear, he/she shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-8.11)  
6.04.110 - Appeal. 
Any party subject to the Notice of Abatement may appeal the decision of the Fire Chief by filing a written Notice of Appeal with the Fire Chief within five days after his/her decision. 
Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council, which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate. 
The City Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 6.04.080 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-8.12)  
6.04.120 - Abatement. 
Five days after the adoption of the order declaring the vehicle, or part thereof, to be a public nuisance, or five days from the date of mailing of the notice of the decision, if such notice is required by the provisions of Section 6.04.100 of this chapter, or 15 days after such action of the City Council authorizing removal following an appeal, the vehicle, or part thereof, may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-8.13)  
6.04.130 - Notices of Abatement to Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State identifying the vehicle, or part thereof, removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to said Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title, and license plates. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-8.14)  
6.04.140 - Assessment of costs. 
If the administrative costs and the costs of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.04.100 of this chapter are not paid within 30 days from the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of the California Government Code and shall be transmitted to the City Finance Director for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other City taxes. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-8.15)  
Chapter 6.08 - EMERGENCY PLAN 
Sections: 
 
6.08.010 - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency operations; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Prior code § 4-2.01)  
6.08.020 - Local emergency defined. 
As used in this chapter, "local emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-2.02)  
6.08.030 - Disaster Preparedness Council membership. 
The City of Montclair Disaster Preparedness Council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The Mayor, who shall be Chair; 
B.  The City Manager, who shall be Vice Chair and Director of Emergency Services; 
C.  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this City, adopted pursuant to this chapter; 
D.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veteran, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the Director with the advice and consent of the City Council. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-2.03)  
6.08.040 - Disaster Preparedness Council powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the Montclair Disaster Preparedness Council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Preparedness Council shall meet upon call of the Chair, or, in his/her absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the Vice Chair. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-2.04)  
6.08.050 - Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services. 
A.  There is created the office of Director of Emergency Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services. 
B.  There is created the office of Assistant Director of Emergency Services, who shall be appointed by the Director. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-2.05)  
6.08.060 - Powers and duties of the Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services. 
A.  The Director is empowered to: 
1.  Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; 
2.  Request the Governor of the State of California to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available sources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
3.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
4.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this City; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
5.  Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein; 
6.  In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as herein provided, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services or the existence of a state of war emergency, the Director is empowered: 
a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council, 
b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the City for the fair value thereof, and if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use, 
c.  To require emergency services of any City officer or employee, and to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he/she deems necessary in the execution of his/her duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by State law for duly registered disaster service workers, 
d.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency, and 
e.  To execute all of his/her ordinary power as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him/her by this chapter or by other action of the City Council, including power conferred upon him/her in the City of Montclair Emergency Plan, and all powers conferred upon him/her by any other lawful authority. 
B.  The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his/her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council. 
C.  The Assistant Director shall, under the supervision of the Director, and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this City; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-2.06)  
6.08.070 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces duly enrolled or registered to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons duly impressed into service under the provisions of this chapter charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-2.07)  
6.08.080 - Emergency plan. 
The Montclair Disaster Preparedness Council shall be responsible for the development of the City of Montclair Emergency Plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council. 
(Prior code § 4-2.08)  
6.08.090 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of Montclair. 
(Prior code § 4-2.09)  
6.08.100 - Prohibited conduct. 
It is unlawful to do any of the following during an emergency: 
A.  Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him/her by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Commit any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the State or the Montclair Disaster Preparedness Council. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-2.10)  
Chapter 6.10 - INSPECTION OF GRADING OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sections: 
 
6.10.010 - Adoption of San Bernardino County inspection grading of food establishments. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, Ordinance No. 3930 of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, adding Chapter 14 to Division 3 of Title 3 and adding subsection 16.0213B(b)(17) to Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1, all of the San Bernardino County Code, relating to inspection grading of food establishments, is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. 05-857 § 1 (part))  
6.10.020 - Penalties. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter or the provisions of the ordinance adopted by reference in this chapter. 
In accordance with Section 33.1406(c) of the County Code, the Letter Grade Card shall not be defaced, marred, camouflaged, hidden or removed. It is unlawful to operate a food establishment unless the Letter Grade is posted. Removal of the Letter Grade Card is a violation of this chapter and may result in the suspension or revocation of the public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in Section 33.0112 of this Code. In addition, violations of this chapter are punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of Title 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. 05-857 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 6.12 - NOISE CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
6.12.010 - Excessive noise prohibited. 
A.  Notwithstanding any noise level specified within this chapter, it is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to cause, create, permit, maintain, or suffer any loud or unusual noise that unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort, quiet, health, or safety of any neighborhood or of any reasonable person of normal sensitivities. 
B.  The following factors shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The volume of the noise; 
2.  The intensity of the noise; 
3.  The distance from the source of the noise from which the noise is plainly audible; 
4.  The time of day or night the noise occurs; 
5.  The duration of the noise; 
6.  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; 
7.  The volume and intensity of the background/ambient noise; 
8.  The zoning classification of the property from which the noise emanates; 
9.  Whether the noise is produced or generated from commercial or non-commercial activity; 
10.  Whether the noise is an expected consequence or expected result from an otherwise lawful use of the property from which the noise emanates; 
11.  The number of persons affected by the noise. 
C.  A noise level reading measured pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this section, however, a noise level reading is not required to demonstrate that a noise violates the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-4.02) 
(Ord. No. 09-909, § 2, 7-6-09)  
6.12.020 - Noise level measurement criteria. 
Any noise level measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be determined by using a sound level meter that meets the minimum requirements of the American National Standard Institute for sound level meters, or by using an instrument with associated recording and analyzing equipment that will provide equivalent data. 
(Prior code § 5-4.03) 
(Ord. No. 09-909, § 3, 7-6-09)  
6.12.030 - Exterior noise level measurement. 
Exterior noise levels made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be measured from the source of the noise or from the property line at a relative point closest to the source of the noise if lawful entry onto the property cannot be obtained. 
(Prior code § 5-4.04) 
(Ord. No. 09-909, § 4, 7-6-09)  
6.12.040 - Base ambient exterior noise levels. 
All ambient noise measurements shall commence at the base ambient noise levels in decibels within the respective times and zones as follows: 
Zone 	Time 	Decibels 
Residential 	10:00 p.m.—7:00 am. 	45 dB(A) 
Residential 	7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	55 dB(A) 
Commercial 	10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 	55 dB(A) 
Commercial 	7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	65 dB(A) 
Industrial 	10:00 p.m.—7:00 am. 	60 dB(A) 
Industrial 	7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	70 dB(A) 
 
(Prior code § 5-4.05)  
6.12.050 - Maximum residential/ nonresidential noise levels. 
It is unlawful for any person within any zone to create any noise or allow the creation of any noise on the property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level, when measured on the exterior of the property, to exceed the base ambient noise level as adjusted below: 
Noise Level 
Exceeded 	Maximum Duration 
Period 
Base Ambient Noise 
 Level (BANL) 	30 minutes in any hour 
5—9 dB(A) 	above BANL 15 minutes in any hour 
10—14 dB(A) 	above BANL 5 minutes in any hour 
15—16 dB(A) 	above BANL 1 minute in any hour 
16 dB(A) or greater 
 above BANL 	Not permitted 
 
(Prior code § 5-4.06)  
6.12.060 - Exemptions. 
The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  City- or school-approved activities conducted in public parks, on public playgrounds and public or private school grounds including, but not limited to, athletic and school entertainment events between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; 
B.  Outdoor gatherings, public dances and shows; provided said events are conducted pursuant to a license issued by the City; 
C.  Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency machinery, vehicle, work or warning alarm or bell, provided the sounding of any bell or alarm on any building, machinery or motor vehicle shall terminate its operation within 30 minutes in any hour of its being activated; 
D.  Noise sources associated with construction, repair, remodeling or grading of any real property, provided said activities do not take place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any given day and provided that the Building Official determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired. Industrial or commercial construction or public improvements, not otherwise feasible except between these hours, may be approved on a limited, short-term basis, subject to the approval of the Director of Community Development. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-4.07)  
6.12.070 - Nonconforming uses—Noise source. 
Any nonconforming use previously approved by the City or any use that can be documented as being a legal, nonconforming use shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Expansion, modification or other changes to the nonconforming noise source shall require full compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-4.08)  
6.12.080 - Schools, hospitals and churches—Special provisions. 
It is unlawful for any person to create any noise which causes the noise level at any school, hospital or church, while the same is in use, to exceed the noise limits prescribed for the assigned noise zone, per Section 6.12.040 of this chapter, in which the school, hospital or church is located; or which noise level unreasonably interferes with the use of such institutions or which unreasonably disturbs or annoys patients in the hospital. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-4.09)  
6.12.090 - Commercial/noncommercial use of sound trucks. 
A.  Registration Required. No person shall use, or cause to be used, a sound truck with its sound-amplifying equipment in operation for commercial/noncommercial purposes in the City before filing a registration statement with the Community Development Department. Such registration statement shall be filed in duplicate and shall set forth the following information: 
1.  The name and home address of the applicant; 
2.  The address of the place of business of the applicant; 
3.  The license number and motor number of the sound truck to be used by the applicant; 
4.  The name and address of the person who owns the sound truck; 
5.  The name and address of the person having direct charge of the sound truck; 
6.  The names and addresses of all persons who will use or operate the sound truck; 
7.  The purpose for which the sound truck will be used; 
8.  A general statement as to the sections of the City in which the sound truck will be used; 
9.  The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck; 
10.  The number of days of the proposed operation of the sound truck; 
11.  A general description of the sound-amplifying equipment which is to be used; and 
12.  The maximum sound-producing power of the sound-amplifying equipment to be used in or on the sound truck, including the following: 
a.  The wattage to be used, 
b.  The volume in decibels of the sound which will be produced, and 
c.  The approximate maximum distance for which the sound will be thrown from the sound truck. 
B.  Registration—Amended. All persons using, or causing to be used, sound trucks for commercial/noncommercial purposes shall amend any registration statement filed pursuant to the provisions of subsection A of this section within 48 hours after any change in the information therein furnished. 
C.  Registration, Certification and Identification. The Community Development Department shall review and approve the registration statement. The approved copy of the application shall be in the possession of any person operating the sound truck at all times while the sound truck's sound-amplifying equipment is in operation, and such copy shall be promptly displayed and shown to any police officer of the City upon request. 
D.  Regulations for Use. The commercial/noncommercial use of sound trucks in the city with sound-amplifying equipment in operation shall be subject to the following regulations: 
1.  The only sounds permitted shall be music or human speech; 
2.  Sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least 10 miles per hour except when the truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. When the truck is stopped by traffic, the sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each such stop; 
3.  Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of hospitals, schools, churches, or courthouses; 
4.  The human speech and/or music shall not be profane, lewd, indecent or slanderous; 
5.  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of 50 feet from the sound truck and so that the volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility; 
6.  No sound-amplifying equipment shall be operated with an excess of 15 watts of power in the last stage of amplification. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-4.10)  
6.12.100 - Specific noises prohibited. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, the following specified acts are declared to be unlawful and a nuisance in violation of this chapter: 
A.  Radios, Televisions and Stereos. It is unlawful for any person to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used or operated any radio, television set, musical instrument, phonograph, stereophonic equipment, jukebox, or other machine or device for producing, reproducing or amplifying sound when audible at a distance of 50 feet or more from the sound and/or when audible within any other residence or establishment. 
B.  Hawkers and Peddlers. It is unlawful for any person to sell anything by public outcry within any area of the City. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, circuses, and other similar licensed public entertainment events. 
C.  Portable or Mobile Radios, Audio Equipment, or other Similar Devices. The operation of portable or mobile radios, audio equipment, or other similar devices designed or used for the amplification or reproduction of sound on any public or private property where the noise from such device is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the source of said noise. 
D.  Machinery, Equipment, Fans and Air Conditioning. It is unlawful for any person to operate, cause to operate, or permit the operation of any machinery, equipment, device, pump, fan, compressor, air conditioning apparatus, or similar mechanical device in any manner so as to create any noise which would cause the noise level at the property line of any property to exceed the ambient noise level by 5 dB(A). 
E.  Loudspeakers, Amplifiers for Advertising. It is unlawful for any person to play, use, or operate or permit to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. 
F.  Yelling, Hollering and Shouting. It is unlawful for any person to yell, shout, hoot, whistle or sing on the public streets between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
G.  Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler device that effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
H.  Motor Vehicle Radios or Similar Sound Amplification Devices. In accordance with Montclair Vehicle Code Section 27007, the use or operation of any radio or sound amplification device in a vehicle which can be heard outside of the vehicle from 50 or more feet when the vehicle is parked or being operated upon a highway, unless that system is being operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation. 
I.  Motor Vehicle Alarms. The emission of an audible sound from an alarm located in a motor vehicle for a period in excess of 10 minutes. Notwithstanding the provisions of Montclair Vehicle Code Section 22651.5, the sound shall be calculated based upon the emission of the first audible sound, and end 10 minutes thereafter, notwithstanding any variation or delay in the emissions of audible sound. 
In addition to other remedies, if a motor vehicle alarm emits an audible sound in excess of 20 minutes, any police officer may have the vehicle summarily removed from any zone within the City to abate such nuisance in accordance with the provisions of Montclair Vehicle Code Section 22651.5 et seq. 
J.  Animals and Fowl. Any sound, bark, cry, or behavior from any fowl or animal (including, but not limited to, a dog) otherwise permitted to be kept within the City that disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort, quiet, health, or safety of any neighborhood or of any reasonable person of normal sensitivities. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-4.11) 
(Ord. No. 09-909, § 5, 7-6-09)  
6.12.110 - Second response costs for police services. 
A.  Any person who causes, creates, permits, maintains, or suffers any loud or unusual noise on private property that unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort, quiet, health, or safety of any neighborhood or of any reasonable person of normal sensitivities, and that results in a response from the police and/or fire department within 24 hours after the issuance of a written warning to cease the disturbance shall be responsible for all costs incurred in response to the second or subsequent response ("second response costs"), including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Salaries of the police officers and/or fire department personnel, at the salary then in effect for each classification of each individual officer, for a one-hour period of time or the actual amount of time spent responding to or remaining at the property where the disturbance was created, beginning when one or more police officer or fire department personnel leaves a location to go to the scene of the event and ending when all responding personnel are available for other duties, or, if their shifts are ended, when they are finished with those duties related to the event which they are required to complete before going off duty, whichever is greater. Such actual costs shall include wages and fringe benefits for the responding personnel and the sergeant or other superior directing them, including overtime if applicable. 
2.  Vehicle and equipment usage at such rates as established by resolution of the City Council. 
3.  Replacement cost of any material expended, including the cost of the recording medium if audio or video recording equipment is used. 
4.  The cost of any medical treatment to any police or fire department personnel. 
5.  The cost of repairing any damaged City equipment or property. 
B.  Second response costs shall not be assessed against a responsible person unless a written warning has first been issued advising said person that the loud or unusual noise violates applicable State or local laws and that the person would be responsible for any costs resulting from a second or subsequent response within 24 hours by police and/or fire department personnel. 
C.  A responsible person, as used in this section, shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
1.  The person who is actually causing, creating, permitting, maintaining, or suffering any loud or unusual noise on private property in violation of this chapter or other applicable law. 
2.  The person in charge of the premises from which a loud or unusual noise is being emanated in violation of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. 
3.  The person responsible for any event that causes or generates a loud or unusual noise that violates the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. 
4.  The parents or guardians of any responsible person that is under the age of 18 years. 
(Ord. No. 09-909, § 6, 7-6-09)  
6.12.120 - Assessment and payment of second response costs. 
A.  Upon determining that a person is responsible for second response costs pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the Chief of Police (or designee thereof) shall cause a notice of assessment on second response costs to be served upon such person by depositing such notice, first class, postage prepaid, with the United States Postal Service to the responsible person at the person's last known address. In addition to setting forth the amount of the second response costs, such notice shall also set forth the right of the responsible person to request administrative review by the City Manager (or designee thereof) in accordance with Section 1.08.010. A notice of assessment on second response costs shall also warn the responsible person that failure to pay the second response costs within 30 calendar days may result in: 
1.  A delinquency penalty in the amount of 10 percent of the second response costs per month, up to an aggregate maximum of 50 percent of the second response costs. 
2.  Interest at the rate of 10 percent per annum of the second response costs (exclusive of any delinquency penalties), from the date the costs first became delinquent until the date the costs are paid. 
3.  The recordation of a lien against the real property from which the disturbance emanated or the delay in issuance or renewal of any City license and/or permit in connection with the real property and/or business establishment from which the disturbance emanated. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 1.08, a notice of assessment on second response costs is not appealable to the Planning Commission or the City Council, and an order to comply issued by the City Manager or designee thereof is final and binding. 
C.  Second response costs shall be due and payable within 30 calendar days of the issuance of the notice of assessment on second response costs. All responsible persons shall be jointly and severally liable for all second response costs. In the event of the failure of a responsible person assessed second response costs to pay such fee within 30 calendar days of the issuance of a notice of assessment on second response costs, a delinquency penalty in the amount of 10 percent of the second response costs per month, up to an aggregate maximum of 50 percent of the second response costs. In the event of the failure of a responsible person assessed second response costs to pay such fee within 30 calendar days of the issuance of a notice of assessment on second response costs, interest shall accrue at the rate of 10 percent per annum of the second response costs (exclusive of any delinquency penalties), from the date the costs first became delinquent until the date the costs are paid. 
D.  Second response costs and other charges or fees imposed in accordance with this chapter shall constitute a debt that may be collected in any manner allowed by law, including, but not limited to, the recordation of a lien (secured or unsecured) with the County Recorder's Office and/or California Franchise Tax Board "Inter-Agency Offset Program" (pursuant to Section 12419.10 of the California Government code). The City may also withhold issuance or renewal of any license, permit, or other entitlement for any property or business whenever an administrative penalty resulting from a code violation at said property or business remains unpaid. The City shall be entitled to recover its attorney fees and costs arising from an action to collect an administrative fine and other shares, fees, or costs imposed in accordance with this chapter if it is the prevailing party and provided it made the election to seek attorney fees at the commencement of the action. A Citee shall be entitled to recover his or her attorney fees if the City made the election to seek attorney fees at the outset of the action and the Citee prevails thereon. 
E.  Second response costs shall also constitute restitution pursuant to Penal Code Sections 1202.4, 1203.1, and 1214, as well as pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 730.6. 
(Ord. No. 09-909, § 7, 7-6-09)  
6.12.130 - Cumulative penalties and remedies. 
A.  Any person who causes, permits, or suffers a violation of any provision of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor violation punishable in accordance with Section 1.12.010 of this Code. 
B.  A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall also be subject to an administrative fine or penalty in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.04 of this Code. 
C.  Nothing contained within this chapter requires a police officer, fire department personnel, or other official authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter to issue a warning before issuing an administrative citation or criminal, misdemeanor citation, or before commencing any other action to seek the abatement of the noise disturbance. 
D.  This chapter does not exclusively regulate loud, unusual, and/or unreasonable noises or disturbances within the City, and the remedies and penalties provided in this chapter are in addition to other remedies and penalties authorized by this Code, or by the laws of the State of California or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 09-909, § 8, 7-6-09)  
Chapter 6.14 - FIREWORKS 
Sections: 
 
6.14.010 - Intent. 
The provisions of this chapter are intended to regulate the use of all fireworks to provide for the safety of the community and the prevention of fires. 
(Ord. 05-865 § 2 (part))  
6.14.020 - Prohibition of fireworks. 
The storage, use, possession and sale of all fireworks, including those fireworks described as safe and sane by the California State Fire Marshal, shall be prohibited throughout the City except when a permit is issued, in advance, by the Fire Chief or his or her designee for the exceptions below. 
Exceptions: 
A.  Storage and handling of fireworks is allowed as set forth in Section 7802 of the California Fire Code. 
B.  The use of fireworks for display is allowed as set forth in Section 7802 of the California Fire Code. 
(Ord. 05-865 § 2 (part))  
6.14.030 - Penalties. 
Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 06-889 § 9: Ord. 05-865 § 2 (part))  
6.14.040 - Disposition of fines. 
All administrative fines collected by the City as penalties for violating this chapter shall be placed in the General Fund to cover the cost of enforcing this chapter. 
All the funds distributed to the City as provided in the preceding paragraph of this section shall not supplant any funds that would, in the absence of this chapter, be made available to support the law enforcement and prosecutorial efforts of the City. 
(Ord. 05-865 § 2 (part))  
6.14.050 - Nonexclusive remedy. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation or penalty for storage, use, possession and sale of fireworks. It supplements, and is in addition to, the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 05-865 § 2 (part))  
Chapter 6.16 - REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
Sections: 
 
6.16.010 - Removal by City. 
All garbage, refuse, rubbish and waste material that accumulates within the City shall be removed by the City or its duly authorized agent, and no person, other than the City, or its duly authorized agent, shall collect or remove any garbage, refuse, rubbish or waste material required to be removed in and by this chapter, except by written permission from the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(Editorially amended during 1999 codification; prior code § 6-8.01)  
6.16.020 - Receptacle required. 
A.  All garbage, rubbish and waste materials as defined in Chapter 6.02 of this title shall be deposited in a single receptacle or receptacles as required, which may be provided by the City or its duly authorized agent. When garbage is deposited with waste material, rubbish or refuse, the receptacle shall be of a plastic or otherwise impervious material with a tight-fitting cover. 
B.  Refuse containers shall be maintained in good condition. Any container that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly replaced upon notice to the City's authorized waste hauler. The City Manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to refuse collection services for failure to comply herewith. 
C.  The total contents of each of the receptacles mentioned herein, except bins, shall not exceed 50 pounds total weight. 
D.  No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or other public place, or upon any private property whether owned by such person or not, within the City except it be in proper containers or properly bundled loose materials for the collection of, under express approval granted by, the City Manager or his/her designee. 
E.  Refuse containers shall be placed for collection at ground level on the property, not within the paved area of a public street or alley, on the day of collection. Ownership of refuse material set out for collection shall be vested in the City. 
F.  In no event shall refuse containers remain in the vicinity of the public right-of-way either before or after collection for a total time period of over 24 hours. 
(Editorially amended during 1999 codification; prior code § 6-8.02) 
(Ord. No. 19-985, § II, 6-17-19)  
6.16.025 - Commercial recycling and organic waste recycling/diversion. 
A.  Any business generating four or more cubic yards of solid waste per week and any multifamily residential dwelling of five or more units shall reuse, recycle, compost, or otherwise divert its recyclable materials by taking one, or any combination, of the following actions: 
1.  Source separate recyclable materials from the solid waste stream and subscribe with the City's franchise hauler, for the pickup of the recyclable materials separately from the solid waste to divert the recyclable materials from disposal. 
2.  Source separate recyclable materials from the solid waste and self-haul recyclable materials to a certified materials recovery facility (MRF) or other mixed waste processing facility for diversion from disposal. 
a.  Each business subject to this section that does not subscribe with city's franchise hauler for pick-up of its recyclable materials shall be responsible for ensuring and demonstrating its compliance with the requirements of this section to the City Manager or his or her designee with satisfactory proof of acceptable levels of waste diversion on a quarterly basis (March, June, September and December). 
b.  To comply with subsection A of this section, property owners of multifamily complexes may require tenants to source separate their recyclable materials. Tenants must source separate their recyclable materials as required by property owners of multifamily complexes subject to this section. 
3.  The City shall implement a commercial solid waste recycling program that consists of education, outreach and monitoring of businesses, that is designed to divert commercial solid waste from businesses. 
4.  Nothing in this section is intended to prevent or limit the existing right of any business to donate, sell, or otherwise dispose of its recyclable materials as provided by Section 41952 of the Public Resources Code. 
B.  Any business and any multifamily residential dwelling of five or more units generating four or more cubic yards of solid waste per week shall recycle, compost, or otherwise divert its organic waste by taking one, or any combination, of the following actions. 
1.  Source separate organic waste from the solid waste stream, and subscribe with the City's franchise hauler for the pick-up of the organic materials separately from the solid waste to divert the materials from disposal. 
2.  Source separate organic waste from the solid waste and self-haul organic waste to a certified organic processing and recycling facility for diversion from disposal. 
a.  Each business subject to this section that does not subscribe with the City's franchise hauler for pick-up of its organic materials shall be responsible for ensuring and demonstrating its compliance with the requirements of this section to the City Manager or his or her designee with satisfactory proof of acceptable levels of organics recycling on a quarterly basis (March, June, September and December). 
b.  To comply with subsection B of this section, property owners of multifamily complexes may require its contracted landscapers to recycle the green waste materials and provide satisfactory proof that the materials are being properly recycled. 
3.  The City's franchise hauler shall implement a commercial organics recycling program that consists of education, outreach and monitoring of businesses, that is designed to divert organic materials from businesses. 
C.  Nothing in this section is intended to prevent or limit the existing right of any business to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of its organic materials as provided by Section 41952 of the Public Resources Code. 
D.  Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction, as defined by and punishable in the manner provided for in Section 1.12.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-985, § III, 6-17-19)  
6.16.030 - Garbage to be wrapped. 
All garbage shall be drained of all liquid and wrapped in sufficient thicknesses of paper or newspaper, or placed in plastic bags, so as not to create undue moisture, such condition to constitute a public nuisance as herein provided. This requirement is to apply prior to placing garbage in a receptacle with rubbish, refuse or other waste material as provided in Section 6.16.020 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6-8.03)  
6.16.040 - Frequency of pickup. 
All such combined residential garbage, refuse, rubbish and waste material shall be picked up at least once each week. All garbage, refuse, rubbish and waste material shall be picked up at least twice each week from apartments and planned unit developments with bin service. Townhouses and condominiums with individual unit receptacle service or with bin service shall be picked up at least once each week. 
Commercial or industrial garbage and refuse, rubbish or waste material shall be picked up as frequently as the volumes shall require, but in no case more than once each day, excluding Sundays and holidays. 
(Prior code § 6-8.04)  
6.16.050 - Fees for collection of garbage, refuse, rubbish and waste materials. 
A.  The City Council shall, by resolution from time to time, set the rate each householder or business or other commercial establishment shall pay for the collection of garbage, refuse, rubbish and waste material. 
B.  The City Manager or his/her designee shall provide for the collection of all charges herein provided for. 
C.  In the event any person shall fail to pay any charge herein provided, when the same becomes due, the City Manager or his/her designee shall pursue all remedies available for collection including, but not limited to, inclusion of such debts on the property tax billing. 
D.  All accounts shall be delinquent if not paid within 10 days of the date of the bill. All delinquent accounts are subject to stoppage of service without notice and service shall thereafter be resumed only on payment of the accumulated fees. 
E.  Failure to pay the charges for refuse collection within 30 days after the mailing of the bill therefor is declared to be a misdemeanor. 
F.  The monthly charge upon each residential, commercial and industrial unit shall be established by a resolution adopted by the City Council. 
(Editorially amended during 1999 codification; prior code § 6-8.05)  
6.16.060 - Special refuse problems. 
A.  Contagious Disease Refuse. The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed should be performed under the supervision and direction of the City Manager or his/her designee. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular collections. 
B.  Inflammable or Explosive Refuse. Highly inflammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in containers for regular collection but shall be disposed of as directed by the City Manager or his/her designee at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof. 
(Editorially amended during 1999 codification; prior code § 6-8.06)  
6.16.070 - Transporting of refuse through City by outside collectors. 
A.  Requirements for Vehicles. Collectors of refuse from outside of the City who desire to haul over the streets of the City shall use a watertight vehicle provided with a tight cover and so operated as to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and refuse from being blown, dropped or spilled. 
B.  Disposal. Disposal of refuse by persons so permitted under subsection A of this section shall be made outside the City limits, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
C.  Rules and Regulations. The City Manager or his /her designee shall have the authority to make such other reasonable regulations concerning the hauling of refuse over City streets by outside collectors as he/she shall deem necessary. 
(Editorially amended during 1999 codification; prior code § 6-8.07)  
6.16.080 - Public nuisance—Accumulation of garbage, refuse, rubbish, waste material and dead animals. 
The Council defines, declares and determines that the accumulation of garbage, refuse, rubbish, waste material and the remains of dead animals, in and about places of business, stores, dwellings and residences in the City, has become and now is a public nuisance and has become dangerous to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the City; and has become and now is an obstruction to the free use of property in the City so as to interfere and prevent the comfortable enjoyment of life and property of a considerable number of persons, residents of the City. 
(Prior code § 6-8.09)  
6.16.090 - Dead animals—Removal. 
Any animal or fowl which shall die within the City shall be immediately taken and removed by the owner thereof or the owner's agent and properly buried or disposed of in such manner that the same will not become obnoxious or a nuisance. 
(Prior code § 6-8.10)  
6.16.100 - Access to private property. 
The City Manager or other duly authorized representative of the City may visit all premises within the corporate limits of the City from time to time to examine sanitary conditions of said premises to determine whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with. 
(Prior code § 6-8.11)  
6.16.110 - Loose rubbish and waste material. 
All waste material or rubbish not suitable for placement in the receptacle required herein shall be bundled and tied as may be required by the City Manager or his/her designee. In any case, tree trimmings shall be tied in bundles of not more than 4 feet in length, and no such loose waste material or rubbish shall exceed 50 pounds in any one bundle; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed as interfering with building under any building permit or apply to wood stored for household use. 
(Editorially amended during 1999 codification; prior code § 6-8.12)  
6.16.120 - Rubbish, etc.—Existence on lot, sidewalk, etc., a nuisance. 
It is found and declared that the existence of refuse, garbage, waste material or rubbish upon any sidewalk or vacant lot within the City is a public nuisance and dangerous to the health and safety of the inhabitants of said City. 
(Prior code § 6-8.13)  
6.16.130 - Reimbursement to City for expenses of removal of rubbish, etc. 
The owner, agent or person having charge of or occupying any lot or premises within the City who shall fail to remove from such premises, or sidewalk immediately in front thereof or adjacent thereto, any things hereinbefore declared to be a nuisance in Sections 6.16.080 and 6.16.120 of this chapter, within five days after receiving written notice from the City Manager or his/her designee to remove refuse, garbage, waste material or rubbish, shall pay the extent of such removal by the City to the City of Montclair. Such expense shall be estimated by the City Manager or his/her designee on the basis of records of the City's present costs for such removal, and such expense shall be collectible by the City in a suit at law if such an expense incurred by the City for such removal is not voluntarily paid within 30 days upon receipt of notice stating such expense. 
(Editorially amended during 1999 codification; prior code § 6-8.14)  
6.16.140 - Scavenging prohibited. 
A.  Scavenging. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the act of scavenging, as defined in Section 6.02.010. 
B.  Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to: 
1.  A contractor or its agents or employees performing under authority of contract. 
2.  A City agent performing under the authority of the City. 
3.  The owner or legal user of a container in which solid waste and/or recyclable materials are disposed in including the owner's authorized agents and employees. 
C.  Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction, as defined by and punishable in the manner provided for in Section 1.12.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 13-934, § 1, 6-3-13; Ord. No. 19-985, § IV, 6-17-19)  
Chapter 6.20 - REPAIR, RESTORATION OR MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES 
Sections: 
 
6.20.010 - Repair, restoration or maintenance of vehicles in residential zones prohibited. 
It is unlawful to conduct or allow any repair, restoration or maintenance of any vehicle or part of any vehicle unless such vehicle or part of any vehicle is legally owned by and registered to the owner of the property upon which it is located, or to the immediate family of the property owner, or to the tenant or immediate family of the tenant of such property. Immediate family shall include the spouse, children, parents, brothers and sisters of said owner or tenant. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 5-21.01)  
6.20.020 - Permitted within enclosed building. 
Any permitted repair, restoration or maintenance of any vehicle or part of any vehicle requiring an exemption permit shall occur wholly within an area enclosed within a building or in a manner where it is not visible from the public right-of-way. 
(Prior code § 5-21.02)  
Chapter 6.22 - REGULATION OF SKATEBOARDS AND OTHER WHEELED RECREATIONAL DEVICES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-986, § I, adopted Sept. 3, 2019, amended ch. 6.22 and in so doing changed the title of said chapter, as set out herein. 
 
6.22.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, words, phrases, and terms used in this chapter shall have their ordinary meaning, unless otherwise provided as follows: 
Other wheeled recreational devices means non-motorized bicycles, scooters, in-line skates, roller skates, or wheelchairs. 
Roller skates or in-line skates, including rollerblades, means any shoe, boot, or other footwear to which one or more wheels are attached. 
Skate or skating means the use of a skateboard or other wheeled recreational device in a recreational manner. 
Skateboard means any platform of any composition or size to which two or more wheels four inches or less in diameter are attached, which is intended to be ridden or propelled by one or more persons standing or kneeling upon it and to which there is not affixed any seat or any other device or mechanism. 
Skateboard/skating area means a public skateboard park as that term is used in California Health and Safety Code Section 115800(d)(1) or any successor provision thereto and includes any facility, structure, or area designated by resolution of the City Council as a skateboard/skating area in which skateboarding and/or use of other wheeled recreational devices is permitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
Unauthorized wheeled devices means any motorized wheeled devices or other wheeled recreational device including, but not limited to, unicycles, go-carts, and wagons. 
(Ord. 04-851 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 19-986, § II, 9-3-19)  
6.22.020 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish regulations for the safe use of designated skateboard/skating areas within the City of Montclair. 
(Ord. 04-851 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 19-986, § II, 9-3-19)  
6.22.030 - Designated skateboard/skating areas. 
The City Council may designate certain areas as a skateboard/skating area by resolution. 
(Ord. 04-851 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 19-986, § II, 9-3-19)  
6.22.040 - Liability. 
The use of any skateboard/skating area is a hazardous recreational activity within the meaning of California Government Code Sections 831.7(a) and (b). Subject to the provisions of that code section, the City of Montclair may not be held liable for any injury incurred by any person participating in any hazardous recreational activity. Skateboard/skating areas are not supervised on a regular basis and all users assume all risks of injury in utilizing the areas. 
(Ord. 04-851 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 19-986, § II, 9-3-19)  
6.22.050 - Regulations applicable to the use of designated skateboard/skating areas. 
A.  No person shall skate or otherwise be present within any skateboard/skating areas at any time other than during the established hours of operation. Hours of operation shall be posted. The hours are subject to change without prior notice. 
B.  No person shall use any skateboard/skating area for any use other than skating. 
C.  Each person using the skateboard/skating area must wear a shirt and proper safety equipment including a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads. All such safety equipment must be functional and protective, properly sized, and designed for skating. 
D.  The use of any other wheeled devices including, but not limited to unicycles, go-carts or wagons is prohibited. No person shall ride or use any unauthorized wheeled device within any skateboard/skating area. 
E.  No person shall possess or be under the influence of alcohol or drugs of any kind within a skateboard/skating area or in surrounding park areas. Tobacco products are prohibited in the skateboard/skating area and surrounding park areas. 
F.  No person shall use, consume, or have in his/her possession or control food or beverages within the skateboard/skating area. 
G.  No person shall litter in any skateboard/skating areas. All persons using a skateboard/skating area must place any trash created or brought to the skateboard/skating area in refuse containers provided by the City. If no refuse container is provided, each person shall be responsible for removing and disposing of such items in an appropriate manner. 
H.  Spectators are not allowed in the skateboard/skating area. 
I.  No person shall have a dangerous weapon in his/her possession in the skateboard/skating area. Deadly weapons shall include, but are not limited to guns, knives, bats/clubs or martial arts weapons. 
J.  No person shall graffiti, tag, or attach any stickers or unauthorized signs in or upon the skateboard/skating area or anywhere in the surrounding park areas. 
K.  No person shall use or engage in profanity, reckless or boisterous behavior (including, but not limited, to tandem riding, punching, horseplay and bullying), or any other activity that could endanger the safety of persons using the skateboard/skating area. 
L.  No person shall ride, or permit to be ridden, any skateboard, roller skates, or other wheeled recreational device in a skateboard/skating area in a reckless manner or with willful disregard for the safety of other persons or property. 
M.  No person shall skate on curbs, sidewalks, fences, railings, and/or driveways of any City-owned property surrounding or adjoining a skateboard/skating area. 
N.  No person shall skate, run, stand on, jump from, or otherwise employ any exterior wall or fence surface in the skateboard/skating area. 
O.  Glass containers or other glass products are prohibited within a skateboard/skating area. 
P.  No person shall ride, operate, or use a skateboard or other wheeled recreational device unless such equipment is in good repair at all times during use. 
Q.  No obstacles of any kind, including, but not limited to, ramps or jumps may be placed in the skateboard/skating area. 
R.  No portion of the skateboard/skating area shall be modified, altered, or added to in any manner. 
S.  The skateboard/skating area shall not be used if any hazardous conditions exist, including, but not limited to, wet pavement, debris, and/or significant cracks, breaks, or other irregularities in the skating surface of the skateboard/skating area. 
T.  All organized events utilizing the skateboard/skating area are prohibited without the prior written approval of the Community Development Director or his/her designee. 
U.  No animals are allowed in the skateboard/skating area. 
V.  Only one person is permitted to use a skateboard, roller skate, or other wheeled recreational device at any given time. By way of clarification and without limitation, tandem riding is expressly prohibited. 
W.  The City is not responsible for items that are lost or stolen within the skateboard/skating area. 
X.  Any person suffering an injury within the skateboard/skating area must promptly report the injury to the City of Montclair. 
(Ord. 04-851 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 19-986, § II, 9-3-19)  
6.22.060 - Signs required. 
In order to provide reasonable notice to the public, signs referring to this chapter shall be posted in one or more conspicuous areas at or near the entrance to the skateboard/skating area, setting forth the rules and regulations established in this chapter, including prohibited activities, and stating that any person failing to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be subject to citation (Chapter 1.12 of the Montclair Municipal Code). 
(Ord. 04-851 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 19-986, § II, 9-3-19)  
6.22.070 - Ejection and exclusion from designated skateboard/skating area. 
A.  Any person who causes or aids and abets in the commission of any of the following at any area designated by the City Council as a skateboard/skating area may be ejected from said area and public parks within the City of Montclair in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.12.250: 
1.  Interference with any City employee in the performance of the employee's duties; 
2.  Interference with the use and enjoyment by any other person of the designated skateboard/skating area; or 
3.  Commission of any public offense within a designated skateboard/skating area. 
(Ord. No. 17-962, § 1, 2-6-17; Ord. No. 19-986, § II, 9-3-19)  
6.22.080 - Closure of skateboard/skating area. 
Upon order of the City Manager, Chief of Police, or designee, any area designated by the City Council as a skateboard/skating area may be closed on a temporary basis when violations of this chapter occur. 
(Ord. No. 19-986, § II, 9-3-19)  
Chapter 6.24 - SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER SKATES 
Sections: 
 
6.24.010 - Roller skating and skateboarding prohibited where posted—Public property. 
A.  No person shall skate, ride, or be propelled upon roller skates or operate a skateboard upon or along any walkway, parking lot, tennis court, or basketball court in the following areas: 
1.  Any City park, excluding the street-side sidewalks bordering the exterior of that park and parking lot; 
2.  Civic Center complex comprised of the publicly owned buildings and property bounded on the north by Benito Street, on the south by the private property boundary line, on the west side by Fremont Avenue and the east by the east border of Alma Hofman Park. Specifically excluded from enforcement of this section shall be the public street-side sidewalks bordering the exterior of the Civic Center complex; 
3.  Such other public property of the City where the City Council has prohibited the same. 
B.  The prohibition set forth in this section shall not apply until notice has been provided in accordance with Section 6.24.030. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1802)  
6.24.020 - Roller skating and skateboarding prohibited where posted—Private property. 
A.  No person shall skate, ride, or be propelled upon or operate a skateboard upon or along or over any privately owned property in the City where the owner, manager, or other person in charge has prohibited the same. 
B.  The prohibition set forth in this section shall not apply until notice has been provided in accordance with Section 6.24.030. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1803)  
6.24.030 - Posting procedure. 
A.  To prohibit the activity, official signs shall be posted prohibiting the use of skateboards and roller skates on the property. Such official signs must be posted in plain view at all entrances to the property or at all entrances to that portion of the property for which the use of skateboards and roller skates is prohibited. This procedure shall apply to both public and private property. On private property, the property owner is responsible for obtaining the signs in compliance with this chapter. 
B.  The signs shall be not less than 18 inches by 24 inches in size, with lettering of not less than 1 inch in height which prohibit the operation of skateboards or roller skates. The sign shall state that violators may be subject to citation per Section 6.24.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1804)  
Chapter 6.25 - CAMPING 
Sections: 
 
6.25.010 - Camp or camping facility. 
Camp or camping facility means tents, huts, other temporary physical shelters (whether of natural or synthetic material), cots, beds, bedding material, hammocks, bedrolls, or fire pits. 
(Ord. 02-823 § 1 (part))  
6.25.020 - Camping prohibited. 
No person shall erect, maintain, or occupy a camping facility for the purposes of living accommodations on any street, sidewalk, other public place, on or in any place open to the public, or on privately owned property without the express consent of the owner. 
(Ord. 02-823 § 1 (part))  
6.25.030 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as described in Section 1.12.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 02-823 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 6.26 - SPLASH PAD AT ALMA HOFMAN PARK 
Sections: 
 
6.26.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, words, phrases, and terms used in this chapter shall have their ordinary meaning, unless otherwise provided as follows: 
Director means the Director of Public Works or other designee. 
(Ord. No. 10-917, § 1, 10-4-10)  
6.26.020 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish rules and regulations for use of the Splash Pad at Alma Hofman Park in the City of Montclair. 
(Ord. No. 10-917, § 1, 10-4-10)  
6.26.030 - Hours of operation—Closure. 
The Splash Pad shall be open from 10:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. from Memorial Day through Labor Day or as otherwise posted by the Director. The Splash Pad is subject to closure without notice at any time for maintenance or as otherwise determined by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 10-917, § 1, 10-4-10)  
6.26.040 - Rules and regulations. 
Swimwear is required for any person using the Splash Pad. All children must be supervised by an adult at all times. Users of the Splash Pad play at their own risk. Other rules and regulations for the use of the Splash Pad may be established by the Director as he or she deems appropriate, provided that signs describing such rules and regulations are placed and posted pursuant to Section 6.26.050. All persons using the Splash Pad shall comply with all rules and regulations specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 10-917, § 1, 10-4-10)  
6.26.050 - Signage and posting requirements. 
In order to provide reasonable notice to the public, the Director shall place and post signs in one or more conspicuous and visible areas at or near the Splash Pad specifying the rules and regulations established pursuant to Section 6.26.040. The signs required pursuant to this section shall cite the respective code section being invoked. 
(Ord. No. 10-917, § 1, 10-4-10)  
6.26.060 - Enforcement. 
Violation of any of the provisions of this section may be grounds for removal from the Splash Pad. Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to citation or other applicable enforcement authority available to the City. Criminal violations of this chapter shall be punishable as infractions. 
(Ord. No. 10-917, § 1, 10-4-10)  
Chapter 6.28 - UNIFORM ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH CODE 
Sections: 
 
6.28.010 - Adoption of Uniform Environmental Health Code. 
Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Sections 480 et seq., 500 et seq., 1155.5, Title 17 of the California Administrative Code and other relevant State law for the protection of the environmental public health, the issuance of permits and violation of such regulations, there is adopted by the City of Montclair as its Environmental Health Code (EHC) that certain code known as the Uniform Environmental Health Code, being Chapters 1—11, Division 3, Title III, of the San Bernardino County Code, except as provided in Section 6.28.020 of this chapter. The City designates the San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) as the enforcement agency for the purpose of this Environmental Health Code and all State law pertaining to environmental health. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.6, a copy of said code is on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Montclair and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-3.01)  
6.28.020 - Exceptions to adopted code. 
The Uniform Environmental Health Code of San Bernardino County chapters are deleted as follows: 
Chapter 8, Article 1 — Refuse Storage is deleted. 
Chapter 8, Article 2 — Refuse Collection is deleted. 
Chapter 8, Article 4 — Sewage Holding Tanks is deleted. 
Chapter 8, Article 6 — Designated Maintenance Areas is deleted, 
Chapter 8, Article 7 — Operation of Multiple Ownership Septic Systems is deleted. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-3.02)  
6.28.030 - Remedies and penalties. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or entity to deny access, interfere with, prevent, restrict, obstruct or hinder the Department of Environmental Health Services' (DEHS) employees or agents acting within the scope of their duty or agency. Offering physical resistance or bodily attack upon authorized representatives of DEHS acting within the scope of their duty or agency is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in the County jail for not less than 10 days, without the alternative of a fine. 
B.  In addition to criminal prosecution, civil action and every other remedy or penalty provided by law, public nuisances may be abated or enjoined in an action brought by DEHS or, under circumstances immediately dangerous to public health or safety, may be summarily abated by DEHS enforcement officers as provided herein or otherwise in the manner provided by law for the summary abatement of public nuisances. 
C.  Except where punishable as a felony under State law, any person or entity that violates any provision of this Environmental Health Code ("EHC") shall be guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this Code. Any person or entity who is convicted of a violation of this EHC by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be liable to the San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) for all necessary costs incurred in investigation, discovery, analysis, inspection, cleanup, and other actual costs incurred by the DEHS or its agents pertaining to the violation. 
D.  Each day or portion thereof in violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. The owner, manager and operator of every activity or facility subject to the jurisdiction of this EHC shall be responsible for any violation by any employee of any of its provisions. Payment of any penalty or serving any term of imprisonment herein provided shall not relieve any person or entity from the responsibility of correcting condition constituting the violation. 
(Ord. 06-889 § 10; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-3.03)  
6.28.040 - Unlawful to place poisons, medicines and similar material in waste or garbage receptacles. 
No person shall place or deposit, in any waste or garbage receptacle for collection pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, hypodermic needles, medicines, pills, poisons, caustic acids, explosives, condemned food products, animal excreta, dead animals, or similar dangerous or harmful substances. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-3.04)  
6.28.050 - Special provisions relating to medical supplies. 
Hypodermic needles and similar medical instruments shall not be disposed of in the normal manner but may be deposited in waste or garbage receptacles only if such instruments are rendered totally inoperative. Medicines, pills, poisons, and similar medical supplies shall either be deposited in the sanitary sewers or stored inside a building for special handling by the refuse collector. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-3.05)  
Title 7 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 7.02 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
7.02.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this Title, the following definitions shall apply. For purposes of Chapter 7.24, these definitions shall supersede any other definitions of the same terms elsewhere in this Code. 
Abandoned shopping cart means any shopping cart that has been removed from the premises of the owner/business establishment without written permission of the owner of the shopping cart or business establishment, regardless of whether the shopping cart has been left on either private or public property. Written permission shall be valid for a period not to exceed 72 hours (other than shopping carts which have been removed with written permission for repair or maintenance). 
Abandoned structure means real property, or any building or structure thereon, that is vacant and is maintained in an uninhabitable condition or a condition of disrepair or deterioration as evidenced by the existence of public nuisances therein; or that is vacant and under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending tax assessor's lien sale; or that is vacant and has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure. Factors that may also be considered in a determination of an abandoned structure include, without limitation: present operability and functional utility; the presence of nonfunctional, broken, or missing doors or windows, such that entry therein by unauthorized persons is not deterred; the existence of real property tax delinquencies for the land upon which the structure is located; age and degree of obsolescence of the structure; and the cost of rehabilitation or repair versus its market value. 
Abandoned personal property means and refers to any item, object, thing, material or substance that, by its condition of damage, deterioration, disrepair, nonuse, obsolescence, or location on public real property or on private real property causes a reasonable person to conclude that the owner has permanently relinquished all right, title, claim and possession thereto or that the object, thing, material or substance cannot be used for its intended or designed purpose. Abandoned personal property may include junk and vehicles. 
Abatement costs means all costs, fees, and expenses, incidental or otherwise, incurred by the City in investigating and abating a public nuisance. 
Alcoholic beverage , when applied to alcohol/intoxication, means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of 1 percent or more of alcohol by volume, and which is fit for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. 
Attractive nuisance means any condition, device, equipment, instrument, item, or machine that is unsafe, unprotected, and may prove detrimental to minors whether in a structure or in outdoor areas of developed or undeveloped real property. This includes, without limitation, any abandoned or open and accessible wells, shafts, basements, or excavations; any abandoned refrigerators and abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris, or vegetation that may prove hazardous or dangerous to inquisitive minors. An attractive nuisance shall also include pools, standing water, or excavations containing water that are unfenced or otherwise lack an adequate barrier, thereby creating a risk of drowning, or that are hazardous or unsafe because of the existence of any condition rendering such water to be clouded, unclear, or injurious to health because of, without limitation, any of the following: bacterial growth, infectious or toxic agents, algae, insect remains, animal remains, rubbish, refuse, debris, or waste of any kind. 
Building means any structure designed, used, or maintained for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, equipment, or property of any kind and shall also include structures wherein things may be grown, made, produced, kept, handled, stored, or disposed of and all appendages, accessories, apparatus, appliances, and equipment installed as a part thereof. 
City means the City of Montclair. 
City Manager means the Montclair City Manager or designee thereof. 
City personnel means any Montclair City employee, representative, agent, or contractor designated by the City Manager to abate a public nuisance. 
Code, Codes, and Montclair Municipal Code means the Montclair Municipal Code and any code, law, or regulation incorporated therein by reference and any adopted and uncodified ordinances. 
Code Enforcement fees means fees imposed by the City to defray its costs of Code Enforcement actions including, but not limited to, the time and other resources of public officials expended by them in identifying, inspecting, investigating, seeking, or causing the abatement of a violation at a residential structure or property. These include, but are not limited to, site inspections; drafting reports; taking photographs; procuring other evidence; engaging in meetings, conferences, and communications with responsible persons, their agents, or representatives concerning a violation as well as with attorneys for the City at any time; and appearances before judicial officers or reviewing authorities during the pendency of a judicial proceeding and other appearances at such judicial or administrative hearings. The time and resources that public officials further expend to confirm that a residential structure remains free of public nuisances while a responsible person is on probation to a court or when a matter concerning a residential structure remains pending before a reviewing authority in an administrative action shall also constitute Code Enforcement actions. For purposes of this definition: 
1.  Residential structure and property shall mean and include all structures and premises that are regulated by the California State Housing Law (California Health and Safety Code Division 13, Part 1.5, Section 17910 et seq.) and any future amendments thereto, as well as any property within a residential zone as designated by the Montclair Zoning Ordinance. These include, but are not limited to, apartment houses, hotels, motels, and dwellings and residential buildings and structures thereto. 
2.  Violation shall mean and include a public nuisance as described in this chapter or any condition, activity, or use that is caused, allowed to exist, or maintained (because of an affirmative act, inaction, or omission) by a responsible person in violation of any other provision, regulation, or requirement of this Code or any applicable county, state, or federal laws or regulations. 
Code Enforcement Officer means any individual employed by the City with primary enforcement authority for City Codes, or his or her duly authorized representative(s). 
Commercial vehicle means any vehicle of a type required to be registered under the State of California Vehicle Code used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or profit or designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. Passenger vehicles that are not used for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or profit, house cars (motor homes), and vanpool vehicles are not commercial vehicles. 
Compliance period means the period of time and/or required schedule set forth in a notice of abatement and/or an order of abatement within which all nuisance abatement actions referenced in such notice of abatement and/or order of abatement must be completed. 
Controlled substances means any substance that is declared by state or federal law to be a controlled substance. 
Diligently prosecute means the exercise of reasonable efforts to legally effectuate the vacation of the rented premises. Failure to succeed in causing the premises to be vacated shall not constitute a failure to diligently prosecute, provided the landlord exercised reasonable effort in such prosecution. 
Drug-related nuisance means any activity related to the possession, sale, use, or manufacture of a controlled substance that creates an unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property, and/or safety of residents of the premises or within a 1000-foot radius from the boundary line of the premises. These activities include, but are not limited to, any activity commonly associated with illegal drug dealing, such as noise; steady traffic, day and night, to a particular unit or portion of the premises; barricaded units; possession and/or display of weapons; drug loitering as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11532; or other drug-related activities. 
Electronic communication shall have the same meaning as defined in Subsection 12 of Section 2510 of Title 18 of the United States Code, except that electronic communication, for purposes of this definition, shall not be limited to electronic communication that affects interstate or foreign commerce. 
Emergency , when applied to curfew and loitering, means unforeseen circumstances or a situation that calls for immediate action that includes, but is not limited to, providing aid to those injured, preventing injury or loss of property, reporting these circumstances to authorities, and in enlisting the assistance of others for these purposes. 
Fire hazard shall include, but shall not be limited to, any device, equipment, waste, vegetation, condition, thing, or act that is in such a condition that it increases or could cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service regularly engaged in preventing, suppressing, or extinguishing fire or that otherwise provides a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause or any device, equipment, waste, vegetation, condition, thing, or act that could obstruct, delay, hinder, or interfere with or may become the cause of obstruction, delay, or hindrance of, the operations of the Fire Department or other emergency service personnel or the egress of the occupants in the event of fire. 
Gang-related crime means any crime motivated by gang membership in which the perpetrator, victim, or intended victim is a known member of a gang including, but not limited to, those crimes committed with the intent to publicize a criminal street gang's dominance over certain territory in order to intimidate nonmembers of the gang from entering, remaining in, or using the territory or adjacent area. 
Guardian , when applied to curfew and loitering, means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor; or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
Hazardous materials means any material or substance of any kind that is declared by any federal, state, or local law, ordinance, or regulation to be composed of hazardous material. 
Hearing Officer means the city employee or representative appointed by the City Manager, or a designee thereof, to hear all timely appeals from a notice of abatement. 
Illegal drug activity means a violation of any of the provisions of Chapter 6 (commencing with Section 11350) or Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section 11400) of the Health and Safety Code or any successor provisions thereto and include any individual, partnership of any kind, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture, or other organization, however formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns or any combination of such persons. "Person" also includes any public entity or agency that acts as an owner in the City. 
Immediate family means any spouse, whether by marriage or not, parent, child, any person related by consanguinity of affinity within the second degree, or any property that is not real property, and includes, without limitation, any appliance, article, device, equipment, item, material, product, substance, or vehicle. 
Incidental expenses shall include, but shall not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the City, such as preparation of notices, specifications, and contracts; inspection of work; costs of printing and mailings required hereunder; costs of any filing and/or recordation with the County Recorder's Office or other governmental agency; and the costs of administration and legal services. 
Inoperable vehicle means and include, without limitation, any vehicle that is incapable of being lawfully driven on a highway. Factors that may be used to determine this condition include, without limitation, vehicles that have a "planned non-operational" status with the California Department of Motor Vehicles, vehicles lacking a current registration, a working engine, transmission, wheels, inflated tires, doors, windshield or any other part or equipment necessary for its legal and safe operation on a highway or any other public right-of-way. 
Junk means and include, but is not limited to, any cast off, damaged, discarded, junked, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, worn out, or wrecked appliance, device, equipment, furniture, fixture, furnishing, object, material, substance, tire, or thing of any kind or composition. Junk may include abandoned personal property as well as any form of debris, refuse, rubbish, trash, or waste. Factors that may be considered in a determination that personal property is junk include, without limitation, its: 
1.  Condition of damage, deterioration, disrepair, or nonuse; 
2.  Approximate age and degree of obsolescence; 
3.  Location; 
4.  Present operability, functional utility, and status of registration or licensing, where applicable; 
5.  Cost of rehabilitation or repair versus its market value. 
Junkyard means real property of any zoning classification on which junk is kept, maintained, placed, or stored to such a degree that it constitutes a principal use or condition on said premises. The existence of a junkyard is not a nuisance when it is an expressly permitted use in the applicable zone and it is in full compliance with all provisions of the Montclair Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable provisions of the Montclair Municipal Code as well as all future amendments and additions thereto. 
Landlord means any owner of record, lessor, or sublessor (including any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity) who leases a rental unit for a specified term or permits a periodic tenancy, a tenancy at will, or a tenancy at sufferance or who otherwise receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use of any rental property or the agent, representative, or successor of any of the foregoing. 
Notice of abatement means a "Notice of Public Nuisance and Intention to Abate with City personnel," as described in Section 7.24.060 of this chapter. 
Order of abatement means an order issued by a Hearing Officer following an appeal of a notice of abatement. 
Owner means and include any person having legal title to, or who leases, rents, occupies, or has charge, control, or possession of any real property in the City including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the San Bernardino County Assessor's Office. Owners include persons with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, or who are court-appointed administrators, conservators, guardians, or receivers. An owner of personal property shall be any person who has legal title, charge, control, or possession of such property. 
Parent , when applied to curfew and loitering, means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of a minor. 
Person means and include any individual, partnership of any kind, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture, or other organization, however formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns or any combination of such persons. "Person" also includes any public entity or agency that acts as an owner in the City. 
Personal property means property that is not real property and includes, without limitation, any appliance, article, device, equipment, item, material, product, substance, or vehicle. 
Premises means any rental unit and the land on which it and other buildings of the complex are located and common areas including, but not limited to, parking facilities, streets, alleyways, stairwells, and elevators. 
Public nuisance means anything that is, or likely to become, injurious or detrimental to health, safety, or welfare or is offensive to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any sidewalk, public park, square, street, or highway. All conditions hereafter enumerated in this chapter, or that otherwise violate or are contrary to any provision of the Montclair Municipal Code, are public nuisances by definition and declaration; and said enumerated conditions shall not, in any manner, be construed to be exclusive or exhaustive. A public nuisance shall also exist when a person fails to comply with any condition of a City approval, entitlement, license, or permit or when an activity on, or use of, real property violates, or is contrary to, any provision or requirement of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
Public park, street, alley, highway, or other public place , when applied to alcohol/intoxication means and refers to only those public parks, streets, alleys, highways, or other public places within the corporate limits of the City. 
Public place or place open to the public , when applied to curfew and loitering, means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, parks, restaurants, arcades, theaters, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, malls and shops. 
Real property or premises means any real property owned by any person and/or any building, structure, or other improvement thereon or portions thereof. "Real Property" or "premises" includes any parkway or unimproved public easement abutting or adjacent to such real property, whether or not owned by the City of Montclair. 
Remain , when applied to curfew and loitering, means to (1) linger, stay, or be present; or (2) fail to leave when requested to do so by a peace officer, owner, operator, or other person in control of the public place or place open to the public. 
Rental unit means any dwelling unit, efficiency unit, guest room, and/or suites as defined in the Montclair Zoning Ordinance including, but not limited to, any single and multifamily residence, duplex, and/or condominium in the City of Montclair. This term shall also include any mobile home, whether rent is paid for the mobile home, the land upon which the mobile home is located, or both. It shall also mean any recreational vehicle, as defined in California Civil Code Section 799.29, if located in a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park, whether rent is paid for the recreational vehicle and the land upon which it is located or rent is paid for the land alone. 
Responsible adult , when applied to curfew and loitering, means a person at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
Responsible person means any person, whether as an owner as defined in this chapter or otherwise, that allows, causes, creates, maintains, suffers, or permits a public nuisance, or any violation of the Montclair Municipal Code or county or state law or regulation thereof, to exist or continue by any act or the omission of any act or duty. A responsible person shall also include employees, principals, joint venturers, officers, agents, and/or other persons acting in concert with, or at the direction of and/or with the knowledge and/or consent of, the owner and/or occupant of the lot, building, or structure on, or in which, a public nuisance or violation exists or existed. 
The actions or inactions of a responsible person's agent, employee, representative, or contractor may be attributed to that responsible person. 
Shopping cart means a basket that is mounted on wheels or a similar device provided by a business establishment for use by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind, including, but not limited to, grocery store shopping carts. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice, wall, fence, or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
Tenant means any tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee, any person entitled to use or occupancy of a rental unit, or any other person residing in a rental unit. 
Threat of violent crime means any statement made by a tenant or at his or her request by his or her agent to any person who is on the premises or within a 1000-foot radius from the boundary line of the premises, or to the owner of the premises or his or her agent, threatening commission of a crime that will result in death or great bodily injury to another person, with the specific intent that the statement is to be taken as a threat, even if there is no intent of actually carrying it out, when, on its face and under the circumstances in which it is made, it is so unequivocal, immediate, and specific as to convey to the person threatened a gravity of purpose and an immediate prospect of execution of the threat and, thereby, causes that person reasonably to be in sustained fear for his or her own safety or for his or that of his or her immediate family. Such a threat includes any statement made verbally, in writing, or by means of an electronic communication device and regarding which a police report has been completed. A threat of violent crime under this chapter shall not include a crime that is committed against a person who is residing in the same rental unit as the person making the threat. 
Vacant means real property or any building or structure thereon that is not legally occupied. Factors that may be used, either alone or in combination, to determine whether real property, or building or structures thereon, is vacant include, but shall not be limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, fliers, and/or mail; past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk, and/or other debris; the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds, and/or shutters; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential and/or commercial furnishings consistent with the permitted uses within the zone of the real property; and statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant. However, the existence of such factors, either alone or in combination, may not, in and of themselves, be conclusive as to the occupation or vacancy status of such real property. 
Vehicle means any device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway or other public right-of-way and includes all vehicles as defined by the California Vehicle Code and all future amendments thereto. "Vehicle" does not include devices (i) that are propelled exclusively by human power, such as bicycles and wheelchairs; or (ii) those that are used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Violent crime means any crime involving a gun, a deadly weapon, or serious bodily injury and for which a police report has been completed. A violent crime under this Section shall not include a crime that is committed against a person residing in the same rental unit as the person committing the crime. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code §§ 4-5.01, 5-2.601) 
(Ord. No. 09-907, § 1, 3-2-09; Ord. No. 09-911, § 2, 1-4-10; Ord. No. 17-963, § 1, 2-6-17)  
Chapter 7.04 - GRAFFITI PREVENTION, PROHIBITION, AND REMOVAL 
Sections: 
 
7.04.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The City Council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Graffiti on public or private property is a condition of blight that not only depreciates the value of property that has been the target of such vandalism but also depreciates the value of the adjacent and surrounding properties so as to create a negative impact upon the entire community. 
B.  Graffiti has been found to be associated with criminal activity and delinquency. It is also a means of identification and intimidation utilized by gangs, and its presence may further gang-related activities. The power of graffiti to create fear within the community and blight upon the landscape, devaluing property and detracting from a sense of community enjoyed by the residents of the City of Montclair, goes beyond the cost of cleanup or removal. Not only is graffiti a criminal act of vandalism, but it is also a social crime upon the quality of life and freedom from intimidation that residents desire in their neighborhoods. 
C.  Acts of graffiti are often committed by persons under the age of 18 years using aerosol containers of spray paint and/or felt-tip markers. These implements of graffiti are frequently stolen from retail stores by minors; and, as such, retail stores that display and/or sell these implements should be prohibited from selling them to minors and should be required to take reasonable steps to prevent their theft. 
D.  California Government Code Section 38771 authorizes the City to declare what constitutes a nuisance. Section 53069.3 further authorizes the City, under certain circumstances, to provide for the removal of graffiti and other inscribed materials from private as well as public property. The City Council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance and, unless the City causes it to be removed from public and private property, it tends to remain. Other properties may then become the target of graffiti with the result that the entire neighborhood is affected and becomes a less desirable place in which to live. 
E.  The City of Montclair appropriates funds for the removal of graffiti from privately owned real or personal property located within the City. While this public service benefits the entire community, it provides no incentive to private property owners to deal directly with the problem and to formulate their own ideas, solutions, and mitigation measures to avoid being victimized time and time again. The perpetual provision of free graffiti removal services is not an effective deterrent to the escalation of graffiti vandalism and is not a cost-effective use of public funds. 
F.  It is the purpose and intent of the City Council of Montclair, through the adoption of this chapter, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement including the application of graffiti on public and private property, walls, vehicles, and other structures. Such acts are destructive of the rights and values of private property owners as well as of the entire community. It is the further intent of the City Council, through the adoption of this chapter, to provide notice to all of those who disregard the property rights of others, that the Montclair Police Department, Code Enforcement Unit, City Attorney/Prosecutor's Office, and the District Attorney's Office will strictly enforce the law and vigorously prosecute those persons engaging in the defacement of public or private properties. 
(Ord. 07-901 § 2 (part))  
7.04.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Adhesive label means any so called "bumper sticker," sheet of paper, fabric, plastic, or other material with an adhesive backing. 
Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint, undercoating, spray insulation, or other substance capable of defacing property. 
City means the City of Montclair. 
Costs means and includes, but are not limited to, court costs, attorneys' fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the City in identifying and apprehending the person who created, caused, or committed the graffiti or other inscribed material on the publicly or privately owned permanent real or personal property within the City. 
Enforcement officer means any City official authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to, the Montclair Police Department, Code Enforcement Unit, and Public Works Department as well as any contract agent authorized by the City to abate graffiti nuisances described in this chapter. 
Felt-tip marker means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip that, at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth of an inch and that contains an ink or other pigmented liquid. 
Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark, or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on or otherwise glued, posted, or affixed to or on any surface, regardless of the nature of the material, to the extent that the same was not authorized in advance by the owner thereof. 
Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container; a felt-tip marker; gum label; paint stick; crayon; etching tool capable of scarring glass, metal, concrete, wood, or other surface; etching cream or other such solvent; adhesive label; or any other device capable of being used to leave a visible mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width upon any surface of any material. 
Paint stick or graffiti stick means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, caulk, or similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and, upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width. 
Responsible Party means any person who owns, possesses, occupies, or otherwise has responsibility for the repair or maintenance of real property at which there exists graffiti on any building, structure, tree, shrub, sidewalk, curb, or vehicle. Responsible Party shall also include any minor (or parent or guardian of a minor) or other person who causes or permits the application of graffiti or other inscribed material. 
Retrofitting means and includes, without limitation, the restoration, modification, or alteration of a building or structure to remove graffiti, to prevent or inhibit the recurrence of graffiti, or to return the building or structure to an acceptable, usable, unblemished, unblighted, or original state or condition. 
Vehicle means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails. 
(Ord. 07-901 § 2 (part))  
7.04.030 - Application of graffiti prohibited. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to apply graffiti to any building, structure, tree, shrub, curb, or vehicle located within the City. It shall also be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to apply or affix any adhesive label to any building, structure, tree, shrub, curb, or vehicle not owned or lawfully possessed by such person, or without advance authorization by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. 07-901 § 2 (part))  
7.04.040 - Possession of graffiti implements by minors prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person under the age of 18 years to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement or other instrument as described hereinbelow while upon private property, without the prior written consent of the owner of such property, or upon a public highway, street, alleyway, park, playground, swimming pool, public building, or any area open to the public: 
1.  Any spray can containing anything other than a solution that can be removed by water after it dries. 
2.  Any spray can tips, other than those affixed to a spray can, not meeting the description of subsection (A)(1) of this section. 
3.  Any marker pens containing anything other than a solution that can be removed with water after it dries. 
4.  Any container holding anything other than solution that can be removed with water after it dries and that can be used to apply that solution. This includes acrylic paint tubes, oil paint tubes, shoe dyes, paint sticks, and bottles and cans of such solutions. 
5.  Objects capable of etching glass or ceramic surfaces including, but not limited to, bits, grinding stones, glass cutters, scribes, broken spark plug ceramic, chisels, and any solution capable of etching these surfaces when applied including acids and etching baths. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person under the age of 18 years attending or traveling to or from school, at which time the minor is enrolled, if the minor is participating in a class at said school that has a written requirement of the class for the possession of the implements or instruments described in this section. The burden of proof in any prosecution for a violation of this section shall be upon the minor student to establish enrollment in a class that requires the possession of a graffiti implement or other instrument described hereinabove. 
(Ord. 07-901 § 2 (part))  
7.04.050 - Possession of graffiti implements prohibited in designated public places. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while in or upon any public park, playground, swimming pool, recreation facility, or while in, or within, 10 feet of an overpass, underpass, bridge, abutment, storm drain, or similar types of infrastructure not normally used by or accessible to the public, except as may be authorized by the City. 
(Ord. 07-901 § 2 (part))  
7.04.060 - Furnishing graffiti implements to minors prohibited. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, lend, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, lended, or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to any person under the age of 18 years without the consent of the parent or other lawfully designated guardian, which consent shall be given in advance in writing. 
(Ord. 07-901 § 2 (part))  
7.04.070 - Sale of graffiti implements at swap meets and yard sales prohibited. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 7.04.080 of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to sell, give, trade, lend, or exchange, or display for sale, trade, lend, or exchange, any graffiti implement at any swap meet, open-air market, flea market, or yard sale. 
(Ord. 07-901 § 2 (part))  
7.04.080 - Accessibility to graffiti implements. 
A.  Display Requirements. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person or business engaged in a commercial enterprise to display for sale, trade, loan, or exchange any graffiti implement except in an area from which the public shall be securely precluded without employee assistance. Two such acceptable methods for displaying graffiti implements for sale shall be by containment in: (1) a completely enclosed cabinet or other storage device that shall be permanently affixed to a building or structure and that shall, at all times except during access by authorized representatives, remain securely locked; or (2) in an enclosed area behind a sales or service counter from which the public is precluded from entry. Nothing herein shall relieve such person or business entity from, at all times, complying with the requirements of California Penal Code Section 594.1(c) by posting signs as described therein. 
1.  Any person or business engaged in the retail sale of any graffiti implement must display at a conspicuous location a legible sign measuring not less than 12 inches by 12 inches with letters at least ½ inch in height, which states: 
"It is unlawful for any person to sell or give to any individual under the age of eighteen years, without prior written authorization from a parent or legal guardian, any implement or other device capable of being used to deface real or personal property. Any person who maliciously defaces real or personal property is guilty of vandalism that is punishable by a fine, imprisonment, or both." 
B.  Storage Requirements. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person or business engaged in the commercial enterprise of selling, providing, lending, or trading graffiti implements to store any graffiti implement except in either: (1) a completely enclosed room that shall at all times, except during access or actual occupancy by the owner or authorized adult representative of the owner, remain securely locked; or (2) in a completely enclosed cabinet or other storage device that shall be permanently affixed to a building or building structure and that shall at all times, except during access by the owner or an adult representative of the owner, remain securely locked. For purpose of this section, an owner or authorized representative of the owner shall be deemed to actually occupy a room even during brief periods of absence if the room is contained within a larger structure that is occupied by the owner. 
C.  Civil Responsibility for Wrongful Display or Storage. In addition to the penalties provided in Section 7.04.140 of this chapter, any person or business that displays or stores or permits the display or storage of any graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of this section shall be personally liable for any and all costs, including attorneys fees and court costs, incurred by any party in connection with the removal of graffiti, the repair of any property containing graffiti, or such party's prosecution of a civil claim for reimbursement or damages resulting from such graffiti removal or property repair arising from the use by any person of such wrongfully displayed or stored graffiti implement in violation of this section or of any provision of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 07-901 § 2 (part))  
7.04.090 - Maintenance of graffiti prohibited. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, it is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to cause, permit, aid, abet, or suffer any graffiti that is visible from any real property (whether privately or publicly owned), public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way or other area open to the public to remain on any building, structure, tree, shrub, sidewalk, curb, or vehicle owned, possessed, or within the custody or control of such person or located on real property owned, possessed, or within the custody or control of such person. Each day that graffiti is maintained constitutes a new and separate offense and is subject to the penalties set forth in Chapters 1.04 and 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 07-901 § 2 (part))  
7.04.100 - Removal of graffiti. 
A.  Declaration of Nuisance. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38771, the City Council declares the following conditions to constitute a public nuisance: 
1.  Graffiti or other inscribed material on a building, structure, tree, shrub, sidewalk, curb, or vehicle in the City that is visible from any real property (whether privately or publicly owned), public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way or other area open to the public. 
2.  The existence of any surface of a building, structure, tree, shrub, curb, or vehicle in the City that has been defaced with graffiti or other inscribed material after removal more than three times in any 12 month period (hereinafter, "graffiti-attracting surface"). 
B.  Abatement of Nuisance. The City Council declares that the maintenance of the public nuisance conditions listed in subsection A of this section is subject to abatement pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.44 of this Code. Furthermore, the City Council authorizes the appropriation and use of public funds to remove graffiti or other inscribed material from publicly or privately owned real or personal property located within the City and to repair, restore, replace, or retrofit publicly or privately owned property within the City that has been defaced with graffiti or other inscribed material that cannot be removed cost effectively or to otherwise abate graffiti-attracting surfaces as defined hereinabove. 
1.  In instances where a responsible party consents to the abatement of graffiti or graffiti attracting surfaces by City forces, the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, is authorized to immediately abate the nuisance. 
C.  Notice to Abate. Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 10.44, whenever any Enforcement Officer determines the existence of a nuisance as defined by and declared in subsection A of this section and determines that City employees, representatives, or contract agents may need to abate said nuisance, the Enforcement Officer shall issue a "Notice to Abate Graffiti Nuisance" (hereinafter, "Notice to Abate Graffiti") to the owner and the entity in possession of or in control of the property on which the nuisance exists, or to any other responsible party, requiring the abatement of the nuisance within 72 hours of the date of service of the Notice to Abate Graffiti or within some other reasonable time in connection with a "graffiti-attracting surface." 
1.  Contents of Notice to Abate Graffiti. A Notice to Abate Graffiti issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain the following provisions: 
a.  The address of the real property on which the nuisance condition exists. 
b.  A brief description of the nuisance condition(s). 
c.  A reference to the law prohibiting or pertaining to the nuisance condition. 
d.  A brief description of the required corrective actions. 
e.  A time period and/or schedule in which to complete the nuisance abatement actions (with all required City approvals, permits, and inspections, when applicable) (hereinafter, "compliance period"). 
f.  The period and manner in which a responsible person may contest the Notice to Abate Graffiti pursuant to this chapter. 
g.  A statement that if the violations are not abated within the time specified or a timely appeal is not made, such nuisance may be abated by City Agents in the manner provided in the Notice. On such occasions, all costs of the abatement shall be assessed against the responsible person(s) and/or the subject property as a lien or as a special assessment (in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 10.44) or in any other manner provided by law. 
2.  Service of Notice to Abate Graffiti. 
a.  Notice to Abate Graffiti shall be personally served upon the responsible parties by either personal delivery or by certified first class mail. The time and date on which a Notice to Abate Graffiti is personally served or is placed in a U.S. Postal Service mail receptacle shall constitute the date of service. Failure of any responsible party to receive a Notice to Abate Graffiti shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
b.  The Enforcement Officer issuing the Notice to Abate Graffiti to an owner of real property may rely on the owner's mailing address according to the last equalized assessment roll of the San Bernardino County Recorder's office in determining a service address for the Notice to Abate Graffiti. 
D.  Method of Abatement. Where graffiti is being abated by the repainting of the surface on which the graffiti exists, the responsible party shall use paint that matches the color of the remaining portions of the structure being painted or as otherwise approved by the Community Development Director. As it relates to a graffiti-attracting surface (as defined by and declared in subsection (A)(2) of this section), a Notice to Abate Graffiti may require, but shall not be limited to, any of the following modifications (or combinations thereof) to said building, structure, tree, shrub, sidewalk, curb, or vehicle (or the property on which said building, structure, tree, shrub, sidewalk, curb, or vehicle exists) as methods of abatement (the costs of which are to be borne by the responsible party): 
1.  Retrofitting of said surface or structure (at a cost not to exceed 10 percent of the assessed value of the property on which the nuisance exists as indicated on the last equalized assessment roll of the San Bernardino County Recorder's office). 
2.  Application and/or use of antigraffiti materials (as approved by the Director of Community Development or his/her designee) to the surface or structure, such as antietching films or antigraffiti paints. 
3.  Installation of landscaping (as approved by the Director of Community Development) so as to screen or to provide a barrier to the surface or structure. 
4.  Installation of additional lighting (as approved by the Director of Community Development). 
E.  Appeal of Notice to Abate Graffiti. 
1.  Hearing Before City Manager. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 10.44.080 or of Chapter 1.08 of this Code, a request for a hearing before the City Manager as it relates to the nuisance conditions referenced in subsection A of this section and payment of all applicable fees must be filed with the City Manager within four calendar days from the date of service of the Notice to Abate Graffiti. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 10.22.080 or of Chapter 1.08 of this Code, a Notice to Abate Graffiti issued in connection with nuisance conditions in subsection A of this section is not appealable to the Planning Commission; and any Order to Comply issued by the City Manager or his or her designee shall be final and binding. 
a.  Failure of the City Manager to receive a timely request for a hearing and/or payment of applicable fees constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a Notice to Abate. In this event, the Notice to Abate is final and binding. 
F.  Scope of Abatement. Whenever the City authorizes the use of public funds for the removal of graffiti, the painting or repairing of surfaces containing graffiti, or for the abatement of graffiti-attracting surfaces, the City shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repairing of any more extensive area than that where the graffiti or graffiti-attracting surface is located, unless the City Manager, or his or her designee, determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless a responsible party agrees in writing to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area. 
G.  Costs of Abatement. The costs of abatement performed by City forces, or agents thereof, shall constitute a personal obligation against the responsible parties (as defined in this chapter) and may be assessed in any, or all, of the following manners: 
1.  Special assessment or nuisance-abatement lien in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 10.44 of this Code. 
2.  Graffiti-abatement lien against any property owned by a minor or other person (or the parent or guardian of any minor) creating, causing, or committing a graffiti nuisance as authorized by Section 38772 of the California Government Code. 
3.  Any other manner provided in the City's Graffiti Abatement Protocols/Policy (in instances where the owner or tenant of a property where a graffiti nuisance exists consents to the removal of the nuisance by City forces). 
4.  Any other manner provided or authorized by law. 
(Ord. 07-901 § 2 (part))  
7.04.110 - Prevention of graffiti through land-use entitlements. 
A.  In approving tentative or parcel maps, subdivision maps, conditional use permits, variances, or other land-use entitlements, the City shall consider imposing conditions reasonably related to the control of graffiti and/or the mitigation of the impacts of graffiti. Such conditions may include, without limitation, any or all of the following: 
1.  Installation and use of antigraffiti materials (as approved by the Director of Community Development or his/her designee) on surfaces that are likely to be graffiti-attracting surfaces. 
2.  Installation and use of landscaping to screen or provide a barrier to surfaces prone to graffiti or are likely to be a graffiti-attracting surface. 
3.  Installation and use of additional lighting to areas that are likely to be graffiti-attracting surfaces and areas adjacent thereto. 
4.  Applicant or owner shall immediately remove any graffiti at the property. 
5.  Right of access by City forces to remove graffiti. 
6.  Applicant or permittee to supply the City with sufficient matching paint and/or antigraffiti material on demand for use in the abatement of graffiti by City forces. 
7.  Any gas, telephone, water, sewer, cable, telephone, and other utility, other than electric, operating in the City shall paint their above-surface fixtures installed after the effective date of the chapter with a uniform paint type and color as directed by the Director of Community Development. 
B.  Persons applying for any tentative or parcel maps, subdivision maps, conditional use permits, variances, or other land-use entitlements shall, as part of any conditions, covenants, or restrictions of any approval for said application, covenant, which covenant shall run with the land in a form satisfactory to the City, that the applicant, and any and all successors in interest of the property, shall comply with all conditions, covenants, or restrictions of said approval. 
(Ord. 07-901 § 2 (part))  
7.04.120 - Reward for information. 
A.  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.5, the City does offer a reward in an amount to be established by Resolution of the City Council for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for a violation committed within the City of Montclair pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 594 or 594.3 (by the use of graffiti), 640, 640.5, and 640.6 or Sections 7.04.030, 7.04.040, 7.04.050, 7.04.060, or 7.04.070 of this chapter. In the event of multiple contributors of information, the reward amount shall be divided by the City in the manner it shall deem appropriate. For the purposes of this section, diversion of the offending violator to a community service program, or a plea bargain to a lesser offense, shall constitute a conviction. 
B.  Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed, in writing, with the City Clerk. Each claim shall: 
1.  Specifically identify the date, location, and kind of property damaged or destroyed. 
2.  Identify by name the person who was convicted. 
3.  Identify the court and the date upon which the conviction occurred. 
C.  No claim for a reward shall be allowed by the City Council unless the City investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the requirements of this section have been satisfied. The investigation must determine that the claimant's information was relevant and directly responsible for the arrest and conviction of the suspect. 
D.  Any person committing graffiti vandalism, and if said person is an unemancipated minor, then the parent or lawful guardian of said minor, shall be civilly liable for any reward paid pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 07-901 § 2 (part))  
7.04.130 - Parental responsibility. 
A.  Pursuant to California Civil Code Section 1714.1(b), where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents or legal guardian of said minor shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of civil damages resulting from the misconduct of the minor in an amount not to exceed Twenty-Five Thousand (25,000) Dollars for each such offense or in an amount designated by any amendment to California Civil Code Section 1714.1(b). The parent or legal guardian of said minor shall also be civilly liable for any reward paid pursuant to Section 7.04.120 of this chapter. 
B.  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38772, the parent or guardian having custody and control over a minor shall be jointly and severally liable for the expense of any abatement of a graffiti nuisance; and the City may make the costs of abatement a lien against the property of the parent or guardian having custody and control over the minor. 
(Ord. 07-901 § 2 (part))  
7.04.140 - Penalties. 
A.  Criminal Penalties. Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor offense and be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
B.  Additional Penalties. Whenever deemed appropriate, it is the City's intent to petition a sentencing court to impose the following additional penalties or conditions of any grant or probation, diversion, deferred entry of judgment, or other court supervision (including upon a determination that a minor is to be a ward of the court as a result of committing an act of vandalism or graffiti) upon conviction: 
1.  Suspension or delay in issuance of driver's license (pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 13202.6). 
2.  Community service and/or graffiti-removal service (pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 640.6 and 1203, et seq., California Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 728 and 729.8, and California Vehicle Code Section 42001.7). 
3.  Payment of restitution for the expenses/costs of abatement pursuant to California Penal Code Section 1202.4, California Government Code Section 38772, or other State law. 
C.  Cumulative Remedies. The remedies provided in this chapter are in addition to other remedies and penalties available under provisions of other applicable City Ordinances, the laws of the State of California, or the laws of the United States. 
(Ord. 07-901 § 2 (part))  
Chapter 7.06 - ILLEGAL DRUGS, VIOLENT CRIME, AND GANG-RELATED CRIME EVICTION PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
7.06.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Illegal Drugs, Violent Crime, and Gang-Related Crime Eviction Program." 
(Ord. No. 09-907, § 2, 3-2-09)  
7.06.020 - Purpose and scope. 
It is the purpose and intent of the Montclair City Council, through the adoption of this chapter, to establish an Illegal Drugs, Violent Crime, and Gang-Related Crime Eviction Program as a means to protect residential neighborhoods and commercial centers from becoming blighted through tenants' criminal activities. 
(Ord. No. 09-907, § 2, 3-2-09)  
7.06.030 - Duties of the landlord. 
A landlord shall not cause, permit, aid, abet, or suffer: 
A.  The premises to be used or maintained for any illegal drug activity, drug-related nuisance, violent crime or threat of violent crime, or gang-related crime. 
B.  A tenant to use or occupy the premises if the tenant commits, permits, maintains, or is involved in any illegal drug activity, violent crime or threat of violent crime, gang-related crime, or drug-related nuisance on the premises or within a 1000-foot radius from the boundary line of the premises. 
C.  The use or occupancy of a rental unit by any person whose tenancy has been terminated pursuant to Section 7.06.050 of this chapter within the preceding 36 months. 
(Ord. No. 09-907, § 2, 3-2-09)  
7.06.040 - Administrative procedures. 
The City Manager of designee thereof may promulgate such administrative procedures as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-907, § 2, 3-2-09)  
7.06.050 - Recovery of possession by landlord. 
A landlord may bring an action to recover possession of a rental unit upon any of the following grounds: 
A.  The tenant is committing or permitting to exist any illegal drug activity, violent crime or threat of violent crime, gang-related crime, or drug-related nuisance on the premises or within a 1000-foot radius from the boundary line of the premises. 
B.  The tenant has been convicted of a crime and the underlying offense involves illegal drug activity, violent crime or threat of violent crime, gang-related crime, or drug-related nuisance on the premises or within a 1000-foot radius from the boundary line of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 09-907, § 2, 3-2-09)  
7.06.060 - Enforcement. 
A.  If a landlord fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter after having received written notice that the Montclair Chief of Police or other person as designated by the City Manager has determined that the landlord is in violation of Section 7.06.030 of this chapter, the City may file an action for injunctive relief or take any other appropriate action to require the landlord to comply with the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this section: 
1.  The written notice shall be served upon the landlord either by personal delivery or by certified mail through the United States Postal Service to the last-known business or residence address as same appears in public records of the City, the San Bernardino Tax Assessor's Office and/or Secretary of State. 
2.  The written notice shall contain the following information: 
a.  A statement that the Montclair Chief of Police or other person designated by the City Manager has determined that the landlord is in violation of Section 7.06.030 of this chapter. 
b.  Identification of the offending tenant, if known. 
c.  Unit number of the offending tenant, if applicable. 
d.  Specific criminal violation committed by offending tenant. 
e.  Dates and times of any observed criminal activity and any resulting arrest. 
f.  A statement informing the landlord that he is required to diligently cause the subject rental unit to be completely vacated by all occupants and that the vacated rental unit may not be rerented, re-leased, or otherwise reoccupied by said tenants prior to the expiration of a 36-month period following the vacation of the rental unit by the tenants. 
g.  A statement that the failure of the landlord to comply with the provisions of this chapter constitutes a public nuisance and a misdemeanor criminal offense and that a violation of this chapter could also result in the commencement of administrative and/or civil proceedings seeking the termination of any unlawful tenancies and the imposition of fines, fees, costs, and other monetary sanctions against the landlord. 
3.  The written notice shall be accompanied by sufficient documentation describing facts necessary to show a violation of Section 7.06.030 of this chapter provided such documentation is disclosable pursuant to the requirements of the California Public Records Act (California Government Code Section 6250, et seq.). Such documentation may include, but shall not be limited to, any of the following: 
a.  Police reports or other official police documents including a "release of information." 
b.  Police Officer or witness affidavits. 
c.  Documented observations of any witness or informant willing to testify before a court of law. 
B.  A court rendering judgment pursuant to this section may, in addition to any other penalty and/or remedy provided by law, impose a civil penalty in the maximum amount permitted by law, payable to the City of Montclair, and/or require the payment of attorney's fees, costs of investigation (including incidental expenses) and discovery, and court costs. 
(Ord. No. 09-907, § 2, 3-2-09)  
7.06.070 - Payments—Lien authorized. 
A.  The City may collect any judgment, fee, cost, or charge, including any permitted fees, fines, late charges, or interest incurred in relation to the provisions of this chapter in any manner authorized by law including the recordation of a lien against the subject property with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office. 
B.  If multiple defendants exist, they shall be jointly and severally liable for any monetary judgment. 
(Ord. No. 09-907, § 2, 3-2-09)  
7.06.080 - Violations—Penalties. 
A.  Criminal Penalties. Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor offense and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Title 1, Chapter 1.12, of this Code. 
B.  Cumulative Remedies. The remedies provided in this chapter are in addition to other remedies and penalties available under provisions of other applicable City Ordinances, the laws of the State of California, or the laws of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 09-907, § 2, 3-2-09)  
Chapter 7.08 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY 
Sections: 
 
7.08.010 - Public consumption of alcohol. 
A.  Possession of Open Container Unlawful in Public Places. It is unlawful for any person or persons to possess any open container containing any alcoholic beverage in or upon any public park, street, alley, highway or other public place, except in or upon those public places where the drinking or consuming of alcoholic beverages is expressly permitted by law. 
B.  Consumption of Alcoholic Beverage Unlawful in Public Places. It is unlawful for any person or persons to drink or consume or attempt to drink or consume any alcoholic beverages while such person or persons are in or upon any public park, street, alley, highway or other public place, except in or upon those public places where the drinking or consuming of alcoholic beverages is expressly permitted by law. 
C.  Offering or Furnishing Alcoholic Beverage for Consumption Unlawful in Public Places. It is unlawful for any person or persons while in or upon any public park, street, alley, highway or other public place, except in or upon those public places where the drinking or consuming of alcoholic beverages is expressly permitted by law, to offer or furnish or give, or cause to be offered or furnished or given, any alcoholic beverages to any other person or persons with the intention that such other person or persons shall drink or consume alcoholic beverages while such other person or persons are in or upon any public park, street, alley, highway or other public place, except in or upon those public places where the drinking or consumption of alcoholic beverages is expressly permitted by law. 
D.  Exceptions to Public Consumption. The drinking or consumption and the offering, giving or furnishing of alcoholic beverages may be expressly permitted by written authorization from the City Manager in any building, facility, park, street or other place owned, leased, operated or under the management and control of the City for special events, meetings, conferences or conventions, provided that such authorization shall be requested in writing and if granted, shall be subject to conditions and all rules, regulations and ordinances of the City, and further provided that such permit may be modified or summarily revoked at any time by the City Manager or Chief of Police without notice or hearing. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code §§ 5-2.602—5-2.605)  
7.08.020 - Urination or defecation in public view. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to urinate or defecate upon public or private property except into a fixture designed for the purpose and screened from public view. 
(Ord. 06-889 § 11: Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-2.109)  
Chapter 7.12 - OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS 
Sections: 
 
7.12.010 - Hours of curfew for minors. 
A.  It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to remain in any place open to the public in the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless such minor is: 
1.  Accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other responsible adult person during such hours; 
2.  Engaged, without detour or delay, in the performance of an errand at the direction of such parent, guardian, or other responsible adult; 
3.  Attending, going to or returning from, without detour or delay, an educational or social gathering or public entertainment which has been approved by and consented to by such parent, guardian, or other responsible adult; 
4.  Attending, going to, or returning from, without detour or delay, an official school, religious, or other adult-supervised recreational activity sponsored by the City, a civic organization, or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the safety of the minor; 
5.  Engaged in an employment which makes it necessary for such minor to be in a place open to the public, or going to or returning home from employment, without detour or delay; 
6.  Involved in any emergency during such hours; 
7.  In a motor vehicle involved in otherwise lawful travel; 
8.  On the sidewalk adjacent to the minor's residence, providing the minor is not otherwise violating the law; 
9.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States or California Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of lawful assembly; 
10.  Emancipated pursuant to State law. 
B.  Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a peace officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in a public place or place open to the public during the hours of curfew. The officer shall not issue a citation or detain a minor under this section unless the officer reasonably believes an offense has occurred and that, based upon the circumstances presented and the minor's responses, none of the above exceptions appear to be present or apply. 
C.  Violations. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable under the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-2.401)  
7.12.020 - Daytime loitering by minors prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any minor over 6 and under 18 years of age who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education to remain in any public place or place open to the public away from his or her place of residence during those hours that his or her school is in session. 
B.  In addition to the exceptions identified in Section 7.12.010, this prohibition shall not apply whenever: 
1.  The minor is traveling directly to or from a medical appointment, appearance in court, place of gainful employment, or employment conference; 
2.  The minor has permission to leave the school campus for lunch, authorized off-campus appointments, or a school-related activity and has in his or her possession a valid school-issued permit to leave the school campus for a designated period of time; such permit shall state the purpose for leaving the school campus. 
C.  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this Code. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
D.  Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall be liable under the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
E.  In lieu of or in combination with the fine set forth above, the court in its discretion may impose the performance of community service for a total time not to exceed 20 hours over a period not to exceed 30 days. Such community service shall not conflict with school attendance or employment. 
F.  In addition to the definitions of terms found in Chapter 7.02 of this Code, the following definition is to be applied for this section: 
"Subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education" means those minors over 6 and under 18 years of age who are not exempted because of: 
1.  Attendance in a private school or receiving home instruction; 
2.  Prior high school graduation or having attained a certificate of proficiency from the school district; 
3.  Current attendance in a regional occupational program; 
4.  Exclusion, expulsion or disqualification from the school district; 
5.  Currently on an authorized leave of absence from the school district; 
6.  Inability to prove legal residency status. 
G.  Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a peace officer shall ask the apparent offender's age, school attendance status, and reason for being in a public place or place open to the public during the hours of curfew. The officer shall not issue a citation or detain a minor under this section unless the officer reasonably believes an offense has occurred and that, based upon the circumstances presented and the minor's responses, none of the above exceptions appear to be present or apply. 
(Ord. 06-889 § 12; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 5-2.405)  
Chapter 7.16 - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
7.16.010 - Unclaimed property defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, "unclaimed property" means any property found by the police upon the public streets or ways of the City or elsewhere, or any property brought to the Police Department by others, the owner of which property is unknown; provided, however, property held as evidence, dangerous or deadly weapons, narcotics or poison drugs, explosives, or any property of any kind whatsoever, the possession of which is prohibited by law as the same is defined in the Penal Code of the State, shall not constitute unclaimed property. 
(Prior code § 3-6.01)  
7.16.020 - Unclaimed property. 
All unclaimed property shall be kept by the Police Department, which shall use ordinary care to keep the same safely and to protect the same from the weather. If an owner appears prior to three months from the date the property came into the possession of the Police Department, offers reasonable proof of ownership, and offers to reimburse the City for any storage charges incurred, the property shall be delivered to such owner upon his or her payment of the storage charges, if any. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-6.02)  
7.16.030 - Period of time to be held. 
All unclaimed property shall be held by the Police Department for a period of at least three months unless restitution has been made prior to its sale or disposition. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 3-6.03)  
7.16.040 - Disposition of property unclaimed by owner. 
If, after the period of time specified in Section 7.16.030, the owner fails to redeem the unclaimed property, or if the owner fails to pay the police department's reasonable costs in the storage and care of the property as required by Section 7.16.020, the police chief shall cause such property to be transferred to the City's purchasing agent who may, in compliance with Section 2080.4 of the California Civil Code, either sell the property at public auction or retain the property for a public use; provided, however, that if the property shall consist of lost and unclaimed bicycles or toys, the purchasing agent may cause such property to be donated to one or more nonprofit tax-exempt charitable organizations which agree, in writing, to donate such property in turn to needy children of the City or county; and provided further, that if the property shall consist of money, it shall be deposited in the general fund of the City. Upon the transfer of such unclaimed property to the purchasing agent for the City, the owner of such property shall not thereafter be entitled to redeem the property. 
(Ord. No. 16-958, § 1, 7-5-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-958, § 1, adopted July 5, 2016, repealed the former § 7.16.040, and enacted a new § 7.16.040 as set out herein. The former § 7.16.040 pertained to sale or disposition—notice and derived from prior code § 3-6.04 and Ord. No. 99-791.  
7.16.050 - Disposition of funds and unsold property. 
A.  Proceeds of Unclaimed Property Sold at Public Action. After the auction is completed, the City's purchasing agent shall deliver the proceeds of the auction to the City's finance director for deposit in the general fund of the City. No officers or employees of the City or their immediate family may bid on any property advertised and offered for sale at public auction. 
B.  Property Unsold at Public Auction. Any unclaimed property advertised and offered for sale at public auction but not sold, and not suitable for appropriation to the use of the City, shall be deemed to be of no value, and shall be disposed of in a manner as may be determined by the City's purchasing agent. No such property shall be given or sold to officers or employees of the City or their immediate family. 
(Ord. No. 16-958, § 2, 7-5-16)  
Chapter 7.20 - WEAPONS 
Sections: 
 
7.20.010 - Firing unlawful. 
It is unlawful to fire, discharge, shoot or operate any BB device except when it may be necessary to do so to protect life or property or to destroy or kill any predatory or dangerous animal. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-5.02)  
CHAPTER 7.24 - PUBLIC NUISANCES 
Sections:  
Article 1. - Nuisances Enumerated 
 
7.24.010 - Findings, purpose, and intent. 
A.  Findings. The City Council finds and declares as follows: 
1.  Section VII of Article XI of the California Constitution provides that a city may make and enforce within its limits all local, police, sanitary, and other ordinances and regulations not in conflict with general laws. 
2.  California Government Code Section 38771 provides that legislative bodies of cities may declare what constitutes a nuisance. 
3.  California Government Code Section 38772 et seq. further provides that legislative bodies of cities may also provide for the summary abatement of any nuisance at the expense of the persons creating, causing, committing, or maintaining it and by ordinance may make the expense of abatement of nuisances a lien against the property on which the nuisance is maintained and a personal obligation against the property owner. 
4.  Nuisance conditions are offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and community appearance, an obstruction or interference with the comfortable enjoyment of adjacent properties or premises (both public and private) and/or are hazardous or injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public. 
B.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this chapter are as follows: 
1.  To define as public nuisances and violations those conditions and uses of land that are offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and community appearance, an obstruction or interference with the comfortable enjoyment of adjacent properties or premises (both public and private), and/or are hazardous or injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public. 
2.  To develop regulations that will promote the sound maintenance of property and enhance of conditions of appearance, habitability, occupancy, use, and safety of all structures and premises in the City. 
3.  To establish administrative procedures for the City's use, upon its election, to, correct or abate violations of this chapter on real property throughout the City. 
4.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City at any time from commencing an administrative, civil, or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance or from pursuing other means available to it under the provisions of any applicable law to correct substandard, hazardous, or nuisance conditions or deficiencies in real property in addition to or as an alternative to the proceedings set forth herein. 
5.  This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of property maintenance, nor is it intended to affect or otherwise alter nuisance abatement procedures established or that may be established in other chapters of this Code. It shall be supplemental and in addition to other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereinafter enacted by the City, State of California, or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
6.  This chapter is not intended to be applied, construed, or given effect in a manner that imposes upon the City, or upon any officer or employee thereof, any duty towards persons or property within the City or outside of the City that creates a basis for civil liability for damages, except as otherwise imposed by law. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.020 - Prohibited public nuisance conditions. 
The City Council finds and declares that it is a public nuisance and unlawful for any person to allow, cause, create, maintain, or suffer, or permit others to maintain, real property or premises in the City in such a manner that: 
A.  Any one or more of the following conditions are found to exist thereon: 
1.  Land, the topography, geology, or configuration of which, whether in natural state or as a result of grading operations, excavation or fill, causes erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety, and welfare or to adjacent properties including, but not limited to: 
a.  Accumulations of uncompacted fill over three feet in height over predominant grade and contrary to adjacent contour for any period of time. 
2.  Real property, or any building or structure thereon, that is abandoned, uninhabited, or vacant for a period of more than six months. 
3.  Buildings or other structures, or portions thereof, that are partially constructed or destroyed or allowed to remain in a state of partial construction or destruction for an unreasonable period of time. As used herein, an "unreasonable" period shall mean any portion of time exceeding the period given to a responsible person by the City for the complete abatement of this nuisance condition with all required City approvals, permits, and inspections. Factors that may be used by the City to establish a reasonable period for the complete abatement of this nuisance include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  The degree of partial construction or destruction and the cause therefor. 
b.  Whether or not this condition constitutes an attractive nuisance or if it otherwise poses or promotes a health or safety hazard to occupants of the premises, or to others. 
c.  The degree of visibility, if any, of this condition from public or adjoining private real property. 
d.  The scope and type of work that is needed to abate this nuisance. 
e.  The promptness with which a responsible person has applied for and obtained all required City approvals and permits in order to lawfully commence the nuisance abatement actions. 
f.  Whether or not a responsible person has complied with other required technical code requirements, including requesting and passing required inspections in a timely manner, while completing nuisance abatement actions. 
g.  Whether or not a responsible person has applied for extensions to a technical code permit or renewed an expired permit, as well as the number of extensions and renewals that a responsible person has previously sought or obtained from the City. 
h.  Whether or not a responsible person has made substantial progress, as determined by the City, in performing nuisance abatement actions under a technical code permit that has expired, or is about to expire. 
i.  Whether delays in completing nuisance abatement actions under a technical code permit have occurred and the reason(s) for such delays. 
4.  Exterior portions of buildings or structures (including, but not limited to, roofs, balconies, decks, fences, stairs, stairways, walls, signs and fixtures), as well as sidewalks, walkways, driveways and parking areas, that have become defective, unsightly, or are maintained in a condition of dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution in property values; or where such condition interferes with the peaceful use, possession and/or enjoyment of adjacent properties; or where such condition otherwise violates, or is contrary to, the Montclair Municipal Code, or State law. 
5.  Interior portions of buildings or structures (including, but not limited to attics, ceilings, walls, floors, basements, mezzanines, and common areas) that have become defective, unsightly, or are maintained in a condition of dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution in property values, or where such condition interferes with the peaceful use, possession and/or enjoyment of properties in the vicinity, or where such condition otherwise violates, or is contrary to, the Montclair Municipal Code or State law. 
6.  Obstructions of any kind, cause, or form that interfere with required light or ventilation for a building or structure or that interfere with, hinder, delay, or impede ingress therein and/or egress therefrom. 
7.  Failure to provide and maintain adequate weather protection to structures or buildings, so as to cause or promote the existence of cracked, peeling, warped, rotted, or severely damaged paint, stucco, or other exterior covering. 
8.  Broken, defective, damaged, dilapidated, or missing windows, doors, or vents in a building or structure, and/or broken, defective, damaged, dilapidated, or missing screens for windows, doors, or crawl spaces in a building or structure. 
9.  Windows or doors that remain boarded up or sealed after 10 calendar days written City notice to a responsible person requesting the removal of these coverings and the installation of fully functional or operable windows or doors. City actions to board up or seal windows or doors in order to deter unauthorized entry into structures shall not relieve responsible persons from installing fully functional or operational windows or doors. 
10.  Any form of an attractive nuisance. 
11.  Abandoned personal property that is visible from public or private property. 
12.  Items of junk, trash, debris, or other personal property that are kept, placed, or stored inside of a structure or on exterior portions of real property that constitute a fire or safety hazard or a violation of any provision of the Montclair Municipal Code, or items of junk, trash, debris, or other personal property that are visible from public or private real property, or that are otherwise out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution in property values. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the existence of a junkyard is not a nuisance when such use and the premises on which such use occurs are in full compliance with all provisions of the Montclair Zoning Ordinance (including all approvals and permits required thereby), and all other applicable provisions of the Montclair Municipal Code and any future amendments and additions thereto, as well as applicable county, state, and/or federal laws and regulations. 
13.  The keeping or disposing of, or the scattering or accumulating of flammable, combustible, or other materials including, but not limited to, composting, firewood, lumber, junk, trash, debris, packing boxes, pallets, plant cuttings, tree trimmings or wood chips, discarded items, or other personal property in interior or exterior areas of buildings or structures, when such items or accumulations: 
a.  Render premises unsanitary or substandard as defined by the Montclair Housing Code, the State Housing Law, the Montclair Building Code, or other applicable local, state, or federal law, rule, or regulation. 
b.  Violate the San Bernardino County Health Code. 
c.  Cause, create, or tend to contribute to, a fire or safety hazard. 
d.  Harbor, promote, or tend to contribute to, the presence of rats, vermin and/or insects. 
e.  Create, or tend to contribute to, an offensive odor. 
f.  Cause the premises to be out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution of property values. Provided, however, that this use of land or condition shall not constitute a nuisance when expressly permitted under the applicable zone classification and the premises are in full compliance with all provisions of the Montclair Zoning Ordinance, and all other applicable provisions of the Montclair Municipal Code and any future amendments and additions thereto, as well as applicable county, state, and/or federal laws and regulations. 
14.  Overgrown vegetation including, but not limited to, any one of the following: 
a.  Vegetation likely to harbor or promote the presence of rats, vermin and/or insects. 
b.  Vegetation causing detriment to neighboring properties, or that is out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in, or contribute to, a diminution of property values, including, but not limited to: 
i.  Lawns with grass in excess of 6 inches in height. 
ii.  Hedges, trees, lawns, plants, or other vegetation that are not maintained in a neat, orderly, and healthy manner as a result of lack of adequate mowing, grooming, trimming, pruning, fertilizing, watering, and/or replacement. 
iii.  Front and side yard vegetable gardens/plants visible from public streets. 
c.  Vegetation that creates or promotes the existence of a fire hazard. 
d.  Vegetation that overhangs or grows onto or into any public property including, but not limited to, any public alley, highway, land, sidewalk, street, or other right-of-way so as to cause an obstruction to any person or vehicle using such public property. 
e.  Tree branches or other vegetation within 2 feet of the rooftop of a structure so as to facilitate rodent or animal access thereto. 
15.  Dead, decayed, diseased, or hazardous trees, weeds, ground cover, and other vegetation or the absence of healthful vegetation that causes, contributes to, or promotes any one of the following conditions or consequences: 
a.  An attractive nuisance; 
b.  A fire hazard; 
c.  The creation or promotion of dust or soil erosion; 
d.  A diminution in property values; 
e.  A detriment to public health, safety, or welfare. 
16.  Lack of landscaped area in the front yard and corner lot side yard setback of each lot zoned A, R-1, R-2, R-3 or SL that is not covered in allowed hardscape as provided in subsection (A)(2) of this section. All such front-yard area and setback on any improved property other than that covered in allowed hardscape shall be a landscaped area as defined herein. Exceptions to landscaped area requirements are: 
a.  Dormant plants and/or seasonal grasses; 
b.  Major landscape rehabilitation of the property (not to exceed 180 consecutive days). 
17.  Waste containers, yard waste containers, and recycling containers that are kept, placed or stored in parking areas or front or side yards, such that said containers are visible from public streets, except when placed in approved areas for collection at times permitted and in full compliance with this Code. 
a.  Waste containers, yard waste containers, and recycling containers may be placed at an approved collection location in public view no earlier than 24 hours before scheduled pickup to 10:00 p.m. on the day of scheduled pickup. 
b.  Dumpsters or storage bins may be located in front yard areas when a building permit that covers excavation, construction, or demolition operations is in full force and effect or for a period not to exceed 72 hours for general cleanup of the subject property. 
18.  The hanging, drying, or airing of clothing or household fabrics on fences, trees, or shrubberies, or the existence of clotheslines, in front or side yards abutting a public street and that is open to view from the street. 
19.  Abandoned, dismantled, inoperable, or wrecked boats, campers, motorcycles, trailers, vehicles, or parts thereof, unless kept, placed, parked, or stored inside of a completely enclosed, lawfully constructed building or structure. 
20.  Vehicles, trailers, campers, boats, recreational vehicles, and/or other mobile equipment parked or stored for in violation of any provision of the Montclair Municipal Code, including the Montclair Zoning Ordinance. 
21.  Vehicles, construction equipment, or other machinery exceeding the permissible gross vehicle weight for the streets or public property upon which they are located. A nuisance also exists under this provision when a vehicle, construction equipment, or other machinery is stopped, kept, placed, parked, or stored on private real property and when such vehicle, equipment, or machinery exceeds the permissible gross vehicle weight for the streets or public property that were utilized in its placement on said private real property, except when parked, placed, or stored pursuant to a valid permit issued by the City. 
22.  Any equipment, machinery, or vehicle of any type or description that is designed, used, or maintained for construction-type activities that is kept, parked, placed, or stored on public or private real property except when such item is being used during excavation, construction, or demolition operations at the site where said equipment, machinery, or vehicle is located pursuant to an active permit issued by the City. 
23.  Maintenance of signs, or sign structures, on real property relating to uses no longer lawfully conducted or products no longer lawfully sold thereon, or signs and their structures that are in disrepair or that are otherwise in violation of, or contrary to, the Montclair Zoning Ordinance. 
24.  Specialty structures that have been constructed for a specific single use only, and that are unfeasible to convert to other uses, and that are abandoned, partially destroyed, or are permitted to remain in a state of partial destruction or disrepair. Such specialty structures include, but are not limited to, the following: tanks for gas or liquid(s), lateral support structures and bulkheads, utility high-voltage towers and poles, utility high-rise support structures, electronic transmitting antennas and towers, structures that support or house mechanical and utility equipment and are located above the roof lines of existing buildings, high-rise freestanding chimneys and smoke stacks, and recreational structures such as tennis courts and cabanas. 
25.  Any building, structure, or personal property that obstructs or encroaches on any public property including, but not limited to, any public alley, highway, land, sidewalk, street, or other right-of-way unless a valid encroachment permit has been issued authorizing said encroachment or obstruction. 
26.  Causing, maintaining, or permitting graffiti or other defacement of real or personal property, as defined in the Montclair Municipal Code or other applicable State law, to be present or remain on a building, structure, or vehicle, or portion thereof, that is visible from a public right-of-way or from private real property. 
27.  Storage of hazardous or toxic materials or substances on real property, as so classified by any local, state or federal laws or regulations, in such a manner as to be injurious, or potentially injurious or hazardous, to the public health, safety, or welfare or to adjacent properties or that otherwise violates local, state, or federal laws or regulations. 
28.  Unsanitary, polluted, or unhealthful pools, ponds, standing water, or excavations containing water, whether or not they are attractive nuisances but that are nevertheless likely to harbor mosquitoes, insects, or other vectors. The likelihood of insect harborage is evidenced by any of the following conditions: water that is unclear, murky, clouded, or green; water containing bacterial growth, algae, insect larvae, insect remains, or animal remains; or bodies of water that are abandoned, neglected, unfiltered, or otherwise improperly maintained. 
29.  Any discharge of any substance or material other than stormwater that enters, or could possibly enter, the City's storm drain system in violation of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
30.  Maintenance of any tarp or similar covering on or over any graded surface or hillside, except in the following circumstances: 
a.  A state of emergency has been declared by local, county, state, or federal officials directly impacting the area to be covered. 
b.  Covering with a tarp performed pursuant to an active building or grading permit. 
31.  Maintenance of any tarp or similar covering on or over any roof of any structure, except during periods of active rainfall, or when specifically permitted under an active roofing or building permit. 
32.  The keeping or suffering of any animal, reptile, or insect in a manner that poses a threat, disturbance, or menace to persons or property. 
33.  The use, parking, or storing of any recreational vehicle as temporary or permanent living space. 
34.  Maintenance of premises so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of properties in the vicinity as to cause, or that tends to cause, substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or property values of such properties in the vicinity. 
35.  Any condition recognized in local or state law or in equity as constituting a public nuisance or any condition existing on real property that constitutes, or tends to constitute, blight or that is a health or safety hazard to the community or neighboring properties. 
B.  Any building or structure, or portion thereof, or the premises on which the same is located in which there exists any of the conditions listed in Section 17920.3 of the California Health and Safety Code and any future amendments thereto. 
C.  Any building or structure, or portion thereof, or the premises on which same is located in which there exists any of the conditions listed in Chapter 10 of the 1997 Uniform Housing Code as adopted by the Montclair Municipal Code. 
D.  Any "dangerous building" as defined by the Code for the 1997 Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as adopted by the Montclair Municipal Code. 
E.  Any "unsafe structure and/or equipment" as defined by the California Building Code as adopted by the Montclair Municipal Code. 
F.  Any building or structure used by any person to engage in acts that are prohibited pursuant to the laws of the United States or the State of California, the provisions of the Montclair Municipal Code, or any other Ordinance of this City including, but not limited to, the following acts: 
1.  Unlawful possession, use, manufacturing, and/or sale of controlled substances; 
2.  Prostitution; 
3.  Unlawful gambling. 
G.  Any condition, use, or activity that constitutes a public nuisance as defined by Sections 3479 or 3480 of the California Civil Code and any future amendments thereto. 
H.  Any building, structure, or use of real property that violates or fails to comply with (i) any applicable approval, permit, license, or entitlement or condition relating thereto; (ii) any ordinance of the City, including, but not limited to any provision of this Code; or (iii) any applicable county, state, or federal law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10; Ord. No. 10-913, § 1, 7-6-10)  
7.24.030 - Penalty. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of the Montclair Municipal Code to the contrary, any person who causes, permits, suffers, or maintains a public nuisance, or any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any obligation or requirement of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor violation punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of Title 1 of this Code. 
B.  Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this chapter, or of any law or regulation referenced herein, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
Article 2. - Administrative Procedures for Abatement of Nuisances 
 
7.24.040 - Abatement of public nuisances. 
All conditions or uses that constitute a public nuisance as defined in Article 1 of this chapter, or that are contrary to, or in violation of, any other provision or requirement of the Montclair Municipal Code, or of any applicable County or State law or regulation thereof, which shall also constitute a public nuisance shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, removal, or termination. The procedures for abatement in this part shall not be exclusive and shall not, in any manner, limit or restrict the City from pursuing any other remedies available at law, whether equitable, administrative, civil, or criminal or from enforcing City Codes and adopted ordinances or from abating or causing abatement of public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.050 - Continuing obligation of responsible persons to abatement a public nuisance. 
A.  No person shall allow, cause, create, permit, suffer, or maintain a public nuisance to exist on their premises. If public nuisances do arise or occur, responsible persons shall promptly abate them by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, repair, removal or termination with all required City approvals, permits, and inspections, when applicable. 
B.  The City may exercise its administrative, civil/injunctive and criminal remedies, or any one or combination of these remedies, to compel responsible persons to abate a public nuisance when, in its judgment, such persons have not completed nuisance abatement actions in a timely or proper manner, or when responsible persons have failed to prevent an occurrence or recurrence of a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.060 - Notice of public nuisance and intention to abate with city personnel. 
A.  Whenever a code enforcement officer or other public official determines that City personnel may need to abate a public nuisance, he or she shall serve a written "Notice of Public Nuisance and Intention to Abate with City personnel" on the responsible person(s) that contains the following provisions: 
1.  The address of the real property on which the nuisance condition(s) exist(s). 
2.  A description of the nuisance condition(s). 
3.  A reference to the law describing or prohibiting the nuisance condition(s). 
4.  A brief description of the required corrective action(s). 
5.  A compliance period in which to complete the nuisance abatement actions (with all required City approvals, permits, and inspections, when applicable). 
6.  The period and manner in which a responsible person may contest the Notice of Abatement as set forth in Section 7.24.090 of this chapter. No such right shall exist when the City is not seeking to establish the right to abate a public nuisance with City forces or contract agents. 
7.  A statement that the City may record a declaration of substandard property with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office against the premises if the public nuisance is not fully abated or corrected (with all required approvals, permits and inspections), as determined by the City, within the compliance period specified in the notice, provided that a timely appeal therefrom has not been made. 
B.  The procedure in Subsection A shall not apply to public nuisances constituting an imminent hazard. In such instances, the provisions in Section 7.24.160 ("Emergency action to abate an imminent hazard") of this chapter shall be followed. 
C.  The City's election to issue a notice of abatement pursuant to this section shall not excuse responsible persons from their continuing obligation to abate a public nuisance in accordance with all applicable laws, regulations, and legal requirements. Furthermore, the issuance of a notice of abatement shall not obligate the City to abate a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.070 - Additional requirements for demolition of buildings or structures. 
A.  The City shall provide responsible persons with a reasonable period to elect between options of repair, rehabilitation, or demolition, as well as a reasonable period of time to complete any of these options, before City personnel abate a public nuisance by demolishing a building or structure pursuant to Article 2 of this chapter. 
B.  The City shall serve a notice of abatement on all secured lien holders of record with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office in the event abatement actions include demolition of a building or structure. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 7.24.110 of this chapter, entry onto any real property to abate a public nuisance by demolition of a building or structure, excepting in cases involving an imminent hazard, shall be pursuant to a warrant or other order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
D.  The provisions of this section shall not apply if demolition is required to address an imminent hazard. In such situation, the provisions of Section 7.24.160 ("Emergency action to abate an imminent hazard") shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.080 - Service of notice. 
A.  Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this chapter, any notice required by this chapter may be served by personal delivery to any responsible person or by first class mail with receipt confirmation. The date of service shall be the date it is personally delivered or placed in a U.S. Postal Service receptacle. Failure of any responsible person to receive a properly addressed notice of abatement by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this chapter, any notice issued to an owner of real property shall be sent to the mailing address on the last equalized assessment roll of the San Bernardino County Assessor's Office. Failure of any owner to receive a properly addressed notice by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.090 - Right of appeal from a notice of abatement. 
A.  A responsible person may contest a notice of abatement by filing a written request for an appeal with the City Clerk's Office (located at 5111 Benito Street, Montclair) within 10 calendar days of service of the notice of abatement. No fee shall be due for the filing of an appeal. 
B.  A written request for an appeal shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and telephone number of each responsible party who is appealing the notice of abatement (hereinafter, "appellant"). 
2.  Address and description of real property upon which the City intends to enter and abate a public nuisance. 
3.  Date of notice of abatement being appealed. 
4.  Specific action or decision being appealed. 
5.  Grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable the Hearing Officer to understand the nature of the controversy. 
6.  The signature of at least one appellant. 
C.  Failure of the City Clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a notice of abatement. In this event, the notice of abatement is final and binding. 
D.  The provisions of this section only apply to instances where the City has elected to establish the right, but not the obligation, to abate public nuisances with City personnel. In no event does this chapter limit the right of City officials to issue alternative written or oral notices of code violations to responsible persons or to cause the abatement of public nuisances in a different manner, including without limitation, by court orders arising from the City's exercise of its criminal or civil remedies. In such instances, a responsible person shall receive a right to hearing and other due process rights through the court process. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.100 - Sample notice of abatement. 
A.  The notice of abatement shall be written in a form that is substantially consistent with the following: 
Notice of Public Nuisance(s) and Intention to Abate With City personnel ("Notice of Abatement") 
(Date) 
______________________________ [Responsible Person(s)] 
______________________________ [Mailing Address] 
______________________________ [City, State, and ZIP Code] 
Re: Real Property at ____________________, Montclair, California 
San Bernardino County Assessor's Parcel No.: ____________________ 
Legal description (Optional): ______________________________ 
  NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the following public nuisance conditions or activities exist on the premises described above: 
 (1) (Describe condition or activities) ______________________________ in violation of Montclair Municipal Code (as well as County and State laws, if applicable) Section(s) ____________________. 
 (a) Required corrective action(s): ______________________________ (with all required permits, approvals, and inspections) 
 (b) Required completion date: ______________________________. [Repeat Items 1(a-b) for each additional public nuisance to be included in this Notice.] 
 The foregoing public nuisance conditions are subject to abatement by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, removal, or termination. 
  PLEASE TAKE FURTHER NOTICE that you may appeal this Notice of Abatement by filing an appeal on a City approved form with the City Clerk's office (located at 5111 Benito Street, Montclair) within ten (10) calendar days of service of this notice. No fee shall be due for the filling of an appeal. Failure of the City Clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of your right to any further administrative appeal and renders the Notice of Abatement final and binding. A written request for an appeal shall contain the following information: 
 1. Name, address, and telephone number of each responsible party who is appealing the Notice of Abatement (hereinafter, "appellant"), as well as relationship of appellant to the public nuisance described in the Notice of Abatement. 
 2. Address and description of real property upon which the City intends to enter and abate a public nuisance. 
 3. Date of Notice of Abatement being appealed. 
 4. Specific action or decision being appealed. 
 5. Grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable the Hearing Officer to understand the nature of the controversy. 
 6. The signature of at least one appellant. 
Following appeal in the case of a final decision by the City, judicial review of this decision is subject to the provisions and time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.6 et seq. 
  PLEASE TAKE FURTHER NOTICE that if the public nuisance violations are not abated within the time specified and a timely appeal is not made, such nuisance may be abated by City employees, representatives, or contract agents (hereafter "City personnel") in the manner stated in this Notice of Abatement. On such occasions, all costs of the abatement including, but not limited to, those stated in Chapter 7.24 of the Montclair Municipal Code shall be assessed against the responsible person(s) and/or the subject property as a lien, or as a special assessment, or as otherwise allowed by law. 
  PLEASE TAKE FURTHER NOTICE that the City may record a Notice of Substandard Property with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office against the premises if the public nuisance is not fully abated or corrected (with all required approvals, permits, and inspections), as determined by the City, in the manner and time set forth in this Notice of Abatement and provided that a timely appeal therefrom has not been made. 
  PLEASE TAKE FURTHER NOTICE that, in the event of abatement by City personnel, all buildings, structures, and/or personal property constituting a public nuisance may be removed from the subject premises or from public property and destroyed or disposed of, without regard to its actual or salvage value. 
Dated this __________ day of _______________, 20___. 
      ______________________________ 
      Public Official (Name and Title) 
(End of Form) 
… 
A notice of abatement shall be deemed in substantial compliance with this subsection regardless of form if all substantive information is contained in such notice of abatement. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.110 - Consequence for an untimely appeal. 
A.  If a timely appeal is not received by the City Clerk, the right to appeal is waived and the notice of abatement is final and binding. In such instances, the City may, without any administrative hearing, cause the abatement with City personnel of any or all of the nuisance conditions or activities stated in the notice of abatement. Entry onto private real property that is both improved and occupied shall, excepting instances of an imminent hazard, be pursuant to a warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. The City shall follow the procedures stated in this chapter for recovery of all abatement costs, fees, and expenses (incidental or otherwise). 
B.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall obligate the City to undertake abatement actions pursuant to a notice of abatement, whether or not there is a timely appeal. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.120 - Abatement by responsible person prior to hearing. 
A.  Any responsible person shall have the right to abate a nuisance in accordance with the notice of abatement at his or her own expense, provided all corrective actions are completed with all required City permits, approvals, and inspections, prior to the date the matter is set for a hearing. 
B.  A hearing shall be cancelled if all nuisance conditions or activities are, as determined by the City, fully and lawfully abated prior thereto. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.130 - Review by hearing officer. 
A.  Any responsible person who contests a notice of abatement shall, subject to filing a timely appeal, obtain review thereof before a hearing officer. The administrative appeal shall be scheduled no later than 60 calendar days, and no sooner than 10 calendar days, after receipt of a timely filed request for appeal. The appellants listed on the written request for an appeal shall be notified in writing of the date, time, and location of the hearing at least 10 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
B.  Any request by an appellant to continue a hearing must be submitted to the City Clerk in writing no later than two business days before the date scheduled for the hearing. The hearing officer may continue a hearing for good cause or on his/her own motion; however, in no event may the hearing be continued for more than 30 calendar days without stipulation by all parties. 
C.  At the place and time set forth in the notification of appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider the testimony of the appealing person(s), the issuing officer, and/or their witnesses, as well as any documentary evidence presented by these persons concerning the alleged public nuisance(s). 
D.  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The City bears the burden of proof to establish a nuisance exists by a preponderance of evidence. The issuance of a notice of abatement shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation and the Code Enforcement Officer who issued the Notice of Abatement is not required to participate in the appeal hearing. The appellant and the enforcement officer issuing the Notice as well as all other responsible persons shall have the opportunity to present evidence and to present and cross examine witnesses. The appellant and the enforcement officer issuing the Notice of Abatement, or other responsible persons, may represent himself/herself/themselves or be represented by anyone of his/her/their choice. The appellant, or other interested persons, may bring an interpreter to the hearing at his/her/their sole expense. The City may, at its discretion, record the hearing by stenographer or court reporter, audio recording, or video recording. 
E.  If the appellant fails, or other responsible persons fail, to appear, or to otherwise submit any admissible evidence demonstrating the nonexistence of the alleged nuisance(s), the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and send a notice thereof to the responsible person(s) by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the appeal form. A cancellation of a hearing because of nonappearance of the appellant shall constitute the appellant's waiver of the right to appeal. In such instances, the notice of abatement is final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.140 - Decision of Hearing Officer—Order of abatement. 
A.  Not later than 15 calendar days following conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine if any nuisance condition exists at the subject property. If the hearing officer determines that each nuisance condition described in the notice of abatement is nonexistent, the notice of abatement shall be deemed cancelled. If the hearing officer determines that one or more of the nuisance conditions described in the notice of abatement exists, he/she shall issue a written order of abatement that shall contain the following: 
1.  A finding and description of each nuisance condition existing at the subject property. 
2.  The name of each person responsible for a nuisance condition or conditions at the subject property, as well as the name of any person who is not responsible therefor. 
3.  The required corrective action and a compliance period for each unabated nuisance condition. 
4.  Any other finding, determination, or requirement that is relevant or related to the subject matter of the appeal. 
5.  The following statement: "The decision of the Hearing Officer is final and binding. Judicial review of this decision is subject to the provisions and time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.6 et seq." 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 1.08 of this Code, the decision of the Hearing Officer is final and conclusive; and the responsible person shall not be entitled to appeal the determination of the hearing officer to the City Manager (if the Hearing Officer were someone other than the City Manager), Planning Commission, or City Council. 
C.  A copy of the decision shall be served by first class mail with receipt confirmation on each responsible person to whom the notice of abatement was issued. If the property owner is not an appellant, a copy of the order of abatement shall also be served on the owner by first class mail to the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll. Failure of a person to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the City pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  The failure of any responsible person to comply with an order of abatement by completing each of the requisite corrective actions in the manner and time set forth in the order of abatement constitutes a misdemeanor offense. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.150 - Abatement of nuisance by responsible persons prior to city abatement actions. 
A.  Any responsible person shall have the right to fully abate a nuisance in accordance with the Hearing Officer's decision prior to the date of entry of City personnel upon the subject real property, provided that all corrective actions are completed with all required City permits, approvals and inspections, prior to said entry date. In such instances, all administrative proceedings shall be cancelled, with the exception of the City's right to seek recovery of its incurred incidental expenses, Code Enforcement Fees, and Attorney's Fees as provided by and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Once the City enters a subject real property to abate a public nuisance, it shall have the right to complete this action. 
C.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to obstruct, impede, or interfere with City personnel in the performance of any act that is carried out to abate a public nuisance. 
D.  All buildings, structures, and/or personal property that is removed by City personnel from premises in the abatement of a nuisance shall be lawfully disposed of or destroyed without regard to its actual or salvage value, if any. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.160 - Emergency action to abate an imminent hazard. 
A.  Notwithstanding any provision of the Montclair Municipal Code to the contrary, the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, or the Building Official, or any of their designees, may cause a public nuisance to be summarily abated if it is determined that the nuisance creates an imminent hazard to a person or persons, or to other real or personal property. 
B.  Prior to abating a nuisance that creates an imminent hazard, the City Manager shall attempt to notify a responsible person by telephone or in writing of the imminent hazard and request its abatement by said person; provided however, that the City Manager may dispense with any attempt at prior notification of a responsible person if, in the sole discretion of the City Manager, the nature or severity of the hazard justifies such inaction. If notice has been so given, but, in the sole discretion of the City Manager, the responsible person(s) fail(s) to take immediate and meaningful steps to abate the imminent hazard, the City may abate the nuisance with City personnel without further notice, and charge the costs and fees thereof to the responsible person(s). 
C.  Within 10 business days following emergency action of City personnel to abate an imminent hazard, the City shall serve any responsible person with a notice of emergency abatement by City personnel of an imminent hazard by first class mail. Notice to a property owner shall be mailed to the mailing address set forth in the last equalized assessment roll of the San Bernardino County Assessor's Office. Failure of any responsible person to receive a properly addressed notice of emergency abatement by City personnel of an imminent hazard by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  A Notice of Emergency Abatement by City personnel of an Imminent Hazard shall contain the following provisions: 
1.  The name of all known responsible persons who are being served with the notice of emergency abatement by City personnel of an imminent hazard and the address of the real property on which the imminent hazard was present. 
2.  A brief description of the condition(s) and reasons why it constitutes an imminent hazard. 
3.  A brief description of the law prohibiting or pertaining to the imminent hazard. 
4.  A brief description of the actions City personnel took to abate the imminent hazard. 
E.  Omission of any of the foregoing provisions in a notice of emergency abatement by City personnel of an imminent hazard, whether in whole or in part, or the failure of a responsible person to receive this document, or the failure of the City to issue this document in a timely fashion, shall not render it defective or render any proceeding or action pursuant to this chapter invalid. 
F.  Emergency abatement of an imminent hazard by City personnel shall not preclude the City from recording a declaration of substandard property in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.24.220 of this chapter, if conditions thereafter remain at the premises that constitute a violation of law or a public nuisance. 
G.  The City shall be entitled to recover its fees and costs (incidental or otherwise) for the abatement of an imminent hazard. In such instances, the City shall follow the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.170 - Combination of notices. 
The notices that are authorized by this chapter may be combined in the discretion of the City. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.180 - Establishment of costs of abatement. 
A.  The City shall keep an accounting of the abatement costs. 
B.  The City shall serve a statement of abatement costs on the responsible persons within 90 calendar days of the City's completion of nuisance abatement actions. Service of this statement may be made in the manner provided for in Section 7.24.080 of this chapter. 
C.  Unless a timely contest of the statement of abatement costs is filed, a responsible person shall tender the abatement costs in U.S. currency to the City within 30 calendar days of the date of service of the statement of abatement costs. 
D.  A responsible person has the right to contest a statement of abatement costs by filing a written request for contest with the City Clerk's Office (located at 5111 Benito Street, Montclair) within 10 calendar days of service of the statement of abatement costs. 
1.  A written request for contest shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name, address, telephone number, and signature of each responsible person who is contesting the statement of abatement costs. 
b.  Address and description of the real property upon which the City abated a public nuisance. 
c.  Date of the statement of abatement costs being appealed. 
d.  Description of the specific abatement cost being contested, and a statement of the grounds for contest in sufficient detail to enable the City Manager to understand the nature of the controversy. 
2.  No fee shall be due for the filing of a request for contest. 
E.  Failure of the City Clerk to receive a timely appeal request for contest constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a statement of abatement costs. In this event, the statement of abatement costs is final and binding, and the City may proceed to collect its abatement costs as contained in a final statement of abatement costs in any manner allowed by law. 
F.  If a timely request for contest is received by the City Clerk, a hearing shall be set before the City Manager no later than 60 calendar days, and no sooner than 10 calendar days, of receipt of the request for contest. A notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be served on all responsible persons who contested the statement of abatement costs by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the request form at least 10 calendar days prior to the hearing. Failure of a person requesting a contest to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the City pursuant to this chapter. 
G.  Any request by an appellant to continue a hearing must be submitted to the City Clerk in writing no later than five business days before the date scheduled for the hearing. The City Manager may continue a hearing for good cause or on his or her own motion; however, in no event may the hearing be continued for more 60 calendar days without stipulation by all parties. 
H.  At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the request to contest the statement of abatement costs, the City Manager shall hear and pass upon the evidence submitted by City personnel, together with any objections or protests raised by responsible persons liable for said costs. Testimony and evidence shall be limited to issues related to the abatement costs, and no person shall be permitted to present evidence or testimony challenging the existence of a public nuisance or manner of abatement as described in the notice of abatement. Thereupon, the City Manager may make such revision, correction or modification to the statement as it may deem just, after which the statement, as it is submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
I.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 1.08 or any other provision of this Code, the decision of the City Manager is final and binding, and a responsible person shall not be entitled to a hearing before the Planning Commission or the City Council. 
J.  The City Clerk shall cause a confirmed statement of abatement costs to be served upon all persons who contested the original statement by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the request form. The City Clerk shall cause a confirmed statement of abatement costs to be served on the owner of the property on which City personnel abated a public nuisance by first class mail to the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll (irrespective of whether the owner contested the statement of abatement costs). This document shall also contain the following statement: "The decision of the City Manager is final and binding. Judicial review of the this decision is subject to the provisions and time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.6 et seq." 
K.  Failure of a person to receive a properly addressed confirmed statement shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the City pursuant to this chapter. 
L.  A responsible person shall tender the abatement costs in U.S. Currency to the City within 30 calendar days of the date of service of the confirmed Statement of abatement costs. The abatement costs (as contained in an uncontested statement on abatement costs or in a confirmed statement of abatement costs) shall constitute a civil debt against the responsible party(ies) and may be collected by the City in any manner authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.190 - Collection of abatement costs by special assessment. 
A.  The City may cause a special assessment to be made upon real property upon which a public nuisance was abated pursuant to California Government Code, Section 38773.5, and future amendments thereto, in the event a statement of abatement costs or a confirmed statement of abatement costs is not paid in a timely manner. 
B.  A notice of special assessment shall be sent to the owner(s) of the subject real property by certified mail at the time the assessment is imposed that shall contain the following recitals: 
The property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax collector's power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrance for value has been created and attaches thereon prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
C.  The City Attorney or City Prosecutor shall establish the notice of special assessment form for use, or consideration by, the Tax Collector in collecting a special assessment. 
D.  The notice of special assessment shall be entitled to recordation with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office. 
E.  The amount of a special assessment shall also constitute a personal obligation of the property owners of land upon which the nuisance was abated. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.200 - Collection of costs of abatement by nuisance abatement lien. 
A.  As an alternative to the procedure contained in Section 7.24.190 of this chapter, the City may cause a nuisance abatement lien to be recorded upon real property upon which a public nuisance was abated pursuant to California Government Code, Section 38773.1, and future amendments thereto, in the event a statement of abatement costs or a confirmed statement of abatement costs is not paid in a timely manner. 
B.  A lien shall not be recorded prior to serving the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the public nuisance is maintained, with a notice. This document shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten (10) days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in San Bernardino County pursuant to Section 6062 of the California Government Code. 
C.  The nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the San Bernardino County Recorder's office in the County in which the parcel of land is located and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. 
D.  A nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section shall specify the amount of the lien for the City of Montclair, the name of the City department on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date of the abatement actions, the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
E.  In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, through either payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection D of this section shall be recorded by the City. A nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index. 
F.  A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the City for a money judgment. 
G.  The City may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
H.  The amount of a nuisance abatement lien shall also constitute a personal obligation of the property owners of land upon which the nuisance was abated. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.210 - Triple the costs of abatement. 
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.7 (or any subsequent amendment thereto), upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a public nuisance except for public nuisance conditions abated pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17980 ("State Housing Law"), the court may order that person to pay triple the costs of the abatement. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
Article 3. - Recordation, Enforcement and Attorney's Fees 
 
7.24.220 - Recordation of substandard notice. 
A.  Notwithstanding any provision of the Montclair Municipal Code to the contrary, if the City determines that any property, building or structure, or any part thereof, is in violation of any provision of the Montclair Municipal Code and said violation has not been fully abated or corrected, as determined by the City, in the manner and time provided in a written notice to a responsible person, then the City, in its sole discretion, may record a "Declaration of Substandard Property" with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office against said premises. As used herein, "fully abated or corrected" includes the procurement of all required City and/or County approvals, permits, licenses and the passage of all required inspections. 
B.  A declaration of substandard property may be recorded after service of a notice to abate provided that: (i) the notice to abate contained this disclosure, (ii) the public nuisance was not, as determined by the City, fully abated or corrected in the manner and time specified in the notice to abate, and, (iii) either a timely and proper appeal of the notice to abate was not made or, in any instance where a notice to abate was timely appealed, the notice to abate is upheld by the reviewing administrative authority. 
C.  The City may record a declaration of substandard property without the issuance of a "notice to abate", provided that a written notice of violation or a written notice of correction to a responsible person previously disclosed that a declaration of substandard property might be recorded against a property if a violation is not fully abated or corrected in the manner and time delineated in said notice. 
D.  The form that constitutes a declaration of substandard property shall be approved by the City Attorney or the City Prosecutor. 
E.  The City shall record a notice of rescission of substandard property with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office within ten (10) business days of its determination that a violation or a public nuisance has been fully abated or corrected. 
F.  The City shall cause copies of recorded declaration of substandard property and notice of rescission of substandard property to be served on all persons having an ownership interest in the subject real property as shown in the last equalized assessment roll of the San Bernardino County Assessor's Office. Notwithstanding any provision of the Montclair Municipal Code, service thereof shall be by first class mail. Failure of any person to receive such notices shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.230 - Code enforcement fees. 
A.  Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17951, and any successor statute thereto, responsible persons, who cause, allow, permit, suffer, or maintain a violation in, or upon, residential properties, shall be charged fees (hereafter "Code Enforcement Fees") by the City to defray its costs of code enforcement actions, as hereafter defined. Such fees shall not exceed the amount reasonably required to achieve this objective and are chargeable whether the City's Code Enforcement actions occur in the absence of formal administrative or judicial proceedings, as well as prior to, during, or subsequent to, the initiation of such proceedings. 
B.  The amount(s) or rate(s) of Code Enforcement Fees for City personnel time and other resources that are used for Code Enforcement actions shall be established and may thereafter be amended by resolution by the City Council. 
C.  The City Manager, or a designee thereof, is authorized to adopt regulations for the uniform imposition of Code Enforcement Fees and for related administrative actions pertaining to such fees. 
D.  The fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other fees or charges that responsible persons may owe in accordance with any other provision of the this Code or that are imposed pursuant to county, state, or federal laws or regulations. 
E.  Code Enforcement Fees shall be recoverable in conjunction with any civil, administrative, or criminal action to abate, cause the abatement or cessation of, or otherwise remove a violation or a public nuisance. 
F.  Failure to pay Code Enforcement Fees shall constitute a debt that is collectible in any manner allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.240 Recovery - of attorney's fees. 
A.  A prevailing party in any administrative, civil or equitable judicial action to abate, or cause the abatement of a public nuisance as defined in this chapter, or in any appeal or other judicial action arising therefrom, may recover reasonable attorney's fees in accordance with the following subsections: 
1.  Attorney's fees are not recoverable by any person as a prevailing party unless the City Manager, or a designee thereof or an attorney for and on behalf of the City, elects in writing to seek recovery of the City's attorney's fees at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding. Failure to make such an election precludes any entitlement to, or award of, attorney's fees in favor of any person or the City. 
2.  The City is the prevailing party when an administrative or judicial determination is made or affirmed by which a person is found to be responsible for one or more conditions or activities that constitute a public nuisance. A person is the prevailing party only when a final administrative or judicial determination completely absolves that person of responsibility for all conditions or activities that were alleged, in that action or proceeding, to constitute a public nuisance. An administrative or judicial determination that results in findings of responsibility and nonresponsibility on the part of a person for conditions or activities that were alleged in that action or proceeding to constitute a public nuisance, shall nevertheless result in the City being the prevailing party. 
B.  Provided that the City has made an election to seek attorney's fees, an award of attorney's fees to a person shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the City in that action or proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
7.24.250 - Applicability of other laws. 
A.  This chapter does not exclusively regulate the conditions and use of property within the City. This chapter shall supplement other provisions of this Code and other statutes, ordinances or regulations now existing or subsequently enacted by the City, the State or any other entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
B.  The procedures for abatement set forth in this chapter are not exclusive and are in addition to any other provisions set forth in this Code or by state law for the abatement of public nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 09-911, § 3, 1-4-10)  
Chapter 7.28 - REMOVAL OR POSSESSION OF SHOPPING CART 
 
7.28.010 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  The City Council of the City of Montclair finds and declares that the accumulation of abandoned, lost, stolen, wrecked, or dismantled shopping carts on public or private property constitutes a nuisance, and creates conditions that promote blight and deterioration; negatively impact community image and property values; are aesthetically detrimental; and constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health, safety, and general welfare of the City's residents and community. Abandoned, lost, stolen, wrecked, and/or dismantled shopping carts also interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
B.  Although the City has enacted regulations pertaining to the containment and management of shopping cars by retail owners (contained in Chapter 11.67), the purpose of this chapter is to supplement existing state and local laws regarding shopping carts (including those contained within California Business and Professions Code Section 22435 et seq.) and minimize the likelihood that shopping carts will be removed from retailers' premises and abandoned elsewhere in the community. 
(Ord. No. 17-963, § 2, 2-6-17)  
7.28.020 - Required signs on cart. 
Every owner, manager, or operator of any business establishment in the City of Montclair that provides shopping carts for use by its patrons shall ensure that every shopping cart has a sign permanently affixed to the shopping cart that contains, at a minimum, the following information: 
A.  Identification of the owner of the cart or the name of the business establishment, or both; 
B.  Notification to the public of the procedures to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the business premises; 
C.  Notification to the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the premises or parking area of the business establishment is a violation of state and City of Montclair law; 
D.  Telephone number to contact to report the location of the abandoned cart; and 
E.  An address for returning the cart to the owner or business establishment. 
(Ord. No. 17-963, § 2, 2-6-17)  
7.28.030 - Prohibited removal or possession of abandoned shopping cart. 
It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts, if a shopping cart has a permanently affixed sign as provided in Section 7.28.020, without the express written authorization of the owner of the shopping cart and/or business establishment (which authorization shall be valid for a period not to exceed 72 hours - other than for shopping carts which have been removed with written permission for repair or maintenance): 
A.  To remove a shopping cart from the premises or parking area of any retail establishment. 
B.  To be in possession of any abandoned shopping cart. 
C.  To be in possession of any shopping cart with serial numbers removed, obliterated, or altered with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. 
D.  To leave or abandon a shopping cart at any location (public or private) other than the premises or parking area of the retail establishment with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. 
E.  To alter, convert, or tamper with a shopping cart, or to remove any part or portion thereof, or to remove, obliterate, or alter serial numbers on a cart, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retail of possession of the cart. 
(Ord. No. 17-963, § 2, 2-6-17)  
7.28.040 - Prohibited removal of or tampering with cart containment system. 
It is unlawful for any person to remove or tamper with any physical mechanism designed to contain a cart on the premises of the owner thereof (including, but not limited to, physical device designed to lock or disable the wheels of a cart) without the express written permission of the owner of the cart and/or business establishment. 
(Ord. No. 17-963, § 2, 2-6-17)  
7.28.050 - Applicability of other laws. 
Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the enforcement of other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 17-963, § 2, 2-6-17)  
7.28.060 - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor violation punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of Title 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-963, § 2, 2-6-17)  
Chapter 7.32 - TRESPASS UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
7.32.010 - Trespass upon private property prohibited. 
A.  Private Property Open to the Public. No person shall enter, occupy, or remain on any private property open to the public, or any structure thereon, for a period of time in excess of that stated in any notice posted on such property or structure limiting the time any patron, customer, or invitee of the premises may remain on the premises or structure thereon. 
1.  For purposes of this subsection A, any sign placed upon any real property or structure thereon limiting the time during which patrons, customers, or invitees of any business on such premises or in such structure may enter or remain shall be conspicuously placed on the premises or structure in such a manner as to give notice of such limitations to persons entering the premises or structure thereon, and shall be printed in legible letters at least two inches in height. 
2.  No person shall enter, occupy, or remain on any private property open to the public, or any structure thereon, after being requested to leave, or if consent to enter, occupy, or remain on said private property or structure thereon has otherwise been withdrawn, by the owner, owner's agent, lessee, or person in lawful possession and said person has been so informed by the owner, owner's agent, lessee, person in lawful possession, or by an enforcement officer acting on behalf of the owner, owner's agent, lessee, or person in lawful possession in accordance with subsection 7.32.010(C). 
B.  Posted Private Property. No person shall enter, occupy, or remain upon posted private property, or any structure thereon, without the express or implied permission of the owner, owner's agent, lessee, or person in lawful possession of such posted property. 
1.  For purposes of this subsection B, "posted private property" shall mean any property where at least one sign is posted in a conspicuous manner at every walkway and driveway entering any enclosed property or portion thereof, and at a minimum of every 50 feet along the boundary of any unenclosed lot. Where the area of such property exceeds one acre, the sign shall be posted at intervals of not more than 300 feet along or near the boundaries thereof. The requirements of this subsection are met if at least one sign is conspicuously posted on the outside of every structure on such property, so as to be readable from each walkway and driveway entering such property. 
2.  The sign(s) required pursuant to this section shall be posted at least three feet above the normal ground level, and said sign(s) shall be composed of wood, metal, or other equally substantial and durable material, the face of which is not less than one square foot in area, and upon which, in legible letters not less than two inches in height in black or red against white background, appear, at a minimum, the following words: 
  
In addition, the sign(s) may contain such other words as may be desired, indicating that trespassers are subject to arrest and prosecution. 
C.  Enforcement Officer Assistance. When an enforcement officer's assistance in dealing with a trespass pursuant to this section is requested, the owner, owner's agent, lessee, or person in lawful possession shall make a separate request to the enforcement officer on each occasion. However, a single request for an enforcement officer's assistance may be made to cover a limited period of time not to exceed six months when such request is made in writing and provides the specific dates of the authorization period. A request for assistance shall expire upon transfer of ownership of the property or, if the request was made by the lessee or other person in lawful possession, upon change in the lessee or other person in lawful possession. Written requests for an enforcement officer's assistance that covers a limited period of time shall be kept on file with the Montclair Police Department. 
1.  As used in this section, "enforcement officer" shall mean and include any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this Chapter (including, the Montclair Police Department and Code Enforcement Division). 
D.  Exceptions. The provisions of Section 7.32.010 shall not apply in any of the following instances: 
1.  When its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by the Unruh Civil Rights Act, or any other provision of law relating to prohibited discrimination against any person on account of sex, race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, disability, medical condition, marital status, or sexual orientation; 
2.  When its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by California Penal Code Section 365 or any other provision of law relating to duties of innkeepers and common carriers; 
3.  When its application would result in a violation of any law allowing for peaceful labor picketing or other lawful labor activities; 
4.  When its application would result in an interference with any person lawfully engaging in activities protected by the United States Constitution or when persons are engaging in acts which are expressly required or permitted by any provision of law; 
5.  When the person who is upon another's private property is there pursuant to the property owner's, lessee's, or other person in lawful possession's expressive activity policy; 
a.  As used in this subsection, an "expressive activity policy" means a written policy of the owner of a shopping center or other similar establishment that establishes regulations for the time, place, and manner of expressive activity on private property; 
6.  When public officers or employees are acting within the course of their employment or in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 17-961, § 1, 2-6-17)  
7.32.020 - Applicability of other laws. 
Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the enforcement of other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 17-961, § 1, 2-6-17)  
7.32.030 - Violations and penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor violation punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of Title 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-961, § 1, 2-6-17)  
Title 8 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.02 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
8.02.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this title, the following definitions shall apply. For purposes of Title 8, these definitions shall supersede any other definitions of the same terms elsewhere in this Code: 
Bicycle means any such vehicle propelled by human power as defined or referred to in the California Vehicle Code, but not required to be registered thereunder, and shall be given its ordinary application and meaning. 
Commercial equipment , when applied to stopping/standing/parking, means and includes, but is not limited to, backhoes, tractors, bucket loaders, air compressors, concrete mixers, road rollers, concrete pumps or pole and pipe dollies, and similar transportable equipment. 
Commercial motor vehicle , when applied to stopping/standing/parking, means a vehicle of a type required to be registered under the State Vehicle Code, and used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit, or designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. Passenger vehicles which are not used for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit are not commercial vehicles. 
Definitions Incorporated . Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not herein defined but are defined in the California Vehicle Code, such definitions are incorporated in this title and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this title as though set forth in full. 
Emergency responders include, but are not limited to, public safety officers of either a municipal or county police department or fire department, emergency medical technicians, paramedics, private ambulance service responders, emergency management workers, and federal and state law enforcement and fire service officers on duty and responding to an emergency service request. 
Loading zone means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Mobile Electronic device means any handheld, head- or body-mounted, or portable electronic equipment capable of providing wireless and/or data communication between two or more persons or a device for providing amusement, including but not limited to a cellular phone, smart phone, text messaging device, paging device, personal digital assistant, laptop computer, video game, video/audio player, digital photographic device, or any other similar electronic device. 
Park means to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers or materials. 
Parkway means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
Passenger loading zone means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Pedestrian means a person who is afoot or who is using any of the following: (1) a means of conveyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle; or (2) an electric personal assistive mobility device. 
Personal audio equipment means any device placed in, on or around a person's ears capable of providing an audible sound, including but not limited to headphones or ear buds. 
Police officer means every officer of the Police Department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
Stop means the complete cessation of movement. 
Stop or stand means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
Trailer , when applied to stopping/standing/parking, means a vehicle designed for carrying persons or property on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, whether or not part of its weight rests upon or is carried by any other vehicle. 
Vehicle Code means the California Vehicle Code. 
Viewing means looking in the direction of the screen of a mobile electronic device. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code §§ 4-1.01, 4-4.103, 4-4.105, 4-4.112) 
(Ord. No. 17-971, § 1, 12-4-17)  
Chapter 8.04 - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS—ENFORCEMENT/OBEDIENCE 
Sections: 
 
8.04.010 - Authority of Police and Fire Department officers. 
A.  Enforce Laws. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department, or such other members of the Police Department assigned by the Chief of Police, to enforce street traffic laws in the City and the State vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the City. 
B.  Direct Traffic. Officers of the Police Department, or other members of the Police Department assigned by the Chief of Police, are authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand, or other signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, however, in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers or other members of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
C.  Direct Traffic in Emergencies. Officers of the Fire Department or other members of the Fire Department assigned by the Fire Chief, who at the scene of a fire or who in the course of their duties are protecting the personnel or equipment of the Fire Department, may direct or assist police officers or other members of the Police Department in directing traffic. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.301)  
8.04.020 - Exemptions to certain vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicles of the Police or Fire Department, any public ambulance, any public utility vehicle, or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. 
B.  The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his or her willful disregard of the safety of others. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a City department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or to any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. 
D.  The provisions of this chapter or Vehicle Code sections regulating the stopping, parking or standing of motor vehicles in front of public or private driveways shall not apply to a school bus, a bus engaged as a common carrier, or a taxicab while engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers (Authority: 22500(e) CVC). 
E.  The provisions of this chapter or Vehicle Code sections regulating curb spaces designated for the loading or unloading of passengers of a transit system shall not apply to school buses while engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers when there is such an agreement between the transit system and the public school district (Authority: 22500.5 CVC). 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.307)  
Chapter 8.08 - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
8.08.010 - Authority to install. 
California Vehicle Code Section 21351 authorizes local authorities to place and maintain traffic-control devices, including signals, signs and markings, including lane markings. The City Engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, such traffic-control devices when and as required by the traffic laws of the City to make effective the provisions of such laws. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.401)  
Chapter 8.12 - BICYCLES 
Sections: 
 
8.12.010 - Scope of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons residing in the City and to such other persons who may commonly or habitually operate bicycles upon the public streets of the City. 
(Prior code § 4-1.02)  
8.12.020 - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle upon any of the streets of the City without first registering such bicycle and obtaining from the Administrative Services Department a license therefor. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 4-1.03)  
8.12.030 - License—Issuance, term and fees. 
A.  Issuance. The Administrative Services Department shall register bicycles and issue licenses for bicycles upon written applications and payment of fees therefor. 
B.  Terms. Such licenses shall be effective for a period of five years. 
C.  Fees. The fees for registration shall be as established by City Council resolution. No further fee shall be charged unless the bicycle is sold or given to a person within the City. If sold or given to a person within the City, the bicycle shall be reregistered as set forth in Section 8.12.050 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-1.04)  
8.12.040 - License plates—Registration cards. 
A.  Administrative Services Department to Control and Supervise. The control and supervision of the registration and licensing of bicycles in the City is placed with the Administrative Services Department, which is given authorization and direction to secure appropriate license plates, together with registration cards, application blanks, and any and all other items which may be required for the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
B.  License Plates and Registration. A license plate shall be attached to each bicycle, and it shall be the duty of the person in the Administrative Services Department so designated to attach one such license plate to each bicycle licensed and to issue a corresponding registration card to each license upon the payment of the original license fee. Such license pilate shall remain attached during the continuance of such licensing. 
C.  Records. A record of the date of the issuance of each license, to whom it was issued, the number thereof, and the serial number of the bicycle frame shall be maintained in the Administrative Services Department. 
D.  Serial Numbers. If no serial number can be found upon any registered bicycle, or if the serial number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes, a permanent distinguishing number shall be stamped on the bottom side of the sprocket frame of such bicycle by a person in the Administrative Services Department so designated. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-1.05)  
8.12.050 - Transfer of ownership—Fee. 
All license fees shall be paid in advance. Licenses for which such fees have been paid may be transferred when the ownership of a bicycle is transferred. A fee, as established by Council resolution, shall be paid for the registration of any transfer. Upon the transfer of any bicycle licensed in the City, the parties thereto are required to register the facts of such transfer with the Administrative Services Department within 10 days, and thereupon the original registration card shall be cancelled and a new registration card shall be issued to the new owner. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-1.06)  
Chapter 8.16 - DESIGNATED STREETS 
Sections: 
 
8.16.010 - Parking time limited on certain streets. 
When parking restrictions are enacted by City Council resolution and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle on the days and during the hours specified upon any of the streets or alleys or parts of streets or alleys on which such signs are placed. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1306)  
8.16.020 - Truck routes. 
A.  Classification. The streets or portions thereof of the City are declared to be and are divided and classified into two groups and shall henceforth be known as and regulated as to heavy traffic by the names of such two groups, together with regulations pertaining thereto as set forth in this section. Such two groups are designated as: unrestricted streets and restricted streets. 
B.  Unrestricted Streets. The streets designated in this subsection shall henceforth be known and designated as unrestricted streets, and the City imposes no weight restrictions or regulations thereon except as are contained in the Vehicle Code of the State: 
1.  Arrow Highway, from the westerly City Limits to Benson Avenue; 
2.  Palo Verde Street from Monte Vista Avenue to Central Avenue; 
3.  Holt Boulevard, from Mills Avenue to Central Avenue; 
4.  Mission Boulevard, from the westerly City Limits to Central Avenue; 
5.  Monte Vista Avenue, from Palo Verde Street to the northerly City Limits; 
6.  Central Avenue, from the northerly City Limits to the southerly City Limits; 
7.  Monte Vista Avenue from Mission Boulevard to Holt Boulevard; and 
8.  Brooks Street from Ramona Avenue to a point 1,650 feet east of the centerline of Monte Vista Avenue. 
C.  Restricted Streets. It is unlawful for any person owning or operating any motor vehicle or truck-trailer combination exceeding a maximum gross weight of 10,000 pounds to drive or propel the same, or to cause or permit the same to be driven or propelled, at any time upon, over or across any and all streets or portions of streets not otherwise classified as unrestricted streets. 
D.  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit any vehicle or truck-trailer combination exceeding the prescribed maximum gross weight limit, coming from an unrestricted or less restricted street, having ingress and egress by direct route to and from such restricted streets, when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets, and for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building, structure, or street upon such restricted street; but then only by such deviation from the nearest unrestricted or less restricted street as is reasonably necessary. 
E.  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the State; 
2.  Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation, servicing, or repair of any public utility; 
3.  Emergency vehicles of the City; 
4.  School buses under the jurisdiction of any school district; 
5.  Any vehicle owned by the City while necessarily in use in the construction, installation, servicing, or repair of any City-owned facility; 
6.  Any vehicle owned or operated by contractor or subcontractor under contract with the City while in use in the construction, installation, servicing, or repair of any City-owned facility; or 
7.  Refuse collection vehicles. 
F.  Signs. The City Council, in accordance with the provisions of Section 35701 of the Vehicle Code of the State, determines that notice of the provisions of this section will best be given by posting unrestricted streets affected by the provisions of this section, and the City Engineer is authorized to post appropriate signs on any such street, which signs shall state and declare the load limits established by the provisions of this section. The City Engineer may post appropriate signs on restricted streets as he/she deems necessary. 
G.  Proof of Compliance. Any police officer shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any vehicle proceeding over a street to proceed to any public or private scale within a radius of 10 miles for the purpose of weighing such vehicles and determining whether there has been compliance with the provisions of this section. 
H.  Weight Violations—Penalty. Any person in violation of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1.12 of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 06-874 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1309) 
(Ord. No. 14-947, § 1, 10-20-14; Ord. No. 16-959, § 1, 9-19-16)  
Chapter 8.20 - IGNITION KEY REMOVAL 
Sections: 
 
8.20.010 - Requirement of ignition key removal. 
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first locking the ignition and removing the ignition key from the vehicle. 
(Prior code § 4-4.1401)  
8.20.020 - Removal of ignition key by police officer. 
Whenever any police officer or other traffic regulator finds a motor vehicle standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, they are authorized to remove such key from such vehicle and to deliver the key to the Police Department. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1402)  
8.20.030 - Registered owner responsible. 
The registered owner of a vehicle found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be held responsible for such violation. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1403)  
Chapter 8.24 - MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
8.24.010 - Operating vehicles on private property prohibited—Exceptions. 
A.  No person shall operate upon the private property of another, or upon any public property which is not held open to the public for any vehicular use and which is not subject to the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the State, a motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, mini-bike, trail bike, dune buggy, motor scooter, jeep, or other form of transportation propelled by an internal combustion engine. 
B.  The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not prohibit the operation of motor vehicles upon the property of another when such motor vehicles are: 
1.  Authorized emergency vehicles; 
2.  For ingress to and egress from and parking upon parking lots or structures open to the public or private parking lots; 
3.  Operated upon property used for a motor vehicle riding area which has received approval from the City and is being operated as a business; 
4.  Governmental agency vehicles, including any motor vehicle riding facility operated by the City; 
5.  Upon the property of another, with the written consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such property and when a valid conditional use permit has been granted pursuant to the provisions of Title 11 of this Code; and 
6.  Upon private property for ingress and egress only. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of such vehicles on private property by the owners or lessees or their families and employees. 
(Prior code § 4-4.807)  
8.24.020 - Cruising regulation. 
It is a violation for any person to engage in "cruising" as defined in this section on any public roadway within the City. 
A.  "Cruising" shall be defined as the repetitive driving of a motor vehicle past a traffic control point in traffic which is congested at or near the traffic control point, as determined by the ranking peace officer on duty within the affected area, within three hours of receipt of a written notice that further driving past the control point will be a violation of this section. 
B.  No person is in violation of this section unless: (1) that person has driven past the control point at least once and on a subsequent trip has been given a written notice that passing the traffic control point within a subsequent three-hour period will be a violation of this section; and (2) the beginning and end of the portion of the roadway subject to cruising controls are clearly identified by signs that state: 
No-Cruising Zone 
Upon second trip between signs, drivers are subject to written notice that further cruising within three hours is a violation of Montclair Municipal Code Section 8.24.020. 
C.  In determining whether a roadway or portion of a roadway is congested, the ranking peace officer may consider, among other factors, the time of day, the flow of traffic slowed to less than 15 miles-per-hour, or where motor vehicles cannot move through a one-fourth mile approach corridor to an intersection controlled by a traffic light, stop sign or yield sign within a five-minute period where the delay is due to the position of other operable motor vehicles. 
D.  This section shall not apply to vehicles that are classified as emergency vehicles, taxicabs for hire, buses, vehicles driven for business purposes, or any publicly owned or leased vehicle. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.808)  
8.24.030 - Use of curb ramps. 
A.  Definition. Curb ramps are sloped sections of paving used to permit access from a street or parking lot to a sidewalk, landing, or building. Curb ramps are also known as handicap ramps, handicap access ramps, and wheelchair ramps. 
B.  It is a violation for any person in a motorized vehicle to use a curb ramp to gain access to a sidewalk, landing, parking lot, public property, or private property. 
C.  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to people using motorized wheelchairs or motorized scooters. 
(Ord. 04-846 § 1)  
Chapter 8.28 - PEDESTRIANS 
Sections: 
 
8.28.010 - Authority to establish crosswalks. 
A.  The City Engineer has the authority to establish and maintain crosswalks at locations deemed to pose a particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway. Such crosswalks shall be subject to the provisions of subsection B of this section. 
B.  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than 400 feet in length. Elsewhere not more than one additional crosswalk shall be established in any one block, and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-block. 
C.  The City Engineer may restrict pedestrian traffic at crosswalks when such crossing would pose a hazard to pedestrians. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.901)  
8.28.020 - Pedestrian use of mobile electronic devices. 
A.  No pedestrian shall cross a street or highway while engaged in a phone call, viewing a mobile electronic device or with both ears covered or obstructed by personal audio equipment. 
B.  Upon presenting evidence, it is an affirmative defense to any citation for a violation of subsection A that the cited person was engaged in, or making, a "911" emergency communication with a mobile electronic device. 
C.  Emergency responders viewing a mobile electronic device, or whose ears are covered or obstructed by audio equipment, while in the performance and scope of his or her official duties are exempt from subsection A. 
D.  Persons, whose disability necessitates the use of a mobile electronic device or personal audio equipment to safely cross a street or highway, are exempt from subsection A. 
E.  Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of an infraction violation punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of Title 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-971, § 1, 12-4-17; Ord. No. 18-977, § 1, 11-5-18)  
Chapter 8.32 - SPECIAL SPEED ZONES 
 
8.32.010 - Prima facie speed limits on certain streets. 
The City Council of the City of Montclair determines and declares, upon the basis of engineering and traffic surveys made on or after September 2017, which surveys are public records on file in the offices of the Engineering Division of the Public Works Department of the City, that the prima facie speed limits specified in those sections are reasonable, safe, and most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic upon the streets and portions of streets specified in those sections, which streets and portions of streets would otherwise be subject to the prima facie speed limits established in the California Vehicle Code. 
These prima facie speed limits shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon the streets and portions of streets to which they pertain. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any 25 mile per hour prima facie speed limit which is applicable when passing a school or the grounds thereof. 
Name of Street or 
Portion of Street Affected 	Declared 
Prima Facie 
Speed Limit 
(miles per 
hour) 
1. Arrow Highway, from the west City Limits to Benson Avenue 	45 
2. Benito Street, from Mills Avenue to Benson Avenue 	35 
3. Benson Avenue, from north City Limits to Moreno Street 	40 
4. Benson Avenue, from Moreno Street to UPRR tracks 	35 
5. Brooks Street, from Silicon Avenue to Benson Avenue 	40 
6. Central Avenue, from the north City Limits to Holt Boulevard 	40 
7. Central Avenue, from Holt Boulevard to Phillips Boulevard 	45 
8. Fremont Avenue, from Arrow Highway to Moreno Street 	40 
9. Fremont Avenue, from State Street to Mission Boulevard 	35 
10. Fremont Avenue, from Mission Boulevard to Phillips Boulevard 	30 
11. Holt Boulevard, from Mills Avenue to Benson Avenue 	45 
12. Howard Street, from Pipeline Avenue to Central Avenue 	35 
13. Kingsley Street, from Mills Avenue to Benson Avenue 	35 
14. Mills Avenue, from Moreno Street to the San Bernardino Street 	40 
15. Mills Avenue, from San Bernardino Street to the UPRR tracks 	45 
16. Mission Boulevard, from the west City Limits to Central Avenue 	45 
17. Monte Vista Avenue, from north City Limits to Arrow Highway 	45 
18. Monte Vista Avenue, from Arrow Highway to San Bernardino Street 	40 
19. Monte Vista Avenue, from San Bernardino Street to Holt Boulevard 	35 
20. Monte Vista Avenue, from Holt Boulevard to Phillips Boulevard 	40 
21. Moreno Street, from Mills Avenue to Monte Vista Avenue 	35 
22. Moreno Street, from Monte Vista Avenue to Benson Avenue 	40 
23. Orchard Street, from Mills Avenue to Benson Avenue 	40 
24. Palo Verde Street, from Mills Avenue to Helena Avenue 	40 
25. Palo Verde Street, from Monte Vista Avenue to Central Avenue 	40 
26. Palo Verde Street, from Central Avenue to Benson Avenue 	35 
27. Ramona Avenue, from Palo Verde Street to Holt Boulevard 	35 
28. Ramona Avenue, from Holt Boulevard to Phillips Boulevard 	40 
29. Richton Street, from Monte Vista Avenue to Central Avenue 	40 
30. San Bernardino Street, from Mills Avenue to Benson Avenue 	40 
31. San José Street, from Mills Avenue to Monte Vista Avenue 	35 
32. San José Street, from Central Avenue to Benson Avenue 	35 
33. State Street, from the west City Limits to Benson Avenue 	45 
 
(Ord. No. 11-922, § 1, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 11-925, § 1, 9-6-11; Ord. No. 15-954, § 1, 7-6-15; Ord. No. 19-981, § 1, 2-19-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-922, § 1, adopted June 6, 2011, repealed the former § 8.32.010, and enacted a new § 8.32.010 as set out herein. The former § 8.32.010 pertained to speed limits on certain streets and derived from prior code § 4-4.1202; Ord. No. 99-791; Ord. No. 00-802 and Ord. No. 04-844.  
Chapter 8.36 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
Sections: 
 
8.36.010 - Application of regulations. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified by this chapter except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or laws of the City prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicle in specified places or at specified times. 
(Prior code § 4-4.1001)  
8.36.020 - Use of streets for storage of vehicles. 
A.  No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such a vehicle upon any street for more than 72 consecutive hours. 
B.  In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street for a period of more than 72 consecutive hours, any member of the Police Department authorized by the Chief of Police may remove such vehicle from the street in the manner specified in, and subject to the requirements of, the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 05-869 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1003)  
8.36.030 - Use of streets for certain purposes. 
A.  No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway and repair such vehicle except for repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
B.  No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway with a "for sale" sign or placard if, because of such sign or placard on the vehicle, it appears that the primary purpose of parking the vehicle at that location is to advertise to the public the private sale of that vehicle. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1004)  
8.36.040 - Angle parking. 
Whenever any law of the City designates and describes any street, or portion thereof, upon which angle parking shall be permitted, the City Engineer shall mark or sign such street indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1006)  
8.36.050 - Parking adjacent to schools. 
A.  The City Engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating "no parking" upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when it is determined that such parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.  When official signs are erected indicating "no parking" upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place except as permitted by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1007)  
8.36.060 - Parking in alleys and on narrow streets. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to park or store any vehicle in any public alley. In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon or within an alley, any member of the Police Department authorized by the Chief of Police, may remove such vehicle from the alley in the manner specified in, and subject to the requirements of, the Vehicle Code. 
B.  The City Engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating "no parking" upon both sides of any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet or upon one side of any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
C.  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Ord. 05-869 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1008)  
8.36.070 - Parking by peddlers and vendors. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables, or other foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited, offered for sale, bartered or exchanged or any lunch wagon or eating car or vehicle on any portion of any street within the City, except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed 10 minutes at any one place. The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with, a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1012)  
8.36.080 - Emergency parking signs. 
A.  When the City Engineer determines that emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the City Engineer shall have the power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the City Engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency, and the City Engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
B.  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1013)  
8.36.090 - Parking commercial vehicles and commercial equipment within City limits. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to park or store any commercial motor vehicle having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 10,000 pounds or more, or trailer or commercial equipment, irrespective of weight, upon any public street or alley, or on private property in the City within the following zones, to wit: R-1 (Single-family Residential), R-2 (Two-family Residential), R-3 (Multifamily Residential), and "Residential" land use districts of Specific Plan areas, except: 
1.  While performing a service requiring the loading or unloading of goods and/or property to premises in the block in which such vehicle and/or commercial equipment is parked until such work is completed; 
2.  When such vehicle and/or commercial equipment is parked in connection with the performances of a service to or on a property in the block in which such vehicle and/or commercial equipment is parked until such service is completed; 
3.  When the vehicle or commercial equipment is immobile due to accident or mechanical breakdown; in such case such vehicle and/or commercial equipment may be parked for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours; or 
4.  On Brooks Street between Ramona Avenue and a point 1,650 feet east of the centerline of Monte Vista Avenue. This exception shall not apply to unattached trailers or commercial equipment. 
5.  On the north side of Palo Verde Street between Central Avenue and Carrillo Avenue, subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Vehicle shall have displayed in the lower left corner of the windshield a special parking permit issued by the City. 
b.  Special parking permit shall be issued to City residents only. 
c.  Special parking permit shall only be valid for single vehicles, i.e., permit is not valid for tractor/trailers; semitrailers; or any commercial vehicle with any trailer, towed vehicle, or towed equipment. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to park or store any commercial motor vehicle having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 10,000 pounds or more, or trailer or commercial equipment, irrespective of weight, upon any public property (non-street right-of-way) or private property in the City within the following zones, to-wit: A-P (Administrative Professional), C-2 (Restricted Commercial), C-3 (General Commercial), MIP (Manufacturing Industrial), and the "Commercial," "Business Park," and "Industrial" land-use districts of Specific Plan areas between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., or for more than four hours between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., except: 
1.  When the vehicle or commercial equipment is immobile due to accident or mechanical breakdown; in such case such vehicle and/or commercial equipment may be parked for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours; 
2.  When the nature of the particular service to be performed, or material or equipment to be delivered, requires a longer period of time to complete than the time limit described in this section; 
3.  When the vehicle and/or commercial equipment is owned or operated by the commercial use on the private property upon which it is to be parked; or 
4.  If parked or stored upon public or private property, that such vehicle and/or commercial equipment shall be parked or stored upon improved and designated parking areas subject to the time restriction of this subsection B. Such parking areas may be approved by the Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions of Sections 11.78.010 through Section 11.78.120 (Conditional Use Permit). The use of such parking areas shall be limited to not exceed four hours or such lesser period of time the vehicle operator is utilizing the service provided by the business use of the premises. 
C.  Excluded from the provisions of this section shall be vehicles and/or commercial equipment operated and parked by a registered transient guest of a motel or hotel if such vehicle and/or commercial equipment is parked within approved designated vehicle parking areas upon the business premises. Vehicle parking areas may be approved by the Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions of Sections 11.78.010 through 11.78.120 (Conditional Use Permit). 
D.  When a vehicle or commercial equipment is parked or left standing in violation of this section, such vehicle or commercial equipment may be removed and stored. 
(Ord. 06-874 § 1 (part): Ord. 05-869 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1015) 
(Ord. No. 12-932, § 1, 8-20-12)  
8.36.100 - Signs and markings. 
A.  The City Engineer is authorized to impose parking time limits or to prohibit parking on designated streets by posting appropriate signs or by markings on curbs, as provided in this chapter. 
B.  When curb markings or signs prohibiting or restricting parking are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions in this chapter. 
(Ord. 00-806 § 1: Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1020)  
8.36.110 - Curb loading zones. 
The City Engineer is authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1021)  
8.36.120 - Painted curb restrictions. 
A.  No person shall park a vehicle next to a green curb for longer than 20 consecutive minutes. 
B.  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle next to a red curb. 
C.  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle next to a yellow or white curb except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or freight and only for a maximum of 15 minutes, unless a different duration of time is otherwise posted. 
(Ord. 00-806 § 2: Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1022)  
8.36.130 - Tow-away zones. 
Whenever by this chapter or any other law of the City parking is restricted or prohibited by law and "Tow-Away Zone" signs are erected giving notice thereof, the officers of the Police Department may cause any vehicle in violation thereof to be towed away and stored at the expense of the owner, operator, or person to whom the vehicle is entitled to be released, and the vehicle shall not be released except upon the payment of the towing and storage costs. In tow-away zones, the City Engineer shall cause to be erected appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1024)  
8.36.140 - Civic Center parking restrictions. 
When official signs are erected indicating restriction of parking within the Civic Center complex public parking facility located east of Fremont Avenue, south of the Benito Street City Hall building and the public parking facility located east of Fremont Avenue, south of the library building, no person shall park a vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. 
A.  Permit Required. 
1.  No vehicle shall be parked or stopped in any parking stall or space posted and/or designated by "Reserved" markings on the pavement unless such vehicle prominently displays, on a designated location upon such vehicle, a permit indicating an exemption from such restriction or prohibition. 
2.  It is unlawful for any person to allow the use of, transfer, sale, rental or lease, or cause to be used, transferred, sold, rented or leased, for or without any value or consideration, any such parking permit unless authorized by the City Manager. 
3.  It is unlawful for any person to borrow, buy or otherwise acquire, for value or use, any such parking permit. 
B.  Issuance of Permits. Permits shall be issued to members of the Montclair City Council, Planning Commission, Community Action Committee and Executive Management Staff by the Department of Administrative Services. The permits shall remain effective for the term of office or employment with the City. Such permit shall be surrendered upon cessation of office or employment with the City. 
C.  Limited Time Parking. No vehicle shall be parked in any parking stall or space posted and designated by a green painted curb for any time exceeding 30 minutes in duration between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day excluding Sunday and holidays. 
No vehicle shall be parked or stopped in any parking stall or space except as posted and designated, unless such vehicle prominently displays, on a designated location upon such vehicle, a permit indicating authorization to so park. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1025)  
8.36.150 - Additional parking restrictions on publicly owned property. 
A.  In addition to the specific parking restrictions identified in this chapter for the Civic Center parking facilities, it is unlawful for any person to operate or park a motor vehicle upon any publicly owned property contrary to the California Vehicle Code or this Code. 
B.  For purposes of this section, the prima facie speed limit within any publicly owned parking lot shall be 10 miles per hour unless pedestrians are present, lowering the prima facie speed limit to five miles per hour. 
C.  No such regulation of vehicle operation or parking shall be enforced unless, prior to enforcement, signs giving notice of the regulation are posted at each of the entrances to the public property. 
(Ord. 99-787 § 1: prior code § 4-4.1025.5)  
8.36.160 - Parking on private property. 
A.  No person shall park any vehicle upon private property, a private right-of-way or easement in the City for the primary purpose of displaying the vehicle for sale, except that an owner of a vehicle shall have the right to display one vehicle per property for sale upon the property of the residence of the vehicle owner as long as no other violation of law occurs. 
B.  This section shall not apply to any vehicle sales dealer who is licensed and authorized by law to display vehicles for sale upon private property in the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1026)  
8.36.170 - Parking prohibited on lawns and other unpaved surfaces. 
A.  No person shall park any vehicle, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and campers, nor permit the storage of any trailer, camper shell, watercraft, or other similar equipment upon any lawn or other unpaved surface on any commercial or industrial zoned property, or lying within any front yard or street side yard, with such front or street side yard to include both the required setback area and any area(s) between the street and structure that are in excess of the required residential setback, within any residential zoned area or other zoned property being used primarily as a residence. 
B.  No property owner shall permit the parking of any vehicle, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and campers, nor permit the storage of any trailer, camper shell, watercraft, or other similar equipment upon any lawn or other unpaved surface on any commercial or industrial zoned property, or lying within any front yard or street side yard, with such front or street side yard to include both the required setback area and any area(s) between the street and structure that are in excess of the required residential setback, within any residential zoned area or other zoned property being used primarily as a residence. 
C.  No person shall use or permit the use on their property of a landscaped or unpaved area for access to a parking or storage area for any automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, camper, trailer, watercraft, or other similar equipment when such access falls within any front yard or street side yard, with such front or street side yard to include both the required setback area and any area(s) between the street and structure that are in excess of the required residential setback, within any residential zoned area or other zoned property being used primarily as a residence. An exception may be granted in those cases where such access is so infrequent as to cause no discernible effect on the landscaping within any front yard or street side yard building setback. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 1: Ord. 01-808 § 1; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1027)  
8.36.180 - Parking on private property in no-cruising zones. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on the private property of another adjacent to a roadway which has been designated a "No-Cruising Zone" pursuant to this chapter when: (A) the business or businesses on that property are closed or at any time when there is no visible business enterprise on the private property; and (B) there is displayed in plain view at the entrances to the private property signs prohibiting public parking (with or without restrictions) and containing the telephone number of the local traffic law enforcement agency. These signs shall be not less than 17 inches by 22 inches in size with lettering not less than 1 inch in height. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1028)  
Chapter 8.40 - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
8.40.010 - Privately owned roadways open for public use. 
Privately owned and/or maintained roads and other public areas shall be designated by resolution and adopted by the City Council and are found and declared to be generally held open to the public for purposes of vehicle traffic to serve residential neighborhoods and/or commercial establishments and are so connected to public highways that the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the State of California and Title 8 of this Code shall be applied in their entirety to them. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1501)  
8.40.020 - Regulation upon certain private roads and areas. 
Pursuant to the Vehicle Code of the State of California, all of the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the State of California and Title 8 of this Code apply to all of the privately owned and maintained roads in public areas described in Section 8.40.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-4.1502)  
Chapter 8.44 - TRAINS 
Sections: 
 
8.44.010 - Blocking crossings. 
It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit any railway train or railway cars, or similar vehicle on rails, to operate or be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than 10 minutes; provided, however, this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars, or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car, or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. 
(Prior code § 4-4.1102)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC SERVICES AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.02 - ACRONYMS AND DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
9.02.010 - Acronyms. 
As used in this title: 
BMPs means best management practices. 
BMR means baseline monitoring report. 
BOD means biochemical oxygen demand. 
CFR means Code of Federal Regulations. 
COD means chemical oxygen demand. 
CTS means compliance time schedule. 
CWA means Clean Water Act. 
EPA means Environmental Protection Agency. 
NOI means Notice of Intent. 
NPDES means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
POTW means publicly-owned treatment works. 
SIC means Standard Industrial Classification. 
TDS means total dissolved solids. 
TOMP means Toxic Organic Management Plan. 
TRC means technical review criteria. 
TSS means total suspended solids. 
USC means United States Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code §§ 6-6.201, 6-9.201)  
9.02.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this title: 
Abandoned means any small cell facilities or wireless support structures that are unused for a period of 180 days without the operator otherwise notifying the City and receiving the City's approval. 
Act (The). The Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251, et. seq. 
Alcoholic beverages means any and all spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, liquids or compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented or not, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of 1 percent or more of alcohol by volume which are potable or fit as, or which may be used for, beverage purposes. 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives radio frequency signals. 
Applicant means any person applying for a small cell permit under Chapter 9.105. 
Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
1.  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president if the industrial user is a corporation; 
2.  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or 
3.  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge originates. 
Base station shall have the meaning as set forth in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(1). 
Best management practices means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the rate at which microorganisms use the oxygen in water or wastewater while stabilizing decomposable organic matter under aerobic conditions. In decomposition, organic matter serves as food for the bacteria, and energy results from its oxidation. BOD measurements are used as a measure of the organic strength of waste in water. 
Blowdown means the removal of accumulated solids in boilers to prevent plugging of boiler tubes and steam lines. In cooling towers, blowdown is used to reduce the amount of dissolved solids in the recirculated cooling water. 
Building lateral means that portion of the City sewer system conveying wastewater from the property line to the main line sewer. 
Building sewer means that portion of the City sewer system conveying wastewater from the building to the property line. 
Business plan (hazardous substance waste, or material) means basic information, including a map of the site and surrounding businesses, required pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 25500 that details location, type, quantity, and health risks of hazardous materials handled, used, stored, or disposed of in the City which could accidentally be released into the environment. 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
Categorical standards means National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or pretreatment standards as established by the Environmental Protection Agency. 
Categorical user means a user as defined in 40 CFR, Parts 401-471. 
Cesspool means a lined excavation in the ground, which excavation receives the discharge of a drained system, or part thereof, so designed as to retain the organic matter and solids discharging therein but to permit the liquids to seep through the bottom and sides and constructed pursuant to the provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code. 
City means the City of Montclair. 
City Engineer means the City of Montclair City Engineer or his/her deputy, agent, representative or inspector. 
City sewer system means all facilities owned, controlled or operated by the City for the purpose of collecting and conducting wastewater to a delivery point, including building laterals conducting wastewater from property lines, main line sewers, and any facilities appurtenant to the foregoing. 
City storm drain system means all facilities owned, controlled or operated by the City for the purpose of collecting and disposing of stormwater. Such facilities shall include but not be limited to conduits, natural or artificial drains, channels, watercourses, pumping stations and any other facilities appurtenant to the foregoing. 
Collocation or collocate means the same as defined by the Federal Communications Commission in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6002(g)(1) and (2), as may be amended. 
Community sewer system shall mean all facilities owned, controlled, or operated by the City of Montclair for the purpose of collecting and conducting sewage to a delivery point, including collector sewers conducting sewage from the originating premises, trunk sewers conveying sewage from tributary collector sewers or other trunk sewers, and any facilities appurtenant to the foregoing. 
Compliance time schedule (CTS) means the time period allowed by the City during which a user shall comply with permit conditions or discharge requirements. The compliance time schedule shall contain specific time periods for installation of adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related equipment and/or procedures and shall not extend beyond applicable federal deadlines. 
Composite sample means a combination of no fewer than eight individual samples obtained at equal time or flow intervals for 24 hours. 
Constituent means any chemical, element, compound or mixture that is either suspended or dissolved in a wastewater stream. 
Construction activity means the clearing, grading or excavation that results in soil disturbances of at least five acres of total land area. 
Cooling water means water discharged from a use, such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or other use to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Decorative pole means a pole, arch, or other structure, except for a street light pole, placed in the public right-of-way that is specifically designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments have been placed except for any of the following (a) electric lighting; (b) specially designed informational or directional signage; (c) temporary holiday or special event attachments. 
Design standards means those detailed design standards, specifications and examples adopted by the City Council pursuant to Chapter 9.105 related to the design and installation of small cell facilities. 
Dewatering means a process by which water is removed from sludge. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly into the waters of the State of California. 
Director of Public Works means the Director of Public Works of the City of Montclair. 
Discharger means any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly into the City storm drain system. 
Domestic wastewater means wastewater from residences and other premises resulting from personal use of water from washing, bathing, or other sanitary purposes. 
Effluent means wastewater or other liquid—raw (untreated), partially or completely treated—flowing from a reservoir, basin, treatment process, or treatment plant. 
Eligible facilities request shall have the meaning as set forth in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(3). 
Food service establishment means and includes, but is not limited to, retail establishments selling prepared foods and beverages for consumption on the premises, and also cafeterias, lunch counters, and refreshment stands selling prepared foods for immediate consumption. Restaurants, lunch counters, and drinking places operated as a subordinate service facility by other establishments shall also be included. 
Frontage means the front property line used by the City Engineer in determining the benefits for local improvements in assessment proceedings. 
Grab sample means any individual sample of liquid collected in less than 15 minutes; also referred to as a "discrete sample." 
Gravity-separation interceptors means an approved detention chamber designed to remove grease, oil and solids from a source flow prior to discharge into the City sewer system. 
Hazardous substance, waste or material means any substance or combination of substances which falls under the classification of a "hazardous substance," "hazardous waste," or "hazardous material" as defined by the EPA, in Title 22 of the California Administrative Code or Section 25117 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Health officer means the San Bernardino County Health Officer or his/her authorized deputy, agent, representative or inspector. 
Illegal discharge means any discharge to the City storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater or contains constituents not provided for in this chapter. 
Illicit connection means any connection to the City storm drain system that is not permitted pursuant to a valid NPDES permit or written approval by the City. 
Indirect discharge means the intentional or unintentional release of treated or untreated wastewater or other pollutants from any source into the City sewer system. 
Industrial user means any person who discharges or causes a discharge of nondomestic waste directly or indirectly into the City sewer system. 
Industrial user discharge permit means a written authorization issued by the City in accordance with the Regional Sewerage Service Contract for the discharge of nondomestic wastewater from any industrial user of the City sewer system. 
Influent means wastewater or other liquid—raw (untreated) or partially treated—flowing into a reservoir, basin, treatment process, or treatment plant. 
Inspector means the authorized inspector, deputy, agent or representative of the City Engineer and/or Director of Public Works. 
Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW processes or operations which contribute to a violation of any requirement of the Inland Empire Utilities Agency's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act (CAA), the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), Title 22 of the California Health and Safety Code, or other criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
Irrevocable Annexation Agreement . When a property owner in an unincorporated area within the City's zone of influence wishes to connect to the City sewer system, the City Council may consider entering into an Irrevocable Annexation Agreement with such property owner. This agreement commits the property owner to cooperate with the City in an annexation of the subject property when and if the City commences such annexation. 
Licensed contractor means a contractor having a valid license, which includes the activities listed on the permit for which the contractor has applied, issued pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 9 of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code of the State. 
Lot means a parcel of land having fixed boundaries and being designated on a plot, survey, or a deed that is recorded in the office of the County Recorder. 
Main line sewer means any public sewer in a dedicated right-of-way in which changes in alignment and grade occur only at manholes or where angle points or curves between manholes have been approved by the City Engineer. Such sewers are generally 8 inches or more in diameter. 
Mass-emission rate means the mass of material discharged into the City sewer system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass-emission rate shall mean pounds-per-day of a particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
Meter pedestal means the housing for the main source of power and distribution of panels for building, streetlights, parks and other uses. 
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit (NPDES permit) means any permit issued pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act. 
New source means: 
1.  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located, or 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source, or 
c.  The wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent factors, the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source will be considered; 
2.  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsections (1)(a) or (b) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment; 
3.  Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program, either of the following: 
i.  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment, or 
ii.  Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment, or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
Nondomestic wastewater means the wastewater resulting from or associated with waste flows from commercial, governmental, institutional and industrial sources including, but not limited to, the following: production or refining of petroleum; production, processing, packing or canning of fruits, vegetables, meat or beverages; laundering of clothes in public laundries; public self-service laundries; hospitals; restaurants; vehicle-service facilities, wash racks, and garages; production of fertilizer, keeping of livestock or poultry, and operation of dairies; production of refuse; washing of equipment, facilities, or spaces used in nondomestic operations; production and processing of plastic; cleaning of tanks, tank cars, or barrels; plating or processing metals; processing or reclamation of refuse and any other similar manufacturing, processing and servicing operations. 
Nondomestic wastewater shall not include wastewater from single-family or multifamily residences or places engaged exclusively in retail business. 
Nonstormwater means any water not associated with storm runoff and that originates on or traverses any property in the City. 
Notice of Intent means a Notice of Intent to comply with an adopted NPDES stormwater permit. 
NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Park means a park, reservation, playground, recreation center, or any other area in the City owned or used by the City and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Pass-through means the discharge of pollutants through a POTW as defined in 40 CFR 403.3 (n) in quantities or concentrations which are a cause, in whole or in part, of a violation of any requirement of an NPDES permit. 
Permission , when applied to public parks, means written permission granted by the Director of Community Development. 
Permittee means the applicant issued a small cell permit pursuant to this Chapter. 
Person means any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether for-profit or not-for-profit. 
Personal wireless service means the same as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(i), as may be amended, which defines the term as commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services. 
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
Point source means any point where domestic and/or nondomestic wastewater enters into the City sewer system. 
Pollution (water) means man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
Premises means any lot, parcel of land, building or establishment, either residential, commercial or industrial, both public or private, including schools, churches and institutions, without limitation. 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the City sewer system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Part 403.6(d). 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, including but not limited to a National Pretreatment Standard imposed on an industrial user. 
Pretreatment Standards . See "National Categorical Pretreatment Standards" in this section. 
Pretreatment system means an on-site method used for the removal of pollutants from wastewater prior to their entering the City sewer system. 
Pretreatment waste means all waste, liquid or solid, removed from a waste stream or discharge by physical, chemical or biological means. 
Public right-of-way means the surface of, and the space within, through, on, across, above, or below, any public street, public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, and any other land dedicated or otherwise designated for a compatible public use, which is owned or controlled by the City of Montclair. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW), as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292), means a publicly-owned facility designed to provide treatment to wastewater generated within the City, which is maintained and operated by a public agency. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal wastewater or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes City-owned sewers, pipes, and other conveyances which convey wastewater for treatment. 
Receiving water means all waters of the United States and tributaries of waters of the United States that are used for recreational or other purposes. 
Regional Board shall mean the California Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, created and exercising its powers pursuant to the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, California Water Code Sections 13000, et seq. 
Regional sewer system shall mean all facilities owned, controlled, or operated by IEUA and any interest or capacity rights of IEUA in facilities owned, controlled, or operated by others for purpose of transmitting, treating, and disposing of sewage, including interceptor sewers, sewage treatment and disposal plants, outfall sewers, facilities for the disposal of effluent and solid waste residuals, and any facilities appurtenant to the foregoing. The regional sewerage system shall not include any recycling facilities or portions of recycling facilities that are operated by or for the benefit of IEUA to meet obligations under the judgment entered in the action entitled Orange County Water District v. City of Chino, et al. (Case No. 117628, Superior Court, County of Orange) or to meet the requirements of contracting agencies exercising the right of first purchase of recycled effluent, provided that the regional sewerage system shall include all other disposal facilities that are required to meet the requirements of the NPDES permit or permits or waste discharge requirements issued to IEUA by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, for the operation of the Regional Treatment Plants. 
Regional Technical Committee . This committee is made up of one appointee and one alternate from each agency contracting with the Inland Empire Utilities Agency and one appointee and one alternate from the Inland Empire Utilities Agency. 
Regional treatment plant means a wastewater treatment plant operated by the Inland Empire Utilities Agency as part of the regional sewerage system. 
Seepage pits means a line excavation in the ground, which excavation receives the discharge of a septic tank, designed to permit the effluent from the septic tank to seep through its bottom and sides. 
Self-regenerating water softening appliance shall mean a water-softening device located within the City of Montclair that discharges to a community sewer system that is tributary to the regional sewer system owned and operated by IEUA, whereby the capability of the appliance to remove hardness from water is renewed by the onsite application of a salt-containing brine solution to the active softening or conditioning material contained therein followed by a subsequent rinsing of the active softening or conditioning material. 
Sewer-connection fee means the fee paid by an applicant to the City for the applicant's proportionate share of the original cost of the construction of the main line sewer. 
Sewer-connection permit means authorization by the City to connect to the main line sewer after payment to the City of the sewer connection fee. 
Sewerage is a comprehensive term which means and includes facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater; a collection system. 
Significant industrial user means any industrial user of the City sewer system who: 
1.  Is a categorical user as defined in 40 CFR, subchapter N (Parts 401-471); or 
2.  Has a discharge flow rate of 25,000 gallons or more per average workday of process wastewater, excluding sanitary noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown water, or contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5 percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the Inland Empire Utilities Agency's POTW; or 
3.  Has, in its wastewater, toxic pollutants as defined in Section 307 of the Act, State statutes, and rules; or 
4.  Is found by the City, the California Regional Water Quality Control Board and/or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other wastewater discharges from contributing industries, on the operation of the POTW, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system. 
Single-pass cooling water means water used solely for the purpose of cooling. This water is used only once and is discarded. 
Sludge means settleable solids separated from liquids. 
Small cell facility shall mean a type of wireless infrastructure comprised of small antennas that are placed on existing or new vertical infrastructure (such as utility poles) within the public right-of-way, and which are accompanied by equipment installed on the pole, on or below the ground. 
More specifically, a small cell facility shall meet all of the following requirements: 
1.  The facility 
a.  Is mounted on a structure 50 feet or less in height, including antennas, as defined in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.1320(d); or 
b.  Is mounted on a structure no more than ten percent taller than other adjacent structures; or 
c.  Does not extend existing structures on which it is located to a height of more than 50 feet or by more than ten percent, whichever is greater; 
2.  Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment (as defined in the definition of antenna in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.1320(d)), is no more than three cubic feet in volume; 
3.  All other wireless equipment associated with the facility, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-existing associated equipment on the structure, is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume; 
4.  The facilities [do] not result in human exposure to radiofrequency radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.1307(b); 
5.  The facility is not located on Tribal lands, as defined under 36 CFR 800.16(x); and 
6.  The facility does not require antenna structure registration under 47 C.F.R. Part 17. 
Small cell permit means the non-exclusive grant of authority issued by the City of Montclair to install a small cell facility in a portion of the public right-of-way in accordance with Chapter 9.105. 
Sound-amplifying system , when applied to public parks, means and includes any system of electrical hookup or connection, loudspeaker system or equipment, sound-amplifying system or any other apparatus, equipment, device, instrument or machine designed for or intended to be used for the purpose of amplifying sound or increasing the volume of the human voice, musical tone, vibration, or sound wave. This definition shall not apply to the regular and customary use of portable radios, televisions, record players or tape recorders played or operated in such places and at such times so that they do not disturb other persons in their permitted uses of the park. 
Spill containment means a system of dikes, walls, barriers, berms, or other devices designed to contain spillage of liquid. Spill containment systems shall be constructed of materials which are impermeable and nonreactive to the liquids being contained. Spill containment systems shall conform to standards as deemed necessary by the City Engineer as to percent, type and size of required containment. 
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan means the plan as described in the general construction activity stormwater permit as issued by the State Water Resources Control Board on August 20, 1992, and as may be amended. 
Support structure means any structure capable of supporting a base station. 
Suspended solids (SS) means the suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquids and which is removable by laboratory filtration. 
Swimming pool means any body of water created by artificial means designed or used for swimming, immersion or therapeutic purposes. 
Temporary industrial user means any user who is granted temporary permission by the City Engineer to discharge unpolluted water or wastewater to the City sewer system and is authorized and controlled by an industrial user discharge permit. 
Tower means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for personal wireless services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. This definition does not include utility poles. 
Toxic Organic Management Plan (TOMP) means a strategy for keeping track of all solvents and toxic organic compounds delivered to a site and of their storage, use and disposal. The plan will address the prevention of discharge of toxic organics into the City sewer system or the environment. The plan will address the control of spills and leaks and will also ensure against the deliberate dumping of solvents. 
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under the provision of the CWA 307(a) or other Acts. 
Treatment Plant . See "regional treatment plant" in this section. 
Upset (sewer) means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with discharge limits because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
User (sewer) means any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of wastewater into the City sewer system. 
Utility pole means a structure that is designed for, or used for the purpose of, carrying lines, cables, or wires for electric or telecommunications service. "Utility pole" excludes street signs, street light poles, and decorative poles. 
Vacant lot unit means the unit of measurement used in calculating the standby assessment on vacant property. A 60-foot increment of frontage constitutes one unit. 
Wastewater means largely the water supply of a community after it has been fouled by various uses. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid or water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, and institutions, together with those from industrial establishments, and with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be present. 
Water pollutant means, but is not limited to, any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, wastewater, garbage, sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including, without limitation, all of the following: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
b.  Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; 
c.  Associated towers, support structures, or base stations; and 
d.  The term does not include coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna and equipment. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code §§ 6-6.202, 6-9.202, 10-1.02) 
(Ord. No. 11-921, § 1, 5-2-11; Ord. No. 19-980, § II, 3-18-19)  
Chapter 9.04 - PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES 
Sections: 
 
9.04.010 - Public assemblies defined. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for the purposes of this chapter "public assembly" means any public meeting, assembly, parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or similar gathering of persons in any room, hall, building, tent, park, street, or other place in the City when such gathering involves in excess of 100 persons. 
(Prior code § 4-6.01 (part))  
9.04.020 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Public assemblies or gatherings regularly held or maintained by any recognized and established religious organization, lodge, order or society having established headquarters within the City. This exception shall not apply to special events held or sponsored by such organizations where such events tend to constitute a danger to the public peace, health or safety as determined by the Chief of Police pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.04.050(A) of this chapter; 
B.  Funeral processions; 
C.  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; and 
D.  School activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities, except where such events tend to constitute a danger to the public peace, health or safety as determined by the Chief of Police pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.04.050(A) of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4-6.01 (part))  
9.04.030 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to hold, maintain, form or start any public assembly without first applying for and obtaining a permit from the Finance Division. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-6.02)  
9.04.040 - Permit application. 
Such application shall be in writing, stating the name and address of the applicant, the place where such assembly is to be held, the estimated number of persons to be present, the purpose of the assembly, and any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-6.03)  
9.04.050 - Permit issuance and denial. 
A.  Standards for Issuance. The Chief of Police shall issue a permit when he/she finds, after receiving the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, the following: 
1.  Such assembly will not endanger the public peace, health or safety; and 
2.  Such assembly will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic in the area; and 
3.  Such assembly will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the City so that it would prevent normal police protection to the City; and 
4.  Such assembly will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
B.  Denial of Permit. If the Chief of Police does not find all the terms and conditions of subsection A of this section to exist, he/she shall deny the permit and mail or personally deliver to the applicant, within 10 days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his/her action, stating the reasons for his/her denial of the permit. Such denial shall become effective 10 days after Notice of Denial is mailed or delivered pursuant to this section. 
C.  Form of Permit. A permit issued hereunder shall be in writing and for a definite time, period and place. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-6.04)  
9.04.060 - Extra police protection. 
If the Chief of Police determines that such assembly will endanger the public peace, health or safety unless the applicant obtains extra police protection, the Chief of Police shall require the applicant to obtain extra police protection as a condition for the issuance of a permit. If such extra protection is required, the Chief of Police shall calculate the amount of moneys necessary to reimburse to the City the cost of furnishing regular or reserve police officers and equipment for that purpose, including, but not limited to, salaries, social security, liability, and State compensation insurance. Such sum of moneys shall then be paid by the applicant to the City Treasurer prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(Prior code § 4-6.05)  
9.04.070 - Appeals. 
Any applicant aggrieved by any decision of the Chief of Police under this chapter shall have the right to appeal the same to the City Council. Such appeal shall be made within 10 days after the mailing or delivery of the Notice of Denial from the Chief of Police, pursuant to Section 9.04.050 of this chapter entitled "Permit issuance and denial." The appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the City Clerk. The appeal shall particularly state wherein the Chief of Police erred or failed to conform to the provisions of this chapter. The City Council shall act upon the appeal within 20 days after its filing. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 4-6.06)  
9.04.080 - Interpretation. 
The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to other applicable provisions of this Code relating to particular businesses, activities or uses. 
(Prior code § 4-6.07)  
Chapter 9.08 - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
9.08.010 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to grade, prepare subgrade, pave, lay sewers, drainpipes and/or water mains, or construct curbs, gutters, driveways, sidewalks, manholes, catch basins, or any similar structures in any street, alley, way or easement which is dedicated, or proposed to be dedicated, for public or municipal use, or which is within the planned right-of-way of any major, secondary or collector street in the City as established and shown on the adopted Master Plan without first obtaining a written permit from the City Engineer to do so. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 7-1.01)  
9.08.020 - Permit applications. 
Any person desiring such a permit shall present a written application therefor to the City Engineer, setting forth the name and address of the applicant; details concerning the location, nature and extent of any proposed construction; and the purpose for such construction. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 7-1.02)  
9.08.030 - Permit application fees. 
Each such application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 7-1.03)  
9.08.040 - Inspection fees. 
Required. For the construction, repair or alteration of sidewalks, curbs, gutters, driveways, subgrades, pavements, manholes, catch basins, and other similar structures and for the excavation, laying and backfilling of sewers (except house sewer laterals outside public rights-of-way) and drainpipe lines and/or water mains and gas mains, and for which specifications, lines and grades therefor shall be approved by the City Engineer, a charge for inspection shall be made and paid for in advance. Such charge shall be set by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 7-1.04)  
9.08.050 - Inspections. 
Any person performing work pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall cause all such work to be inspected by the office of the City Engineer and shall notify such office 24 hours before the time set for inspection. Work completed without such notice or request for inspection shall not be accepted, and work performed during the absence of the inspector may not be accepted by the City. All work to be performed shall be to the satisfaction of the City and in accordance with City Standard Drawings and "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction," including latest amendments, written and promulgated by Southern California Chapters of American Public Works Association and Associated General Contractors of America Joint Cooperative Committee, the laws of the City and State, and under the supervision of the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 7-1.05)  
9.08.060 - Storage of materials during construction. 
The materials used during the construction work may be stored on adjacent public property during the course of construction, provided the materials are so placed and safeguarded by lights, warning signs, and barricades as to not constitute a hazard to the public peace and safety. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 7-1.06)  
9.08.070 - Removal of materials and debris. 
It is unlawful for any person performing work pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to fail, neglect or refuse to remove all unused materials and debris within 48 hours after completion of the work. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 7-1.07)  
9.08.080 - Conformance of materials with specifications. 
Raw materials and workmanship provided for work pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall conform to the applicable provisions of the standard specifications on file in the office of the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 7-1.08)  
9.08.090 - Driveway approaches. 
No driveway approach shall cross over an extended lot line without the consent of the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 7-1.09)  
9.08.100 - Public utilities—Maps. 
At the request of the City Engineer, every public utility shall provide the City with atlas prints of all underground facilities owned and/or operated by the public utility. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 7-1.10)  
Chapter 9.12 - PUBLIC PARKS 
Sections: 
 
9.12.010 - Purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of the Council in enacting the provisions of this chapter to provide for the use and enjoyment by the people of public parks and recreation facilities by adopting regulations governing the conduct and behavior of persons using such public places to the end that such recreation facilities may be enjoyed by all. 
(Prior code § 10-1.01)  
9.12.020 - Unlawful acts. 
It is unlawful for any person to do or commit, or for any person to cause or permit to be done or committed within the boundaries of any public park within the City, any act in the following sections of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 10-1.03)  
9.12.030 - Signs. 
No person shall fail or refuse to obey or comply with any notice or sign, including warning, regulatory and road markings, placed by order of the Director for the safety or control of persons, vehicles or animals. No person shall willfully refuse to follow or comply with any lawful order or direction given by a department employee. 
(Prior code § 10-1.04)  
9.12.040 - Vandalism. 
No person shall willfully cut, break, injure, deface, disfigure, mark or write upon, paint, carve, burn, tamper with, attach rope or wire to, displace or remove any tree, shrub, plant, turf, rock, sand, soil, wood, building, fence, table, bench, barbecue unit, pole, light, playground apparatus, bridge, railing, paving material, fountain, trash receptacle, waterline or other public utility, part or appurtenance thereof, sign, notice or placard, whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post or other boundary marker, equipment, tools, implements, materials, any structure or park facility whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(Prior code § 10-1.05)  
9.12.050 - Public toilets. 
No person shall fail to cooperate in maintaining public toilets in a neat and sanitary condition nor shall any person loiter in or about any public toilet or enter any public toilet designated for the opposite sex, except that this provision shall not apply to persons under five years of age that are accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Prior code § 10-1.06)  
9.12.060 - Littering. 
No person shall deposit, throw, discharge or otherwise place any paper, ashes, dirt, bottles, broken glass, cans, trash, litter, animal carcass, rubbish, debris or any substance, matter or thing, either liquid or solid in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or in or on the grounds of said park except in the proper receptacles where these are provided; nor shall any person within any park wash eating or cooking utensils elsewhere than in the sinks provided for such purposes; nor shall any person bring any such substance, except litter accumulated in the course of automobile travel, into a City park for the purpose of disposal thereof in City park facilities. Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Prior code § 10-1.07)  
9.12.070 - Vehicle operations—Parking. 
A.  Parking. No person shall operate, drive, ride, park or leave standing any automobile, truck, motorcycle, motor scooter, motorized bicycle, go-cart or any other motor vehicle or any other vehicle at any time in any park; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to those specific areas within any public park of the City which shall have been regularly and lawfully set aside for the use of vehicles; and provided further that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle used or owned by the City or any vehicle to which a temporary parking pass has been issued by the City or any commercial vehicle making lawful deliveries to or otherwise lawfully engaged in any undertaking or enterprise within any public park of the City. No person shall park and leave unattended any vehicle in areas other than those designated for parking. Vehicles left unattended in any area, except those designated for parking, without permission, may be towed away and stored by the City and said removal and storage costs shall be charged to and paid by the owner prior to release. Nor shall any person ride or drive a bicycle, skateboard or roller skates upon any tennis, handball, basketball, shuffleboard or multipurpose court in a City park. 
B.  Upon proof of valid California vehicle registration, proof of insurance as required by the California Vehicle Code and proof of a valid driver's license, the operator of a vehicle may be issued a temporary parking pass by the Director of Community Development or his or her designated representative. The pass will entitle the holder to park or operate a vehicle during short-term use of park facilities. The pass must be displayed at all times on the front dashboard of the vehicle or in a manner so that it is clearly visible through the windshield. 
(Prior code § 10-1.08)  
9.12.080 - Vehicles—Speed. 
No person shall operate any wheeled conveyance of any type in any park at a speed in excess of 10 miles per hour unless a greater speed is posted. The maximum speed limit when pedestrians are present shall be five miles per hour. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 10-1.09)  
9.12.090 - Skateboards and roller skates. 
No person shall ride or be propelled upon roller skates or operate a skateboard upon or along any walkway, parking lot, tennis court or basketball court as regulated by Section 6.24.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 10-1.10)  
9.12.100 - Animals. 
No person shall ride, lead, or let loose any cattle, horse, mule, goat, sheep, swine, cat, dog, fowl or animal of any kind in a park except that it shall not be unlawful to have dogs, physically restrained by a leash not in excess of six feet. No person shall keep or permit to remain any dog which is noisy, vicious or dangerous or which disturbs other persons within the boundaries of a park after such person has been directed to remove such dog. No person shall trap, kill, injure, catch or maltreat any wild or domesticated bird or animal; or destroy, remove or disturb any of the young or eggs of same, or permit any dog to pursue, trap, kill or wound any wild or domesticated bird or animal, except that the provisions of this section shall not apply to City employees regulating animal populations that have been declared a nuisance or hazard by the Director consistent with laws protecting such animals. 
(Prior code § 10-1.11)  
9.12.110 - Boisterous conduct. 
No person shall maliciously or willfully disturb the peace or quiet of a park or of any person therein, by loud or unusual noises, or by indulging in riotous, boisterous, threatening, indecent or offensive conduct, or by using abusive, profane, indecent or vulgar language. No person shall, within any park, disturb in any manner any picnic, meeting, services, concert, exercise or exhibition. No person shall play or utilize any sound-amplifying system within or upon any park or facility not set aside for such purpose by the City Council or the Director. 
(Prior code § 10-1.12)  
9.12.120 - Gambling. 
No person shall gamble or engage in gambling. 
(Prior code § 10-1.13)  
9.12.130 - Vending and peddling. 
No person shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing nor shall he or she station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing except as authorized by Chapter 9.29 of this Code. No person shall give, set up or maintain any exhibition, show, performance, concert, lecture, entertainment, or similar activity without written permission to do so from the Director. No person shall for profit offer sports camps, sports lessons, or similar activity on park property without the written permission of the Director. 
(Prior code § 10-1.14) 
(Ord. No. 18-978-U, § 3, 12-17-18)  
9.12.140 - Alcoholic beverages. 
No person shall consume or have in his or her possession, custody or control, either open or unopened, any alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever, except when attending a function operating under a permit issued by the Director or his or her designee. No intoxicated person shall enter, be or remain in any park. 
(Prior code § 10-1.15)  
9.12.150 - Games and activities. 
It is unlawful for any person to take part in or abet the playing of any activity which endangers the health, safety or welfare of the participant or any person whomsoever in any park, except on fields and courts or areas specifically provided for such games or activities or areas designated for such games and activities by the City Council or Director. Such games and activities shall include, but shall not be limited, to the following: 
A.  Baseball, tackle football, field hockey, rugby, cricket, golf, boxing, wrestling, and the martial arts; 
B.  Hitting golf balls, practicing golf, or using golf clubs in any area of a park except for the portion of Alma Hofman Park designated for putting only; 
C.  Flying any model airplane or helicopter, and launching any model fuel-powered rocket; 
D.  Carrying, transporting, possessing, discharging, firing or shooting over, onto or through any park any firearm, air gun, bb gun, spring gun, slingshot, bow and arrow, crossbow, spear, fireworks, firecracker, rocket, explosive of any kind or any other form of weapon potentially dangerous to human beings or wildlife. This subsection shall not apply to law enforcement officers; 
E.  Bring into any park grounds or be in possession of any glass beverage containers upon any park grounds; 
F.  Lighting or maintaining any fire except in a stove, barbecue grill, fire circle, portable stove or barbecue grill approved by the Director; 
G.  Erecting any barrier, whether string, wire, rope or chain, or placing any obstruction of any kind across any path, trail or other area accessible to the public; 
H.  Engaging in any other activity which endangers the health and safety of the public as determined by the Director or a police officer. 
(Prior code § 10-1.16)  
9.12.160 - Curfew. 
No person shall remain, stay or loiter on or about any such park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, or as may be posted in the park, provided that this section shall not apply to attendance at authorized community activities in the park. Any park, recreation center or part or portion thereof may be closed to the public during an emergency, or when it has been determined by the Director, or police officer, that the public health, safety or morals require such action. Such park, recreation center or part or portion thereof shall not be reopened except by order of the City Council, City Manager, Director or police officer. 
(Prior code § 10-1.17)  
9.12.170 - Advertising. 
No person shall announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire, or paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, picture, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, or distribute any handbill, circular or petition except by permission from the Director, provided that this section shall not apply to any concession operating under lease granted by the City Council. 
(Prior code § 10-1.18)  
9.12.180 - Nuisance. 
It shall be deemed a public nuisance for any person to do or commit, or cause to permit to be done or committed on or within the boundaries of any public park within the City, any act as described in the sections hereof. 
(Prior code § 10-1.20)  
9.12.190 - Barbecues, fire pits, open fires. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any requirements of this section. In addition to other remedies provided by law, any person violating any provision of this section or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this section is deemed guilty of an infraction within the manner provided in Montclair Municipal Code Section 1.12.010. 
B.  Fire pits, fire rings, campfires, and all other open fires within any City-owned, -leased, or -maintained park are prohibited, except as herein permitted below as a barbecue. 
C.  The use of nonliquid propane gas (LPG) barbecues and grills is prohibited in all City-owned, -leased, or -maintained parks. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, charcoal-, wood-, briquette-, and natural gas-fired barbecues. 
D.  LPG grills and/or barbecues shall be a patio-size barbecue with a grill area not exceeding 1,000 square inches. No large barbecues or cookers that are towed behind vehicles are permitted. Barbecues shall be fully self-contained with a grill area, burners, and frame for mounting LPG tank. 
E.  No barbecue otherwise permitted by this section shall be placed within 25 feet of any adjacent property, playground equipment, buildings, fences, walls, or at the Alma Hofman Park Skate Park or Splash Pad facilities. 
F.  Exceptions: City-sponsored or special events shall be exempt from these restrictions upon approval by the City Manager, Deputy City Manager, Public Works Director, or Director of Public Safety. 
(Ord. No. 13-936, § 1, 9-3-13)  
9.12.200—9.12.240 - Reserved.  
9.12.250 - Ejection and exclusion from public parks. 
A.  Ejection and Exclusion. Any person who causes or aids and abets in the commission of any of the following at any park (as defined in Chapter 9.02 of this Code) within the City, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, may be ejected and excluded from City parks in accordance with the provisions of this Section: 
1.  Interference with any City employee in the performance of the employee's duties; 
2.  Interference with the use and enjoyment of a public park by any other person; or 
3.  Commission of any public offense at a public park. 
Exclusions cover all parks regardless of the location of the incident resulting in the ejection and/or exclusion. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the ejection and/or exclusion of any person lawfully exercising any rights protected by the state or federal constitutions unless that person is also committing acts that violate a applicable provisions of law and which are not protected by the state or federal constitutions. 
B.  Duration of Exclusion. Exclusions from parks under the provisions of this section shall be for the specified time periods subsequent to the occurrence of the following violations in a park: 
Category 	Duration of 
Exclusion 	Reason(s) for Exclusion 
1 	24 Hours 	Single violation of park rules or regulations; or 
A violation of law classified as an infraction 
2 	30 Days 	A second violation of park rules or regulations within a 12-month period; or 
A violation of law constituting a non-violent misdemeanor 
3 	90 Days 	A third violation of park rules or regulations within a 12-month period; or 
A second violation of law constituting a non-violent misdemeanor within a 12-month period; or 
A violation of law classified as a non-violent felony 
4 	1 Year 	A fourth or more violation of park rules or regulations within a 12-month period; or 
A third or more violation of law constituting a non-violent misdemeanor within a 12-month period; or 
A second violation of law classified as a non-violent felony within a 12-month period; or 
Any violation of law constituting a violent felony 
 
All exclusions begin immediately upon the issuance of the exclusion notice and terminate at 12:00 p.m. (noon) on the day following the end of the exclusion. 
C.  Notice of Exclusion. Any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this section (including, but not limited to, the Montclair Police Department, Code Enforcement Division, and Human Services Department) shall issue a written notice to any person excluded from any park under the provisions of this section. The notice shall specify, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  The date the exclusion is effective; 
2.  The duration of the exclusion; 
3.  The conduct resulting in the exclusion; 
4.  The penalties for failure to comply with the exclusion; and, 
5.  The manner in which the excluded individual may challenge/appeal the exclusion. 
The notice shall be signed by the issuing officer, and shall either be personally served upon the excluded individual or served via US Mail to: the excluded individual at his or her last known address. 
D.  Appeal. Any person who is issued a notice excluding him/her from a park may appeal the exclusion by filing a written request for appeal with the Director of Human Services within 10 calendar days from the date of the notice. The written request shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  Name, mailing address, and telephone number of the person appealing the exclusion (hereinafter, "appellant"). 
2.  Date of the notice of exclusion. 
3.  Ground(s) for appeal in sufficient detail to enable the Director of Human Services (or designee thereof) to understand the nature of the controversy. 
4.  A request that the Director of Human Services (or designee thereof) either schedule a hearing or that the Director of Human Services (or designee thereof) considers the appeal request as the sole evidence to be submitted by the appellant. Any appeal that does not contain this request shall be deemed to be a request for a hearing. 
5.  The signature of the appellant. 
If a hearing is requested, the Director of Human Services (or designee thereof) shall consider the testimony of the appellant, the issuing officer, and/or their witnesses, as well as any documentary evidence presented by these persons concerning the exclusion. Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. Upon review of the evidence submitted, the Director of Human Services (or designee thereof) shall uphold the exclusion if a preponderance of the evidence demonstrates that the excluded person committed the violation(s) and the exclusion is otherwise in accordance with the law. 
The period of exclusion is not stayed pending an appeal. 
E.  Relief from Exclusion. Any person who is subject to an exclusion from a park may seek relief from the exclusion for good cause by filing a written request for relief with the Director of Human Services (or designee thereof) at any point during the period of exclusion. The written request shall contain the same information as for an appeal (as set forth in subsection D). 
If a hearing is requested, the Director of Human Services (or designee thereof) shall consider the testimony of the appellant, the issuing officer, and/or their witnesses, as well as any documentary evidence presented by these persons concerning the exclusion. Hearings for relief are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The Director of Human Services (or designee thereof) shall have the authority to modify the period of exclusion for good cause—however, no period of exclusion may be decreased by more than 50 percent. 
F.  The Director of Human Services (or designee thereof) shall maintain an accurate database of those persons excluded from public parks. 
G.  The Director of Human Services (or designee thereof) may promulgate rules and regulations pertaining to the use and maintenance of park and recreational facilities consistent with the provisions of this chapter, as well as for procedures for enforcing provisions of this chapter; and the Director and any designee thereof are authorized and empowered to enforce such rules and regulations. Copies of such rules and regulations shall be made available at each recreational facility. 
H.  No person subject to exclusion from any public park shall enter or remain in any park at any time during the period of exclusion. Any person subject to exclusion from any public park that enters or remains in any park in violation of said exclusion is guilty of a misdemeanor violation punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of Title 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-962, § 2, 2-6-17)  
Chapter 9.14 - MONTCLAIR TRANSCENTER AND CITY-OWNED PROPERTIES 
 
9.14.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide for the safe use and enjoyment by the public of the Montclair Transcenter and all City-owned properties by adopting regulations governing the conduct and behavior of persons using such public places so that said facilities may be enjoyed by all. 
(Ord. No. 13-937, § 1, 10-21-13)  
9.14.020 - Unlawful acts. 
It is unlawful for any person to do or commit, or for any person to cause or permit to be done or committed within the boundaries of the Montclair Transcenter or any City-owned property, any act specifically prohibited in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13-937, § 1, 10-21-13)  
9.14.030 - Signs. 
No person shall fail or refuse to obey or comply with any notice or sign, including warning, regulatory and road markings, placed by Caltrans or by the City Manager, or his/her designee, for the safety or control of persons, vehicles or animals. No person shall willfully refuse to follow or comply with any lawful order or direction given by a City employee. 
(Ord. No. 13-937, § 1, 10-21-13)  
9.14.040 - Vandalism. 
No person shall willfully cut, break, injure, deface, disfigure, mark or write upon, paint, etch, carve, burn, tamper with, attach rope or wire to, displace, or remove any tree; shrub; plant; turf; rock; soil; wood; building; fence; wall; table; bench; chair; pole; light; railing; drinking fountain; trash receptacle; vending machine; display case; irrigation equipment or other public utility, part, or appurtenance thereof; sign; notice or placard, whether temporary or permanent; monument; stake, post, or other boundary marker; equipment; tools; implements; materials; or any other structure or property whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(Ord. No. 13-937, § 1, 10-21-13)  
9.14.050 - Public toilets. 
No person shall fail to cooperate in maintaining public toilets in a neat and sanitary condition nor shall any person loiter in or around any public toilet or enter any public toilet designated for the opposite gender, except that this provision shall not apply to persons under five years of age accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 13-937, § 1, 10-21-13)  
9.14.060 - Littering. 
No person shall deposit, throw, discharge, or otherwise place any paper, ashes, dirt, bottles, broken glass, cans, trash, litter, rubbish, debris, or any substance, matter, or thing, either liquid or solid, on the grounds of the Montclair Transcenter or any City-owned property, except in receptacles designated for such items, nor shall any person bring any of the aforementioned substances, except litter accumulated in the course of automobile, bus, or train travel, into the Montclair Transcenter or any City-owned property for the purpose of disposal thereof. Where designated receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish and waste shall be removed from the Montclair Transcenter or City-owned property and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 13-937, § 1, 10-21-13)  
9.14.070 - Animals. 
No person shall ride, lead, or let loose any animal or fowl of any kind at the Montclair Transcenter or on any City-owned property, except that it shall not be unlawful to have dogs physically restrained by a leash not in excess of six feet. 
No person shall keep or permit to remain any dog that is noisy, vicious, or dangerous or which disturbs other persons within the boundaries of the Montclair Transcenter or any City-owned property after such person has been directed to remove such dog. No person shall trap, kill, injure, catch, or mistreat any wild or domesticated bird or animal; or destroy, remove, or disturb any of the young or eggs of same; or permit any dog to pursue, trap, kill, or wound any wild or domesticated bird or animal, except that the provisions of this section shall not apply to City or contract employees regulating animal populations that have been declared a nuisance or hazard by the City Manager or his/her designee consistent with laws protecting animals. 
(Ord. No. 13-937, § 1, 10-21-13)  
9.14.080 - Boisterous conduct. 
No person shall maliciously or willfully disturb the peace or quiet of the Montclair Transcenter, City-owned property, or of any person therein by creating loud or unusual noises or by engaging in riotous, boisterous, threatening, indecent, or offensive conduct or by using abusive, profane, indecent, or vulgar language. No person shall play or utilize any sound-amplifying system within the Montclair Transcenter or on any City-owned property or facility not specifically designated for that purpose or permitted by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 13-937, § 1, 10-21-13)  
9.14.090 - Gambling. 
No person shall gamble or engage in gambling at the Montclair Transcenter or on City-owned property, except that this section shall not apply to bingo activities that occur within buildings at the Montclair Civic Center. 
(Ord. No. 13-937, § 1, 10-21-13)  
9.14.100 - Vending and peddling. 
No person shall expose or offer for sale any food, article, or thing nor shall any person station or place and stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale, or display of any such article or thing within the Montclair Transcenter or any City-owned property except by written permission from the City Manager or his/her designee. No person shall give, set up, or maintain any exhibition, show, performance, concert, lecture, entertainment, or similar activity at the Montclair Transcenter or on any City-owned property without written permission to do so from the City Manager or his/her designee. No person shall offer any for-profit services at the Montclair Transcenter or on any City-owned property without the written permission from the City Manager or his/her designee. As used in this section, lawful possession of a City of Montclair Business License does not qualify as written permission from the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 13-937, § 1, 10-21-13)  
9.14.110 - Alcoholic beverages. 
No person shall consume or have in his or her possession, custody, or control any open container of an alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever, except when attending a function operating under a permit issued by the City Manager or his/her designee. No intoxicated person shall enter or remain within the boundaries of the Montclair Transcenter or any City-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 13-937, § 1, 10-21-13)  
9.14.120 - Advertising. 
No person shall announce, advertise, or call the public's attention in any way to any article for sale or hire; or paste, glue, tack, or otherwise place or post any sign, picture, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatsoever; or distribute any handbill, circular, or petition except by permission from the City Manager or his/her designee, provided that this section shall not apply to any concession operating under a lease granted by the City. 
(Ord. No. 13-937, § 1, 10-21-13)  
9.14.130 - Nuisance. 
It shall be deemed a public nuisance for any person to do or commit, or cause to permit to be done or committed on or within the boundaries of the Montclair Transcenter or any City-owned property, any prohibited act as described in this Chapter or as outlined in Chapter 7.24 herein. 
(Ord. No. 13-937, § 1, 10-21-13)  
Chapter 9.16 - PUBLIC STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
Sections: 
 
9.16.010 - Authority of City Engineer. 
No work shall be done on the streets or alleys of the City except by the authority of the City Engineer. All work shall be done in accordance with City Standard Drawings and "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction," including the latest amendments written and promulgated by Southern California Chapters of American Public Works Association and Associated General Contractors of America Joint Cooperative Committee. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 7-2.01)  
9.16.020 - Excavations. 
A.  Permit Required. It is unlawful for any person to perform any digging or filling or to make any excavations in or upon any part of any street, alley, or other public right-of-way or public property, or to carry any dirt therefrom, or to burn anything thereon, or to in any way dam water in or upon any part of any street, alley, or other public right-of-way or public property, without first obtaining permission to do so from the City Engineer. 
B.  Deposit. When a permit is granted by the City Engineer to make any excavation in or upon any street, alley, or other public right-of-way or public property, the City Engineer may require a deposit from the person to whom such permit is granted, which deposit shall be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring the street, alley, or other public right-of-way or public property to the same condition it was prior to such excavation being made. 
C.  Safety Precautions. Should the City Engineer approve any such digging, filling, or excavation to remain open after dark, the person performing the work or in control of the work shall place traffic-safety devices in accordance with the "Specifications for Design and Construction of Public Works Facilities for the City of Montclair" and the "City of Montclair General Permit Conditions and Utility Trench Specifications." 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 7-2.02)  
9.16.030 - Obstructions—Gutters. 
The construction, placing or maintaining of bridges of any description across or over any gutter of any street in the City in such a manner as to be an obstruction to the ordinary flow of water in the gutter is expressly prohibited. 
(Prior code § 7-2.03)  
9.16.040 - Obstructions—Public streets, alleys, or other public rights-of-way. 
It is unlawful for any person to place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, in or upon any public street, alleys, or other public right-of-way, or any portion thereof, any building, fence, tree, or other obstruction to the free use of such public street, alley, or other public right-of-way, or any portion thereof, unless an encroachment permit has been authorized by the City Engineer in accordance with the following provisions: 
A.  Encroachment Defined. "Encroachment" means and includes any wall, fence, or other object of any kind or nature that is placed in, on, under, or over any portion of any public right-of-way. 
B.  Fees for Encroachment. The City Engineer shall collect from the applicant a fee for the issuance of an encroachment permit. The amount of such fee shall be as set forth by City Council resolution. Any person placing or causing to be placed any encroachment within any public right-of-way without first obtaining an encroachment permit will be subject to a penalty as set forth by City Council resolution. 
C.  Revocation of Permits Involving Encroachments. Every encroachment permit shall be subject to the provision that in the event of any future public improvement, pursuant to any law of the State of California, or action of the City Council necessitating the relocation or removal of such encroachment, the City Engineer shall serve to the owner, occupant, or person in possession of the encroachment or to any other person causing the encroachment to exist a Notice of Revocation specifying that the encroachment must be removed from the public right-of-way and specifying a reasonable time within which the work of relocation or removal must be completed. 
D.  Revocation or Removal of Permitted Encroachments. Upon notice of revocation pursuant to subsection C of this section, the property owner shall relocate or remove such encroachment at his/her own expense pursuant to all items specified in said Notice of Revocation. 
E.  Procedure for Removal of Encroachments. The City Engineer may immediately have removed from any street, alley, or other public right-of-way any encroachment that is not removed or relocated within the time specified in the Notice of Revocation. Upon such removal, the owner of such property shall be responsible for the cost of such removal and shall be billed upon completion of this work. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 7-2.04)  
9.16.050 - Removal of obstructions. 
A.  Notice. It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to notify in writing any person obstructing any street, alley, public place or other right-of-way without having been issued an encroachment permit to remove the obstruction. 
B.  Service of Notice. Such notice may be given by delivering the same personally or by posting the same upon the. obstruction. 
C.  Failure to Remove. If such obstruction has not been removed within the time specified in such notice, the same shall be and is declared to be a public nuisance; and the City Engineer shall have the obstruction removed, which cost shall be borne by the person causing such encroachment. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 7-2.05)  
9.16.060 - Obstructions—Sidewalks. 
Except as authorized by Chapter 9.29 of this Code, no boxes, merchandise of any description, wares, baskets, crates, chairs, tables, sports equipment, or any obstruction whatever to the free use of the width of the sidewalk for travel, or the space between the sidewalk and curb, shall be placed, kept, or permitted to remain upon or over any such sidewalk or places. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 7-2.06) 
(Ord. No. 18-978-U, § 3, 12-17-18)  
9.16.070 - Obstructions—Public property adjacent to private premises. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Code, every property owner in the City shall keep the gutters, alleys, and sidewalks adjoining his or her premises free from natural grasses, weeds, leaves, rubbish, paper, rock, dirt, or other obstructions offensive to the senses, injurious to health, or impeding the free use of such places. 
In the event of failure on the part of any person to comply with the provisions of this section within 48 hours after being notified in writing by the City Engineer, and in addition to the penalties provided for violations of the provisions of this Code, the City Engineer may cause the work to be done. The owner or holder of such property shall be responsible for the cost of the removal of such obstruction and shall be billed upon completion of this work. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 7-2.07)  
9.16.080 - Laying pipes in streets to be improved. 
A.  Notice. Whenever any street, alley, or other public right-of-way is to be graded, oiled, reoiled, paved, or repaved, or is to be in any way improved, the City Engineer shall notify any corporation or company who may own or maintain pipes along such street or other public right-of-way of such improvements. Such corporation or company shall, within a time period specified by the City Engineer, begin to lay pipes along such street or other public right-of-way and to make the proper service connection with the property abutting such street or right-of-way. 
B.  Failure to Lay Pipes. Any corporation or company which fails to act upon the notice of the City Engineer to lay pipes in any street or other public right-of-way that is to be improved shall thereafter be denied the privilege of laying pipes along such street or other public right-of-way for a time period as determined by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 7-2.08)  
9.16.090 - Street work by public utilities. 
A.  Completion of Work Required. No work performed upon, in, or under the surface of any street or alley by any person, company or corporation shall be left in an unfinished or dangerous condition but shall be completed without unnecessary delay and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
B.  Failure to Complete Work. In the event of failure of any person, company or corporation to comply with the provisions of this section, the City shall have the right, after notice by the City Engineer to such person, company or corporation, to take any steps necessary to ensure the prompt and satisfactory completion of such work. 
C.  Repair of Damages. Whenever any excavation is made or other work is peformed in or on any street or alley pursuant to any law of the City, any and all damages to such street or alley resulting therefrom shall be promptly repaired without cost to the City and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
D.  Failure to Repair Damages. If such damage is not immediately repaired, the City Engineer shall give notice in writing to the person, firm, company or corporation responsible therefor, and if the same is not repaired within one week after the service of such notice, the City Engineer shall cause such repairs to be made as are reasonably necessary to place such street or alley in the same condition as it was prior to such excavation being made or other work being performed. Such person, firm, company or corporation shall be responsible for the cost of such work and shall be billed upon completion of this work. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 7-2.09)  
9.16.100 - Public utility poles. 
Except as otherwise provided pursuant to lawful franchise provisions, it is unlawful for any public utility or other company or individual to erect, or cause to be erected, poles for the stringing of wires for telephone, telegraph or electrical service, or for any other purpose for which poles are erected and wires are strung along public streets, without first obtaining a permit from the City Engineer to erect such poles or string such wires. 
Except as otherwise provided pursuant to lawful franchise provisions, the placing of all poles along the streets of the City shall be under the direct control of the City Engineer. Such poles shall be so placed as to interfere as little as possible with public safety and private convenience, and any company or individual erecting poles on or along the streets of the City shall only place the same as directed by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 7-2.10)  
9.16.110 - Closing streets for repair work. 
A.  Authorized. The City Engineer is authorized to close any street, or any portion of any street, during the time required for the improvement of such street and making the necessary repairs thereon and may keep the same closed until such time as it may be ready for travel. 
B.  Barriers and Lights. In closing any street or portion thereof, the City Engineer shall place barriers at each extremity of the street closed and at all intersections of cross streets. At night, there shall be placed on each of such barriers an illuminated warning device to warn persons of such danger. 
C.  Barriers and Lights: Observance by Public. During the time a street or portion thereof is closed by the City Engineer, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel over the same without permission from the City Engineer; and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, damage or destroy any barrier or warning device placed pursuant to this section. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable under the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 7-2.11)  
9.16.120 - Landscaping requirements. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every owner of real property to maintain such property to the following standards: 
1.  Landscaping. All shrubs, trees and other landscaping located along the lines of any street bordering the property shall be maintained in such condition so that no part of the shrubs or other landscaping shall project over the property line onto the sidewalk or street. The shrubs or other landscaping shall also be trimmed to a height that shall not cause a sight obstruction for vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Such determination of height shall be made by the Director of Public Works. 
2.  Trees. Trees located between the property line and the curb or street are designated as "City trees" and the pruning, planting and removal of "City trees" are regulated pursuant to the City Tree Policy Manual. 
B.  In the event of neglect or refusal of the property owner to observe the provisions of this section, the Director of Public Works shall notify such owner in writing indicating the work to be performed and a time period within which such work shall be performed. Such time period shall be set at the discretion of the Director of Public Works. In the event the work indicated is not completed within the specified time period, the Director of Public Works may cause the necessary work to be performed. The owner of such property shall be responsible for the cost of such work and shall be billed upon the completion of such work. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 7-2.12)  
9.16.130 - Enforcement of provisions. 
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer and Director of Public Works to see that there is compliance with the provisions of this chapter and that such provisions are strictly enforced. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 7-2.13)  
Chapter 9.20 - SEWER SYSTEM 
Sections:  
Article I. - Title and Scope of Provisions 
 
9.20.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "City Sewer System Regulations" and may be cited as such. 
(Prior code § 6-6.101)  
9.20.020 - Scope. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the design, construction, alteration, use and maintenance of the City sewer system, including, but not limited to, main line sewers, building sewers, building laterals, wastewater pretreatment systems, regional wastewater treatment plants, gravity separation interceptors, and other appurtenances; the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor, to cover the costs of checking plans, inspecting construction, and making record plans of the facilities permitted; and provision for penalties for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Design and construction of the City sewer system shall be pursuant to the document entitled "Specifications for the Design and Construction of Public Works Facilities for the City of Montclair" as adopted by the Montclair City Council. 
C.  The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the maximum beneficial use of the City sewer system, groundwater resources and effluent-receiving waterways through regulation of wastewater discharges by establishing terms, limits and conditions of discharge through the enforcement of general requirements for domestic wastewater users and the issuance of industrial user discharge permits; to provide for equitable distribution of the City's costs; and to provide procedures for complying with requirements placed upon the City by State and federal regulations. This is accomplished in compliance with the NPDES permits issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board in conformity with 40 CFR, Part 403, the Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987, and the California Water Code as amended. 
D.  The objectives of this chapter are: 
1.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the City sewer system which would interfere with operation of the regional system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
2.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the City sewer system which would pass inadequately treated through the regional system into receiving waters or into the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the regional system; 
3.  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system; 
4.  To provide for regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the City sewer system through the issuance of industrial user discharge permits to certain nondomestic users and through the enforcement of general requirements for other users, to authorize monitoring and enforcement activities, to require user reporting, to provide that existing customers' capacity will not be preempted, and to provide for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this chapter. 
E.  Any fines imposed by a regulatory agency other than the City as a result of a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to any charges or fees imposed by the City. 
(Prior code § 6-6.102)  
Article II. - General Provisions 
 
9.20.030 - Sewer connection fees—Deposits. 
Except as otherwise provided, all money received pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited as follows: 
A.  Regional Fees. All money received pursuant to Sections 9.20.430 through 9.20.460 of this chapter shall be deposited into the Sewer Fund. 
B.  Main Line Connection Fees and Main Line Construction Fees. All money received pursuant to Section 9.20.260 of this chapter shall be deposited into the Sewer Fund. 
C.  Reimbursement Districts. All money received pursuant to Section 9.20.550 of this chapter shall be deposited into the sewer reimbursement liability account within the General Fund. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.301)  
9.20.040 - Use of the Sewer Fund. 
Money deposited in the Sewer Fund, as provided in Section 9.20.030 of this article, may be expended by the City, contingent upon the receipt and availability of such funds, to accomplish the purposes set forth in Section S471 of the California Health and Safety Code for which no other provisions have been made or for such other sewer purposes, including sewerage facilities, storm drain systems, and maintenance and development of the same, not in conflict with applicable laws or legal requirements. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.302)  
9.20.050 - Enforcement of provisions. 
The Public Works Director and City Engineer, or their designees, shall enforce all the provisions of this chapter and in doing so shall have the powers of peace officers. Such powers shall not limit or otherwise affect the powers and duties of the San Bernardino County Health Officer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.303)  
9.20.060 - Service of notices. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all notices required hereunder shall be given in writing and served by messenger or by first class, certified or registered mail. Notice shall be deemed received as follows, depending upon the method of transmittal: 
A.  By messenger as of the date delivered; and 
B.  By United States mail, first class, certified or registered, as of 72 hours after deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.304)  
9.20.070 - Time limits. 
Any time limit provided for in this chapter may be extended by mutual written consent of both the City and the permittee, applicant or other person affected, unless specifically restricted in this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.305)  
9.20.080 - Access to facilities. 
No object or structure, whether permanent or temporary, shall be placed in such a position as to interfere with the ready access to any facility described in Section 9.20.200 of this chapter. Any such obstruction, upon request of the Director of Public Works, shall be immediately removed by the violator at no expense to the City and shall not be replaced. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.306)  
9.20.090 - Interference with inspectors. 
No person shall, during reasonable hours, refuse, resist, or attempt to resist the entrance of the Director of Public Works into any building, factory, plant, yard, field or other place, or portion thereof, in the performance of his/her duties within the powers conferred upon him/her by applicable laws or legal requirements. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.307)  
9.20.100 - Opening manholes. 
No unauthorized person shall, for any purpose whatsoever, open or enter or cause to be opened or entered, any manhole to any public sewer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.308)  
9.20.110 - Reimbursement for repairs and maintenance. 
If any person causes obstructions to, removal of, or damages to, the City sewer system or any appurtenances thereto, he/she shall reimburse the City for the costs of flushing, cleaning, repairing and/or reconstructing such portion of such system within 30 days after the City Engineer renders an invoice for the same. The amount, when paid, shall be deposited into the sewer maintenance fee account within the Sewer Fund. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.309)  
9.20.120 - Dedication of sewers to public. 
A.  Before plans for the construction of any public main line sewer are approved by the City Engineer, the person causing such plans to be prepared shall provide the following information, using forms provided by the City: 
1.  An offer of dedication signed and acknowledged by all persons sharing the cost of such sewer; and 
2.  A letter of participation describing the property of the persons who participated in such cost. 
B.  When the construction of the sewer has been completed and accepted by the City Council, the sewer shall become part of the City sewer system. No sewer shall be accepted for dedication by the City unless such sewer has been constructed in conformity with the requirements of this chapter and the document known as "Specifications for the Design and Construction of Public Works Facilities for the City of Montclair." 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.310)  
Article III. - Inspection of System Construction and Maintenance of System 
 
9.20.130 - Construction inspections. 
The Director of Public Works may inspect, as often as he/she deems necessary, every main line sewer, building lateral, building sewer, wastewater pretreatment system, interceptor, and other appurtenances to the City sewer system to ascertain whether such facilities under construction are being installed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.401)  
9.20.140 - Inspections—Notice of readiness. 
Immediately after work is ready for inspection and at least 24 hours before an inspection is to be made, the permittee shall request such inspection by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.402)  
9.20.150 - Inspections—Convenience of work to be inspected. 
At the time of the inspection, the permittee shall have all work uncovered and convenient, giving the City Engineer the opportunity to make a thorough examination. The permittee shall apply air pressure tests as required by the document entitled "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction." 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.403)  
9.20.160 - Inspections—Prior removal of obstructions. 
If any pipes are enclosed or covered in any way which obstructs a thorough inspection of the sewer construction or installation and the City Engineer notifies the permittee to remove such obstruction(s), the City Engineer need not inspect the work until such obstruction(s) are removed. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.404)  
9.20.170 - Inspections—Tests, labor and equipment. 
The permittee shall furnish all labor, tools and materials necessary for all tests, and the permittee or his/her representative shall be present at the job site at the time the inspection is made. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.405)  
9.20.180 - Inspections—Prior connection of facilities. 
In the event a building lateral, building sewer, interceptor, pretreatment system, or other appurtenance to the City sewer system is placed in use and fails to pass inspection, the permittee shall have a period of time as determined by the City Engineer in which to make the construction conform to the requirements of this chapter. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.406)  
9.20.190 - Correction of defects. 
If the City Engineer notifies a permittee that any work is defective, either in its construction or material, the permittee shall reconstruct or remove such work, causing conformance to the provisions of this chapter within a period of time as determined by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.407)  
9.20.200 - Maintenance of building sewers, building laterals, wastewater pretreatment systems, gravity-separation interceptors, and related appurtenances. 
Building sewers, building laterals, wastewater pretreatment systems, gravity-separation interceptors, and related appurtenances shall be maintained by the owners thereof in a safe and sanitary condition; all devices or safeguards which are required by the provisions of this chapter for the operation of such facilities shall be maintained in good working order. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as permitting the removal or nonmaintenance of any devices or safeguards on existing facilities unless authorized in writing by the Director of Public Works. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.408)  
Article IV. - Connections to Sewer System 
 
9.20.210 - Connecting cesspools and septic tanks. 
No person shall connect, or cause to be connected, any cesspool seepage pit or septic tank to any main line sewer or to any building lateral or building sewer leading thereto. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.501)  
9.20.220 - Connecting sewers on private property. 
No person shall connect, or cause to be connected, any sewer on private property unless: 
A.  Such sewer has been laid under the supervision of, and to the satisfaction of, the City Engineer; and 
B.  If dedication of such private property is required, such private property has been dedicated, and the City Council has accepted such dedication. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.502)  
Article V. - Sewer Construction Permits 
 
9.20.230 - Construction permit required. 
No person shall commence, do, construct, use or alter, or cause to be commenced, done, constructed, used or altered, any public sewer, main line sewer, building lateral, building sewer, or other appurtenance to the City sewer system without first obtaining a construction permit from the City to do so. All such work performed pursuant to such permit shall be constructed by a licensed contractor. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.601)  
9.20.240 - Permits not transferable. 
Permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not be transferable from one person to another person or from one location to another location. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.602)  
Article VI. - Sewer-Related Fees 
 
9.20.250 - Construction permit fees. 
Before granting any permit for the construction of a main line sewer, building lateral, building sewer, or any industrial waste pretreatment or disposal system, the City shall collect from the applicant a construction permit fee. The formula for the development of this fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council and shall be based on the estimated construction cost of the project. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.701)  
9.20.260 - Sewer-connection fees. 
A.  The City Engineer may issue a permit to make a sewer connection to the main line sewer in any area annexed to the City having frontage parallel to such main line sewer that was constructed by Montclair Assessment District No. 2 or constructed by the City after the formation of Montclair Assessment District No. 2. A map of Montclair Assessment District No. 2 boundaries is attached as Exhibit A to this chapter. 
B.  The City Engineer may issue a permit to make a sewer connection to the main line sewer in any unincorporated area having frontage parallel to a City main line sewer when the property owner desiring such sewer connection has an executed and approved irrevocable annexation agreement with the City. 
C.  Payment of the sewer connection fee shall be made at the time of application for a building permit to construct a building sewer. The fee for a sewer connection permit as described in this section shall be calculated as follows: 
1.  Main line connection fee in annexed areas: 
a.  Two Hundred Fifty (250) Dollars in an R-1 zone, 
b.  Two Hundred Ninety (290) Dollars in an R-2 zone, 
c.  Three Hundred Thirty (330) Dollars in an R-3 zone, 
d.  Three Hundred Seventy (370) Dollars in an AP, C or M zone per acre of the lot or parcel sought to be connected; and 
2.  Main Line Construction Fee. In addition to the main line connection fee, the applicant shall pay a proportionate share of the entire cost of the construction of the main line sewer. Such cost shall be calculated as follows: 
MLCF 	= 	Main line construction fee 
PF 	= 	Property frontage (linear frontage measurement of subject property) 
PFC 	= 	Per foot cost 
TMLCC 	= 	Total main line construction cost 
TPF 	= 	Total of property frontages (linear frontage measurement of all properties along the subject main line) 
		
 
TMLCC 	= PFC 
TPF 	
	
PFC × PF 	= MLCF 
		
 
The total property frontage paralleling the construction of the main line sewer will be divided into the total cost of the main line constructed to establish a per-foot cost. The per-foot cost will then be multiplied by the property frontage to establish the fee. 
If the shape of the lot or parcel is other than the usual rectangular shape or is unusual in area, and strict adherence to the formula would require the payment of an amount not commensurate with the benefits to be received, the amount to be charged may be modified as determined by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.702)  
9.20.270 - Plan-checking fees. 
Persons desiring plan checking as required by the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the City an advance plan-checking fee that will be determined by the City Engineer at the time that plans are submitted for review. Plan-checking fees will be determined by the actual total cost incurred by the City Engineer's office to review and/or approve such plans. The advance plan-checking fees shall be applied to the actual total plan-checking cost to determine if additional fees will be required. If the advance plan-checking fees are in excess of the actual cost, the remaining advance plan-checking fees shall be refunded to the payer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.703)  
9.20.280 - Regional capital outlay fees—Residential. 
Residential regional capital outlay fees are as set forth in Section 9.20.430. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.704)  
9.20.290 - Regional capital outlay fees—Commercial. 
Commercial regional capital outlay fees are as set forth in Section 9.20.440. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.705)  
9.20.300 - Regional capital outlay fees—Industrial. 
Industrial regional capital outlay fees are as set forth in Section 9.20.450. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.706)  
9.20.310 - Sewer-maintenance fees. 
Sewer-maintenance fees are determined as set forth in Section 9.20.360. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.707)  
9.20.320 - Future assessments. 
In the event a lot or parcel specifically described in a sewer connection application receives additional benefit from any public sewer, nothing contained in this chapter shall relieve the property owner from future payment of connection fees as provided in this article; nor shall the property owner be relieved from the levy of a special assessment statute of the State for such additional benefit. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.708)  
9.20.330 - Fees—Records. 
A permanent and accurate accounting of all fees received pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be kept. Such accounting shall include the names and addresses of the persons on whose accounts the same were paid, the date and amount thereof, and the number of permits granted, if any. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.709)  
9.20.340 - Fees—Refunds. 
In the event any person shall have paid a plan-checking fee, sewer-connection fee, or a fee for the processing of reimbursement documents and no such work has been completed, such person, upon presentation to the City Engineer of a request therefor in writing, shall be entitled to a refund in an amount equal to the fee actually paid, minus any costs incurred by the City relative to such application. The Director of Public Works shall determine the validity of such request and the amount of such refund. Such refund shall be paid as provided by law for the payment of claims against the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.710)  
9.20.350 - Fee adjustments. 
Fee adjustments are determined as set forth in Section 9.20.470. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.711)  
Article VII. - Sewer-Maintenance Fees 
 
9.20.360 - Bimonthly sewer-maintenance fee formula. 
An occupant, owner or tenant whose premises is served by a connection to the City sewer system, whereby the domestic wastewater or nondomestic wastewater, or either or both, are disposed of by the City through the facilities of the regional treatment and disposal works owned by the Inland Empire Utilities Agency, or otherwise, shall pay a sewer-maintenance fee based on the number of service units for the various property classifications as determined by the following formula: 
A.  A sewer unit factor is developed by the following formula: 
	 F  	(0.31)(BOD) 		(0.32)(SS) 
SU = 	270 (0.37 + 	 230 	+ 	220 ) 
 
SU 	= 	Sewer units in gallons 
F 	= 	Sewage flow in gallons per day based on sewage factor applied to water meter readings 
BOD 	= 	Users discharge—biochemical oxygen demand (mg/l) 
SS 	= 	Users discharge—suspended solids concentration (mg/l) 
 
B.  Conversion from gallons per day (GPD) to hundreds of cubic feet (HCF): 
1.  Residential Sewer Fees. The residential sewer rate is based on 270 GPD, regardless of actual water consumption; therefore, it is not necessary to make the calculation from GPD to HCF for residential rates. 
2.  Commercial and Industrial Sewer Fees. Commercial and industrial sewer fees are based on actual water consumption. The SU formula is based on GPD of sewer discharge, and meter readings are based on HCF of water consumption. One HCF is equivalent to 748 gallons of water. In order to establish a sewer billing formula based on metered consumption, a conversion from GPD to HCF has to be made. The following is how this conversion is accomplished: 
270 GPD × 365 days ÷ 6 billing periods ÷ 748 = 21.96 
(Sewer bills are generated bimonthly, resulting in six billing periods per year.) 
21.96 represents the equivalent daily discharge (EDD) over a two-month period as measured in HCF. 
C.  Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU) Calculation. The next step in the rate-development process is to determine the number of EDU's by using the SU formula, substituting 270 GPD with the equivalent daily discharge factor, and then multiplying the result by the bimonthly water consumption (BWC) as follows: 
	 F  	(0.31)(BOD) 		(0.32)(SS) 	
EDU = 	21.96 (0.37 + 	230 	+ 	220 ) 	× BWC 
 
F* 	= Sewage flow in gallons per day based on sewage factor applied to water meter readings 
BOD 	= Users discharge—biochemical oxygen demand (mg/l) 
SS 	= Users discharge—suspended solids concentration (mg/l) 
BWC 	= Bimonthly water consumption 
 
* Add landscape factor to (F) if applicable. If an account has combined domestic and landscape usage in the HCF-metered water consumption reading, then the HCF reading shall be multiplied by 0.55 prior to the EDUs being calculated in the formula. Fifty-five (55) percent represents the amount of consumption that is contributable to the domestic consumption. If an account has a special circumstance and can show that the landscape usage is different than the norm established in this section, that account can be so adjusted, provided the billing agency documents the change in the landscape factor and can provide that information to the auditor if required. 
Sewer EDU Determinations for Commercial Categories 
	BOD/SS 	Flow (F) as Percent of Water Use 	Bimontly Sewer Rate Factor 
			
1. Residential Property 			
a. Single-family 	230/220 	270 	1.00 
b. Mobile home 	230/220 	270 	1.00 
c. Multiple-family (3 or more 			
dwelling units) 	230/220 	270 	1.00 
			
2. Commercial/Industrial Property 			
a. Office, day care center, 			
market without grinder, 			
public facility without 			
dining, bar/tavern without 			
food, retail/service, 			
recreation/amusement 			
without dining 	230/220 	80 	.0364 
b. Mortuary 	250/350 	95 	.0526 
c. Hotel with dining, motel 			
with dining, bar/tavern 			
with dining, recreation/ 			
amusement with dining, 			
public facility with 			
dining, hospital-full 			
service, convalescent 			
facility 	300/400 	85 	.0525 
d. Laundromat, car wash 	100/150 	95 	.0313 
e. Laundry—commercial 			
industrial, dry cleaner 	350/500 	85 	.0607 
f. Motel without dining, 			
health spa, church/ 			
worship 	300/100 	80 	.0335 
g. Outpatient facility, 			
medical/dental 			
office 	225/100 	90 	.0336 
h. Restaurant, full 			
service; restaurant, 			
fast food; market with 			
grinder, bakery 	400/300 	85 	.0521 
i. Schools: 			
Public/private, K-12 	230/220 	5 GPD/s 	.0370 × # students 
			
College 		10 GPD/s 	.0740 × # students 
			
GPD/s = gallons per day per student 			
 
The sewer-maintenance fee for schools is based on the number of students as reported by the schools in October of each year. 
D.  The final step in development of the sewer bill is to multiply the EDUs by the EDU billing rate as established in Section 9.20.460. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.801)  
9.20.370 - Sewer fees applicable where sewers are available. 
The fees fixed by the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable only to premises to which a main line sewer is available. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.802)  
9.20.380 - Sewer maintenance fees where water services have been discontinued. 
When water services have been discontinued, no sewer-maintenance fee shall be levied on such premises during the period of such discontinuance. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.803)  
9.20.390 - Sewer-maintenance fee. 
The sewer-maintenance fee, as authorized in Section 9.20.360, shall be composed of three parts, to wit: 
Part 1 - Sewage Treatment - That fee charged by the Inland Empire Utilities Agency for sewage treatment 
Part 2 - Sewer Maintenance - That fee necessary to maintain the City sewer system including all sewer mainline, manholes, and cleanouts 
Part 3 - Sewer Rehabilitation/Replacement - That fee necessary to develop a fund to construct, repair, replace, and/or rehabilitate the City Sewer System 
The following maximum rates per month per equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) for the use of sewer services is established for structures discharging domestic or nondomestic waste into the City sewer system as follows: 
Effective Date 	Part 1 	Part 2 	Part 3 	Total 
July 1, 2007 	$ 9.19 	$3.10 	$1.00 	$13.29 
July 1, 2008 	10.00 	3.26 	1.50 	14.76 
July 1, 2009 	10.75 	3.42 	1.50 	15.67 
July 1, 2010 	11.50 	3.59 	1.50 	16.59 
July 1, 2011 	12.25 	3.77 	1.50 	17.52 
July 1, 2012 	13.00 	3.96 	1.50 	18.46 
July 1, 2013 	13.75 	4.16 	1.50 	19.41 
July 1, 2014 	14.50 	4.37 	1.50 	20.37 
July 1, 2015 	15.25 	4.59 	1.50 	21.34 
July 1, 2016 	16.00 	4.82 	1.50 	22.32 
 
Any revision of these fees shall be made in accordance with State statute and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. 07-890 § 1: Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.804)  
9.20.400 - Sewer-standby assessment. 
The rate for the sewer-standby assessment is established at Two Dollars and Thirty-Five Cents ($2.35) for structures or vacant lot units having access, but not being connected, to the City sewer system. Any revision of this assessment shall be made upon satisfaction of any conditions imposed by state statute or other applicable laws. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.805)  
9.20.410 - Collection of sewer-maintenance fees and sewer-standby assessments. 
The City Council may contract with Monte Vista Water District, or such other agency as designated by the City Council, the duty of collecting the sewer-maintenance fee or sewer-standby assessment on developed properties as provided for in this chapter. The City will collect the sewer-standby assessment on vacant land to which sewer service is made available as part of the property owner's annual San Bernardino County tax bill. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.806)  
9.20.420 - Deposit of sewer-maintenance fees and sewer-standby assessments. 
All moneys received from the collection of sewer maintenance fees and sewer-standby assessments as established by this chapter shall be deposited in the sewer fund. The money in such fund shall be used as permitted by Section 5471 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.807)  
Article VIII. - Regional Requirements 
 
9.20.430 - Regional capital outlay fees—Residential. 
Every person constructing a new residential structure in the City who connects to the City sewer system shall pay to the City a regional capital outlay fee for each residential unit pursuant to Section 9.20.460 of this chapter. This fee is not required for a residential unit built as a replacement for a similar unit which had been connected to the City sewer system. A residential unit is defined as each unit designated for the purpose of providing permanent housing for one family or tenant. This includes, but is not limited to, a single-family detached residence, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile home, or trailer space. Each unit shall constitute one equivalent dwelling unit (EDU). 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.901)  
9.20.440 - Regional capital outlay fees—Commercial. 
Every person constructing a new structure in the City for the purpose of providing permanent housing for enterprises engaged in the exchange of goods and services who connects to the City sewer system shall pay to the City a regional capital outlay fee. Commercial industrial units shall include, but are not limited to, all private business and service establishments, schools, churches, and public entities. This fee shall be paid pursuant to Section 9.20.460 of this chapter. The EDU number shall be determined by multiplying the fixture units (as defined by the 2007 California Plumbing Code) shown on the approved building plans by the appropriate sewage factor from the following category use: 
Category 	Use 	Sewer Flow 
Gallon/Fixture Unit 	BOD/SS 	Sewage Factor 
I 	Motel/hotel 	12 	230/220 	0.0444 
	Recreation/amusement 			
	Restaurant (fast food) 			
	Office 			
	Retail store 			
	Market (without butcher shop) 			
	Bar/tavern 			
II 	Market (with butcher shop) 	24 	250/350 	0.1081 
	Bakery 			
	Mortuary 			
III 	Convalescent home 	42 	250/300 	0.1780 
	Hospital 			
	Health spa with pool 			
	Restaurant (full service) 			
IV 	Laundromat 	43 	350/500 	0.2499 
	Laundry 			
	Dry cleaner (processor) 			
V 	Car wash (coin-operated) 	102 	150/500 	0.4910 
VI 	Church 	17 	230/220 	0.0630 
	School 			
	Public facility 			
VII 	Health spa without pool Laundromat (See Note A) 	42 	230/220 	0.1555 
 
A. For commercial laundromats, if high efficiency front-load washers from approved Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWD) washer list are used, the number of fixture units per machine is established at two fixture units. 
Commercial centers with various use categories will be the sum of EDUs computed for each use. The wastewater factor is derived from the formula: 
  
When: 	SF = 	Sewage Factor 
	K = 	Gallons per fixture unit divided by the average domestic household flow of 270 gallons 
	BOD = 	Biochemical Oxygen Demand (mg/l) 
	SS = 	Suspended Solids (mg/l) 
 
Computation of Equivalent Dwelling Unit 
(EDU) 
EDU 	= 	(SF)(AFU) 
SF 	= 	Sewage Factor 
AFU 	= 	Number of Actual Fixture Units 
 
(Ord. 08-903 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.902)  
9.20.450 - Regional capital outlay fees—Industrial. 
A.  Every person constructing a new structure in the City for the purpose of providing permanent housing for an enterprise engaged in the production, manufacturing or processing of material who connects to the City sewer system shall pay to the City a regional capital outlay fee. The EDUs for industrial users shall be determined as follows: 
1.  For domestic wastewater, the EDU number is computed by multiplying the fixture units (as defined by the Uniform Plumbing Code) as shown on the approved building plans by a wastewater factor of 0.0741, based on 20 gallons per fixture-unit flow per day. 
2.  For nondomestic wastewater, the EDU number is computed from information contained on the industrial user discharge permit application using the following formula: 
  
3.  The total EDU number equals the combined resultant of the EDU numbers derived from subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section. 
B.  For any newly constructed commercial unit or industrial unit connected to the City sewer system with an estimated wastewater flow exceeding 15,000 gallons per day, the amount of the EDU number shall be determined by the Regional Technical Committee and approved by the Inland Empire Utilities Agency. 
(Ord. 08-903 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.903)  
9.20.460 - Equivalent dwelling unit value. 
The regional sewage supplemental capital outlay fee for residential, commercial, and industrial structures shall be the equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) number multiplied by the EDU value of Five Thousand Four Hundred Fifteen ($5,415) Dollars as established by the Inland Empire Utilities Agency effective January 1, 2016; Six Thousand Nine ($6,009) Dollars as established by the Inland Empire Utilities Agency effective January 1, 2017; Six Thousand Three Hundred Nine ($6,309) Dollars as established by the Inland Empire Utilities Agency effective July 1, 2017; Six Thousand Six Hundred Twenty-Four ($6,624) Dollars effective July 1, 2018; and Six Thousand Nine Hundred Fifty-Five ($6,955) Dollars as established by the Inland Empire Utilities Agency effective July 1, 2019. The EDU value is based on construction costs and takes into consideration the current Engineering News-Record Construction Cost Index nationwide using the 20-city average. 
(Ord. 07-892 § 1: Ord. 06-884 § 1: Ord. 05-863 § 1: Ord. 04-847 § 1: Ord. 03-831 § 1: Ord. 02-818 § 1: Ord. 01-813 § 1: Ord. 00-804 § 1: Ord. 99-792 § 1: Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.904) 
(Ord. No. 09-908, § 1, 5-4-09; Ord. No. 12-928, § 1, 3-19-12; Ord. No. 16-956, § 1, 6-6-16)  
9.20.465 - Sanitary sewer expansion fee. 
The sanitary sewer expansion fee for residential, commercial, and industrial structures shall be the equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) number multiplied by the EDU value of Five Hundred Forty ($540) Dollars effective January 1, 2016; Six Hundred ($600) Dollars effective January 1, 2017; Six Hundred Thirty ($630) Dollars effective July 1, 2017; Six Hundred Sixty ($660) Dollars effective July 1, 2018; and Seven Hundred ($700) Dollars effective July 1, 2019. 
(Ord. No. 12-928, § 1, 3-19-12; Ord. No. 16-956, § 1, 6-6-16)  
9.20.470 - Fee adjustments. 
An owner of any project subject to a fee described in this chapter may apply to the City Engineer for a reduction of or adjustment to the fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the amount of the fee charged and either the wastewater impacts of that development or the type of sewer facilities to be built, improved or expanded. The application shall state, in detail, the factual basis for the claim of the reduction, adjustment or waiver. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the reduction, adjustment or waiver of this fee and authorize the City to impose and collect the applicable fee. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.905)  
Article IX. - Sewer Reimbursement Districts 
 
9.20.480 - Reimbursement agreement defined. 
As used in this chapter, "reimbursement agreement" means a contract entered into between the City and any other entity providing for the construction of sewer facilities by said entity and for the collection by the City of a fee or charge for the connection with such sewer facilities by any other party. Reimbursement to said entity shall be made from the proceeds of such collections. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1001)  
9.20.490 - Reimbursement agreement prerequisites. 
Whenever an entity, as referred to in Section 9.20.480 of this chapter, has been required by the City to install main line sewer facilities as a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit, or as a condition precedent to the approval of a tentative or final subdivision map, or for any other reason the City Council deems to be in the public interest, and said entity agrees to construct such facilities at its sole expense in accordance with the requirements of the City, and it is found by the City Council that such facilities will be for the benefit of, or usable by, other properties in the City adjacent to such sewer, the City Council may, by resolution, approve a reimbursement agreement with said entity whereby the City shall collect from any other person using or connecting with such facilities a charge for making such connection. No such agreement may be entered into unless the sewer facilities are designed and constructed pursuant to all City design standards and requirements, and said entity also agrees thereby to dedicate such sewer facilities to the City for public use. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1002)  
9.20.500 - Reimbursement district—Establishment. 
Upon the execution of a reimbursement agreement, there shall be established a reimbursement district consisting of those properties the City Council finds will be benefited by such facilities. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1003)  
9.20.510 - Connection charges required. 
Charges shall be made only to those persons desiring to connect to such sewer facilities with property lying in whole or in part within such reimbursement district. A map of the district and a schedule of the charges necessary to make connection to such sewer facilities shall be maintained by the City. 
After the execution of a reimbursement agreement, no other person shall connect to the sewer facilities indicated thereon without payment of the charges provided for in Section 9.20.550 of this chapter. No building or construction permit shall be issued until the City Treasurer has certified that the payment, as required by the reimbursement agreement, has been made; however, no reimbursement shall be forwarded until the entity who originally paid for said installation has fully complied with all the terms and conditions in the reimbursement agreement. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1004)  
9.20.520 - Accounting of payments received. 
There is created a sewer reimbursement liability account within the General Fund, and all charges made and received in accordance with reimbursement agreements entered into pursuant to this article shall be deposited in such account. Payments to the entity as provided in the reimbursement agreement shall be transferred semiannually to the entity, together with a description of the properties for which the payments have been made. These payments are subject to an administrative fee as provided in the reimbursement agreement. Any amounts remaining in such account after all disbursements have been made to the entity shall be transferred annually to the Sewer Fund. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1005)  
9.20.530 - Limitation of disbursements. 
No disbursements of funds collected as provided in the reimbursement agreement shall be made to the entity after 10 years from the dedication of such facilities to the City for public use. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1006)  
9.20.540 - Agreement not required. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring the City to enter into any such reimbursement agreement even though it may have required the installation of off-site facilities, nor shall the City be liable for any reimbursement of the cost of such facilities except from the proceeds of such charges actually collected by the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1007)  
9.20.550 - Sewer connections in reimbursement districts—Fees. 
Any person who elects to connect to a sewer in a reimbursement district shall make a written application to the City Engineer. 
If the City Engineer finds that the property described in such application for a sewer connection is located within a reimbursement district as defined in Section 9.20.500 of this chapter, and for which the City has reimbursed, or has agreed to reimburse, such entity who originally paid for the sewer improvements, the City Engineer shall determine the appropriate connection charge, as scheduled pursuant to Section 9.20.510 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1008)  
9.20.560 - Reimbursement district document fee. 
For each entity requesting a reimbursement agreement with the City that will involve the processing of reimbursement documents and maps, the applicant shall pay, in addition to the plan-checking fee pursuant to Section 9.20.270, a reimbursement district document fee as established by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1009)  
9.20.570 - Collection and refund of costs. 
A.  The City shall endeavor to collect such costs as called for in Section 9.20.550 and cause the sum so collected to be refunded as provided in subsection B of this section, but the City shall not be liable for any failure to make such collection or refund. Such obligation to collect such cost shall terminate 10 years from the date of such contract. 
B.  All sums so paid by any property owner shall be refunded to the entity, who shall have contributed toward the construction of such sewer facilities and who entered into a reimbursement agreement with the City, in proportion that the amount contributed bears to the entire amount contributed, less that portion distributed against the property of the entity who entered into such reimbursement agreement. 
C.  It shall be the obligation of the entity to inquire of the City whether any amounts have been paid to the City by a property owner who did not contribute toward the cost of the construction of the sewer facilities. If any such money remains on deposit with the City without being claimed by the party rightfully entitled to it within one year after it is deposited, such money shall be forfeited to the City and transferred to the General Fund of the City. 
D.  The City may contribute toward the construction of any such sewer facilities; and if it does so, it shall be entitled to a refund under the same provisions and method set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1010)  
Article X. - Sewer Discharge Regulations 
 
9.20.580 - General discharge prohibitions. 
A.  No user shall contribute, or cause to be contributed to the City sewer system, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will pass through or interfere with the system or the regional treatment plant. These specific prohibitions apply to all users of the City sewer system whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
B.  A user shall not contribute the following substances to the City sewer system: 
1.  Any liquids, solids or gases, or pollutants such as gasoline, benzene, naphtha, solvents, and fuel oils which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the regional treatment plant, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flash point of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees centigrade) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR Part 261.21; 
2.  Any waste which cannot be carried freely under normal flow conditions prevailing in the City sewer system. This prohibition shall apply to, but not be limited to, solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer, or other interference with the operation of the regional treatment plant, such as grease; garbage with particles greater than ½ inch in any dimension; animal guts or tissues; paunch manure, bones, hair, hides, fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, or diatomaceous earth; stone or marble dust; metal, glass, straw, grass clippings, mud, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, or asphalt residue; residue from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil; or glass grinding or polishing wastes; 
3.  Any wastewater having a corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel and in no case wastewater with a pH below 6.0 or greater than 10.0 or that which will change the pH of the City's discharge to the Inland Empire Utilities Agency's regional interceptor to below 7.0 or above 9.0; 
4.  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the regional treatment plant, or exceed the limitation set forth in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act; 
5.  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair; 
6.  Any substance which may cause the regional treatment plant's effluent or any other product of the regional treatment plant, such as residue, sludge or scum, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the City sewer system cause the regional treatment plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, or State criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used; 
7.  Any discharge of pollutant(s) which alone, or in combination with other discharges, will persist after treatment or will cause the regional treatment plant to violate its NPDES and/or State disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards; 
8.  Any wastewater that discolors normal treatment plant influent such that it is detrimental to treatment plant operations or causes violation of the NPDES permit; 
9.  Any waste having a temperature of 140 degrees Fahrenheit or higher, or causes the wastewater influent to a treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit; 
10.  Any slug load; 
11.  Any radioactive wastes, unless: 
a.  The user is authorized to use radioactive materials by the State Department of Health or other governmental agency empowered to regulate the use of radioactive materials, and 
b.  The waste is discharged in strict conformity with current California Radiation Control Regulations (California Code of Regulations, Title 17) for safe disposal, and 
c.  The user is in compliance with all other applicable laws and legal requirements; 
12.  Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance; 
13.  Any emulsifying agent which suspends or emulsifies any fat, grease or oil and is specifically used to prevent oil and grease buildup in any gravity separation device or interior plumbing; 
14.  Any unpolluted water, including cooling water, stormwater, subsurface water, and single-pass cooling water. The City Engineer may approve, on a temporary basis, the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of discharge is available. The user shall pay all applicable charges and fees; 
15.  Any discharge from any vehicle radiator, including, but not limited to, radiator fluid or radiator flush chemicals; 
16.  Any overflow from a septic tank, cesspool, chemical toilet, or any liquid or sludge pumped from trailers, buses, or similar vehicles having wastewater holding tanks, except at such place and in such manner as may be prescribed by the City Engineer; 
17.  Any waste transported from one location or facility to another for the purpose of treating and discharging it directly or indirectly into the City sewer system without written permission from the City Engineer; 
18.  Any amounts of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral origin which form persistent water emulsions or that will cause interference, upset or pass-through; 
19.  Any discharge that results in toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the City sewer system in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
20.  Any waste containing excessive quantities or concentrations of benzene or other volatile organic compounds or any other waste constituent that alone or in combination with other materials adversely affects air quality; 
21.  Any waste containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in such quantities that alone or in combination with other waste substances may create a hazard for humans, animals, or local environment; interfere with wastewater treatment processes; cause a public nuisance; cause any hazardous condition in the City sewer system; or cause interference, upset or pass-through; 
22.  Any wastes which cause excessive incrustations or scale, precipitate on sewer walls, or have any corrosive or detrimental characteristics that may cause damage to the City sewer system or injury to service and maintenance personnel; 
23.  Any waste containing excessive quantities or concentrations of chlorides, fluorides, sulfates, borates, or any other materials that can cause a pass-through at a wastewater treatment plant and degrade water quality or limit reuse of the wastewater; 
24.  Any amount of a hazardous substance or toxic pollutant except as allowed in subsection (B)(11) of this section; 
25.  Any hazardous waste discharged to any portion of the City sewer system or treatment plants by truck, rail, or dedicated pipeline; 
26.  Any wastes with excessively high BOD, COD, or other oxygen-demanding substances; 
27.  Any waste containing excessive quantities or concentrations of ammonia; 
28.  Any excessive quantities of deionized water, steam, condensate, or distilled water; 
29.  Any wastes containing excessive quantities or concentrations of thiosulfate or any other waste constituent which requires chemical applications above levels used in the normal operation of the City sewer system; 
30.  Any recognizable portions of the human anatomy; 
31.  Any waste containing substances that may precipitate, solidify, gel, polymerize, or become viscous at temperatures between 40 degrees Fahrenheit and 100 degrees Fahrenheit; 
32.  Any quantity of chlorinated hydrocarbons, pesticides, or fertilizers which cause interference, upset or pass-through; 
33.  Any waste generated outside the City boundaries and discharged into the City sewer system, unless otherwise approved by the City Council; 
34.  Any wastes requiring an excessive quantity of chlorine or other chemical compound to be used for disinfection purposes; 
35.  Any waste containing detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the City sewer system; 
36.  Any discharge of trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points as may be designated by the City Engineer; 
37.  Any infectious waste unless prior written approval for such discharge is given by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1101)  
9.20.590 - Affirmative defense. 
A user shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of this chapter when a user can demonstrate, according to 40 CFR Part 403.5(a)(2)(i, ii)(A, B) that: 
A.  User did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through, upset or interference; and 
B.  A local limit designed to prevent pass-through, upset or interference was developed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.5(c) and the user was in compliance with each such local limit directly prior to and during the pass-through, upset or interference; or 
C.  A local limit designed to prevent pass-through and interference was not developed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.5(c) and the user's discharge directly prior to and during the pass-through, upset or interference did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge activity when the regional treatment plant was regularly in compliance with the regional treatment plant's NPDES permit requirements, and in the case of interference, was regularly in compliance with applicable requirements for wastewater sludge use or disposal. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1102)  
9.20.600 - Pretreatment standards. 
Users shall comply with all applicable federal regulations and pretreatment standards contained in 40 CFR Part 403-471 and all amendments thereto or any applicable, more stringent State wastewater discharge regulations and standards and including but not limited to the limits outlined in Section 9.20.610 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1103)  
9.20.610 - Local concentration limitations. 
No person shall, except as specifically allowed by the Public Works Director, on a temporary basis or as provided in this article, discharge or cause to be discharged to the regional treatment plant any wastewater which contains pollutants in concentrations exceeding those shown as follows: 
Local Pollutant Limitations 
Pollutant 	Maximum 
Concentration (Mg/L) 
Arsenic, total 	0.15 
Barium, total 	8.04 
BOD 	300.00 
Boron, total 	0.70 
Cadmium, total 	0.02 
Chloride 	116.70 
Chromium, total 	0.99 
Cobalt, total 	1.74 
Copper, total 	0.11 
Cyanide, total 	0.27 
Dissolved sulfides 	0.05 
Fluoride 	2.36 
Iron, total 	1.62 
Lead, total 	0.12 
Manganese, total 	0.42 
Mercury, total 	0.02 
MBAS (Methylene Blue Activated Substances) 	22.41 
Nickel, total 	0.06 
Oil and grease, total 	100.00 
pH 	6 to 10 units 
Selenium, total 	0.10 
Silver, total 	0.71 
Sodium, total 	129.30 
Sulfate 	111.13 
Total hardness (as CaCO 3 ) 	243.00 
Total dissolved solids 	1000.00 
Total suspended solids 	300.00 
Zinc, total 	0.51 
 
The Public Works Director may authorize the discharge of nondomestic wastewater with BOD and TSS concentrations greater than 300 milligrams per liter, subject to conditional waivers and/or payment of a surcharge fee to the City. 
Any surcharge fee assessed against the City by the district for discharge of City wastewater with surchargeable concentrations of BOD and TSS, pursuant to the regional sewer service contract, shall be allocated to the industrial users who discharge wastewater with BOD or TSS concentrations above 300 milligrams per liter on the basis of total pounds of BOD or TSS discharged over the district's surcharge period. 
The Public Works Director may specify an electrical conductivity limit of 1540 micromhos per centimeter at 25 degrees centigrade in lieu of the TDS limit listed in this section if there is reason to believe that there may be significant interference with the analytical procedure to determine TDS. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1104)  
9.20.620 - Dilution prohibition. 
In accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.6(d), no user shall increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate pretreatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or in any other pollutant specific limitation developed by the City or State. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1105)  
9.20.630 - Accidental discharges. 
Each industrial user shall provide spill containment and/or protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City for review and shall be approved by the City before construction of such facility. Industrial users may not discharge into the City sewer system until such accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the City. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. In the case of an accidental discharge, slug load, or bypass of any pretreatment equipment, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the City of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
A.  Written Notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, slug load, or bypass, the user shall submit to the City Engineer a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or compliance with all applicable laws and legal requirements. 
B.  Notice to Employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge, slug load, or bypass. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1106)  
9.20.640 - Limitations on point of discharge. 
No person shall cause any discharge into a manhole or other opening in a sewer unless such discharge is approved by the City Engineer upon written application by the user and payment of the applicable charges and fees. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1107)  
9.20.650 - Limitations on disposal of spent industrial solutions and sludge. 
Spent solutions, sludge, recovered pretreatment wastes and materials of quantity or quality to be in violation of or prohibited by this chapter or prohibited by any industrial user discharge permit issued pursuant to this chapter must be disposed of in a legal manner at a legally acceptable point of disposal as defined by the appropriate regulatory agency. All waste manifests shall be retained for a minimum of three years and be made available to the City upon request. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1108)  
9.20.660 - Bypass. 
A.  Bypassing is prohibited and the City may take enforcement action against a user unless: 
1.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
2.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary pretreatment systems, retention of untreated waste, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment was not installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass from occurring during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
3.  The user submitted notice as required in Section 9.20.630 of this chapter entitled, "Accidental discharges." 
B.  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, the user shall submit a notice of such bypass for approval by the City Engineer at least 10 days before the date of the bypass. 
C.  The City Engineer may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the City Engineer determines that it will meet the conditions listed in Section 9.20.580 of this chapter entitled, "General discharge prohibitions." 
D.  A user shall verbally notify the City Engineer of an unanticipated bypass immediately after the user becomes aware of the bypass. The user shall submit a written report to the City Engineer within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written report shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times; and if the bypass has not been corrected, an estimate of the anticipated time the bypass is expected to continue and the steps planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. 
E.  Notification provided pursuant to this section shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the City or any other damage or loss to persons or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any charges and fees or other liability which may be imposed under this chapter or other applicable law or legal requirements. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1109)  
Article XI. - Compliance Monitoring 
 
9.20.670 - Inspection and entry. 
A.  The City shall be authorized to enter the premises of all users to determine compliance with all applicable requirements, inspect facilities and monitoring equipment, take photographs, and take samples of the wastes discharged to the City sewer system insofar as such inspection and sampling is reasonably related to enforcement and compliance with this chapter and the users' industrial user discharge permit conditions, requirements, and discharge limitations. Such inspection shall also include the right to inspect and copy records required to be maintained by the permittee under federal, State or local industrial user discharge permit requirements. 
B.  Inspection may include every facility that is directly or indirectly involved with the discharge of wastewater to the City sewer system as determined by the City. Authorized personnel of the City shall be provided immediate access to all such facilities. No person shall interfere with, delay, resist, or refuse entrance to authorized City personnel attempting to inspect any facility involved directly or indirectly with the discharge of wastewater to the City sewer system. 
C.  City identification will be provided to all inspectors, monitoring personnel, and other authorized personnel; these persons will make themselves known when entering any user's property for inspection or sampling purposes. 
D.  Any permanent or temporary obstruction to the safe and easy access to any facility to be inspected shall promptly be removed by the user or property owner at the written or verbal request of the City Engineer and shall not be replaced. 
E.  When a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, City employees shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific tasks. 
F.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the City Engineer access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1201)  
9.20.680 - Search warrants. 
The City may seek issuance of a search or inspection warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction if: 
A.  The City has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter; or 
B.  There is a need to conduct an inspection and/or take a sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder; or 
C.  To protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1202)  
Article XII. - Special Restrictions 
 
9.20.690 - Gravity separation interceptor. 
A.  Food Service Establishments. Any person who operates, owns or maintains a food service establishment shall cause all floor drains, floor sinks, sinks, waste container wash racks, dishwashers, and garbage grinders to be directed through a minimum 750-gallon gravity separation interceptor and shall keep all domestic wastewater from rest rooms, showers, drinking fountains, and condensate (i.e., ice melt or air conditioning) separate from the food service wastewater until the food service wastewater has passed through all necessary pretreatment equipment, devices, or monitoring stations. 
B.  Vehicle Servicing Facilities. Any facility maintained for the servicing or repair of vehicles, construction equipment, industrial transportation, or power equipment shall install and maintain adequate sand and oil interceptors. All wastewater arising from the servicing and repair of vehicles shall pass through this interceptor before being discharged into the City sewer system. If the vehicle servicing facility does not include facilities for the washing of more than one vehicle at a time, the interceptor shall have an operation fluid capacity of at least 750 gallons. If the vehicle servicing facility has the capacity for washing or cleaning more than one vehicle at a time, the size of the interceptor shall be determined on a case-by-case basis. 
C.  Conditional Waivers. Conditional waivers for the grease and/or sand and oil interceptor requirement may be granted by the City Engineer for food service establishments or vehicle service facilities if it is determined that such waiver would not have an adverse effect on the City sewer system or the Inland Empire Utilities Agency's regional treatment plant. Conditional waivers may be revoked for the following reasons: 
1.  Changes in menu; 
2.  Falsification of information submitted; 
3.  Change in operation hours; 
4.  Changes in equipment used; 
5.  Changes in number of vehicles washed; or 
6.  Such waiver causes adverse effects on the City sewer system or the Inland Empire Utilities Agency's regional treatment plant. 
D.  Interceptor Requirements. 
1.  All interceptor chambers shall be immediately accessible at all times for the purpose of inspection and cleaning. At no time shall any material, debris, obstacle or obstruction be placed in such a manner as to prevent immediate access to the interceptor. 
2.  Any interceptor legally and properly installed before December 7, 1973, shall be acceptable as an alternative to the interceptor specified in this section, provided such interceptor is effective in removing floatable and settleable material and is so designed and installed that it can be inspected and properly maintained. 
3.  If the City Engineer finds that an interceptor is incapable of adequately retaining the floatable and settleable material in the wastewater flow, is structurally incomplete, or is undersized for the facility, he/she shall condemn such interceptor and declare that it does not meet the requirements of this chapter and shall require the user to install, at the user's expense, an acceptable interceptor. 
E.  Interceptor Designs. Wastewater from domestic usage shall be routed so that it shall not be allowed to pass through the interceptor. The interceptor shall be designed to retain any oil and grease which will float and any sand which will settle. It shall be watertight, structurally sound and durable, and easily accessible for cleaning. The City Engineer shall have the right to periodically inspect the interceptor for proper operation. 
F.  Interceptor Maintenance. The interceptor shall be properly maintained. It shall be cleaned as often as is necessary to ensure that settleable and floatable materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the interceptor. When an interceptor is cleaned, the accumulated sediment and floating material shall be removed by trucking to a legally designated disposal site. All locations required to use and maintain a grease trap or interceptor shall keep maintenance and pumping records. These records shall include the date, the name of the waste hauler, and the disposal site of the waste. An interceptor is not considered to be properly maintained if accumulations of sediments and floating material total more than 25 percent of the operating fluid capacity. The owner of any vehicle servicing facility, the lessee and sublessee, if there is such, and any proprietor, operator or superintendent of such facility are individually and severally liable for any failure of proper maintenance of such interceptor. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1301)  
9.20.700 - Residential water-softening appliances. 
A.  Statutory Authorization. This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority contained in Section 13148 of the California Water Code and exercises authority conferred by law including, but not limited to, Chapter 5, Part 12, Division 104 of the Health and Safety Code and Order No. R8-2010-0008 of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, and Ordinance No. 921 of the Inland Empire Utilities Agency. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the quality of the waters of the state including, but not limited to, protecting beneficial uses of the Chino Basin and the entire Santa Ana watershed, and to allow for the effective recycling of water to meet the water supply of the residents of the community. 
C.  Findings. 
1.  The State Legislature has found and declared that elevated levels of salinity in community sewer systems can hinder needed water recycling projects, and discharges from those systems may impair groundwater resources and surface waters of the state. 
2.  The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region (Regional Board), has determined that the Santa Ana River Basin, including the Chino Basin, faces water quality challenges due to salinity pollution resulting from historical agricultural and other activities. (Resolution No. R8-2004-0001) 
3.  The Regional Board has adopted the 2004 Basin Plan Amendment, which sets water quality objectives that protect beneficial uses and provide maximum benefit to the users of the Santa Ana River Basin and to the State of California. (Resolution No. R8-2004-0001) 
4.  Producing high-quality recycled water is imperative to the regional initiative within Inland Empire Utility Agency's (IEUA) service area to maximize beneficial reuse of recycled water through landscape irrigation, industrial reuse, and groundwater recharge. 
5.  Reuse of recycled water is a critical component of the regional plans to reliably meet current and future water needs for the City of Montclair as well as the communities served by the IEUA. 
6.  In accordance with Section 13148(e) of the California Water Code, the Regional Board has found that the control of residential use of self-regenerating water softeners will contribute to the achievement of the water quality objectives approved in the 2004 Basin Plan Amendment. This finding is based on evidence demonstrating that salinity input from residential use of self-regenerating water softeners is a significant source of controllable total dissolved solids within IEUA's sewer system and that significant regional economic impacts will result if residential use of self-regenerating water softeners is not controlled. (Order No. R8-2010-0008) 
D.  Prohibition. It is unlawful to install or cause to be installed, replace, or enlarge any self-regenerating water softening appliance that is used for softening all or any part of the water supply to any premises when such appliance is regenerated by the onsite application of a salt-containing brine solution with the regenerated wastes being discharged to the City's community sewer system. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1302) 
(Ord. No. 11-921, § 2, 5-2-11)  
9.20.710 - Hospital and medical waste. 
A.  Hospital and medical waste which is defined as "infectious waste" by the Hospital Council of Southern California may be disposed of in the City sewer system subject to the following limitations and requirements: 
1.  The material shall be ground by an approved grinder system capable of meeting the fineness of grind requirements of 1/2 inch in any dimension. Entry to the grinding mechanism shall be restricted to a 6-inch by 9-inch opening. 
2.  Pathologic specimens may not be disposed of into the City sewer system. Pursuant to the requirements of the Hospital Council of Southern California, pathologic specimens shall be segregated from other solid wastes and shall be contained in plastic bags or other suitable disposable containers which shall not exceed a capacity of 5 gallons and shall be colored red for identification. Container and contents shall be weighed and the weight recorded prior to disposal by means other than through the City sewer system. These records shall be retained for a minimum of three years and be made available to the City Engineer upon request. 
B.  Disposable hypodermic needles, syringes, and associated articles following their use in hospitals, outpatient clinics, medical and dental offices, etc., may be ground and discharged to the City sewer system subject to the following limitations and requirements: 
Such material shall be ground by an approved grinder not exceeding 5 horsepower and shall meet the fineness of grind requirements of 1/2 inch in any dimension. Entry to the grinding mechanism shall be restricted to a 6-inch by 9-inch opening. 
C.  Traps are to be installed and maintained in all waste sinks and toilets. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1303)  
Article XIII. - Administration 
 
9.20.720 - Industrial user discharge permits—Application. 
A.  Any person proposing to discharge nondomestic wastewater into the City sewer system shall complete and submit an industrial user discharge permit application to the City Engineer. The application shall contain information regarding the type and amount of nondomestic wastewater being discharged or proposed for discharge, plans and specifications for any pretreatment facilities designed to prevent discharge of materials to the City sewer system which exceed the allowable limitations set forth in this chapter, and any other pertinent information necessary to control discharge to the City sewer system. This application is considered an integral part of the industrial user discharge permit. Based on the information submitted on the industrial user discharge permit application and the City's investigation of the user's establishment, an industrial user discharge permit may be required. Users not required to obtain an industrial user discharge permit are still required to meet the City's discharge limitations. 
B.  Any industrial user discharge permit application submitted shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Name, address, mailing address, and location (if different from the mailing address); 
2.  Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) number; 
3.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in Article X of this chapter as determined by a State certified water laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended: 
4.  Time and duration of contribution; 
5.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation; 
6.  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are, or could be, discharged to the sewer; 
7.  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, a compliance time schedule (CTS) shall be submitted to the City Engineer. This CTS shall outline the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment, the deadline for submittal of which shall be no later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard as established in 40 CFR. The CTS is subject to the approval of the City Engineer. The following conditions shall apply to such compliance time schedules: 
a.  The CTS shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.), 
b.  No increment referred to in subsection (B)(7)(a) of this section shall exceed nine months. The total time in the CTS shall not exceed 18 months unless approved by the City Engineer, 
c.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the CTS and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the City Engineer including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the City Engineer, 
d.  Any industrial user regulated by National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and classified as a "new source" shall install and have in operating condition and shall start up all pollution-control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed 90 days, new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards; 
8.  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
9.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
10.  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; 
11.  A waste minimization plan to conserve water, investigate product substitution, provide inventory control, and determine other steps as necessary to minimize the total quantity of waste produced; 
12.  A valid business plan from the San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health Services or letter exempting the user from such plan. If exempt, Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for all materials on site shall be provided; and 
13.  Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
C.  The City Engineer will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of this data, the City Engineer shall determine whether or not an industrial user discharge permit is required. If so required, the City Engineer shall issue an industrial user discharge permit to the applicant. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1401)  
9.20.730 - Industrial user discharge permits—Requirements. 
A.  All significant industrial users who discharge nondomestic wastewater into the City sewer system shall be required to have an industrial user discharge permit issued by the City. 
B.  The City may require nonsignificant industrial users to obtain industrial user discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. An initial or renewed industrial user discharge permit is valid for up to a five-year period from the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked. 
C.  Noncompliance with any term or condition of a user discharge permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject the permittee to enforcement actions pursuant to this chapter. Obtaining an industrial user discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of his/her obligation to comply with all applicable laws and other legal requirements. 
D.  The City Engineer may issue a permit to discharge nondomestic wastewater to the City sewer system if: 
1.  The quality of the wastewater conforms to the requirements of this chapter; 
2.  All required pretreatment systems are approved by the City Engineer and it is demonstrated by the user that the systems can adequately achieve existing City point source limits or EPA categorical limitations, whichever are the more stringent, as well as having the capability to handle or to be easily modified to handle future requirements; 
3.  A City approved monitoring vault, manhole, or other approved monitoring station has been constructed or shall be constructed and has been included in the compliance time schedule; 
4.  The City sewer system has adequate capacity for the volume of wastewater to be discharged; 
5.  A permit application has been completely and correctly filled out and signed by the user's industrial wastewater representative; 
6.  A compliance time schedule (CTS), if required, has been approved by the City Engineer and is on file with the City; and 
7.  Industrial users who use a pretreatment system have established and maintained a daily operation and maintenance log for their pretreatment system, and it contains, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  Dates and times of routine maintenance and calibrations, 
b.  A description of all maintenance and calibration work being done on the system, 
c.  Date and time of any major repair and/or downtime on the system, 
d.  The emergency or backup system or program to be utilized if the pretreatment system were out of operation, and 
e.  The name of the supervisor responsible for the pretreatment system. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1402)  
9.20.740 - Industrial user discharge permits—Conditions. 
A.  All industrial user discharge permittees shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations. In addition to the requirements in Section 9.20.720, all permits shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged into the City sewer system; 
2.  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents, characteristics, and mass emission rates. Mass emission rates shall be defined as the mass of material discharged into the City sewer system during a given time interval, unless otherwise specified; the mass-emission rate shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or combination of constituents. The City Engineer may impose mass emission rate limitations on users if necessary; 
3.  Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
4.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling stations; 
5.  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling stations, frequency of sampling, numbers and types of samples, standards for tests, and reporting schedules; 
6.  Compliance time schedules; 
7.  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports per this chapter; 
8.  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records related to wastewater discharge, as specified by the City, and affording the City access thereto; 
9.  Requirement for notification to the City of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the City sewer system; 
10.  Requirements for notification of slug discharges per Section 9.20.630; and 
11.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City Engineer to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful to discharge into the City sewer system, directly or indirectly, any nondomestic wastewater without a valid industrial user discharge permit from the City, except that the City Engineer shall grant such reasonable time extensions on existing permits as may be necessary for business alterations; changes in processes or designs; or the acquisition, manufacture, installation and testing of a wastewater pretreatment system or other facilities for which additional time is required, but not to exceed one year, provided there are no point-source limitation violations. 
C.  In the event a wastewater violation exists, discharges exceed the point source limitations or a violation of Section 9.20.580 exists and such violation does not involve hazardous substance(s) or hazardous waste as defined by the EPA, a compliance time schedule for all pretreatment and/or wastewater cleanup procedures and practices must be submitted to the City and approved by City Engineer as specified in 40 CFR Part 403.8(f)(1). 
D.  Modifications or changes in a compliance time schedule may be granted by the City Engineer upon written request provided the new compliance dates are not in violation of the current EPA compliance dates for the type of discharge in question. 
E.  All industrial users must keep, for a minimum of three years, copies of all their wastewater reports, surveys, permits, monitoring reports, any correspondence related to their pretreatment system, violation notices, and chain-of-custody logs; and upon request, this information must be made available for review and/or copying by any government agency as specified in 40 CFR Part 403.12(1). 
F.  The user chain-of-custody logs shall consist of the following: dates of sample collection, type of sampling, how the sample was preserved and stored, listing of the constituents and parameters to be tested, name of the individual who collected the sample, name of the laboratory at which the test(s) were conducted, and the date and time the sample was turned over to the laboratory. 
G.  The installation, design, and adequacy of any facility constructed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not impute any liability, but does not relieve the owner or proprietor of responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1403)  
9.20.750 - Industrial user discharge permits—Appeals. 
If the industrial user wishes to appeal or challenge any condition imposed in a discharge permit, a petition shall be filed for modification or reissuance of the permit. Such petition shall be filed within 30 days of the receipt of the permit. The following conditions shall apply: 
A.  Failure to submit a timely petition shall be deemed to be an acceptance of all conditions. 
B.  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the condition to which the objection is being made, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the permit. 
C.  The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
D.  Such appeals shall be heard by the Director of Public Works within 30 days of receipt of the petition. The decision of the Director of Public Works shall be final. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1404)  
9.20.760 - Industrial user discharge permits—Modifications. 
Within nine months of the promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or amendments thereto, the industrial user discharge permits of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standards within the time frame prescribed by such standards. If a user who is subject to the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards has not previously submitted an application for an industrial user discharge permit as required by Section 9.20.720, the user shall apply for an industrial user discharge permit within 180 days after the promulgation of applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and amendments thereto. In addition, all users with existing industrial user discharge permits shall submit to the City Engineer within 180 days after the promulgation of applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards and amendments thereto the information required by Sections 9.20.720 and 9.20.870. 
If any person proposes to alter a pretreatment system or any connection to the City sewer system or if he/she proposes to increase or decrease the discharge volume by more than 25 percent or to discharge nondomestic wastewater of a different nature, type or substance not consistent with the original industrial user discharge permit, he/she shall submit to the City Engineer a letter requesting the approval of such an alteration along with an updated discharge permit application and shall pay all applicable fees. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1405)  
9.20.770 - Industrial user discharge permits—Duration. 
Industrial user discharge permits shall be issued for any period of time up to five years. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the City during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements, as identified in this chapter, are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in the permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of such change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1406)  
9.20.780 - Industrial user discharge permits—Temporary. 
A permit shall be required of all users granted temporary permission by the City to discharge unpolluted water or wastewater from industrial startup operations directly or indirectly into the City sewer system. This temporary permit may be granted when no alternate method of disposal is reasonably available. The provisions of Section 9.20.580 of this chapter pertaining to general discharge prohibitions and limitations shall apply. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1407)  
9.20.790 - Industrial user discharge permits—Transfers. 
Industrial user discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1408)  
9.20.800 - Pretreatment required. 
A.  Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all National Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified by the Federal Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403.6). Any equipment required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the City shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment systems and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City for review and shall be approved by the City before construction of the pretreatment system commences. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the system as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the City under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes to the pretreatment system or method of operation shall be submitted for City review and approval prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
B.  Pursuant to Section 9.20.850, the City shall annually publish a list of the users who were in significant noncompliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards during the previous 12-month period. 
"Significant noncompliance" shall be defined as follows: 
1.  Violations of Wastewater Discharge Limits. 
a.  Chronic violations exist where 66 percent or more of the measurements are in any magnitude of excess of the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit by more than the technical review criteria (TRC) in a six-month period, 
b.  Technical review criteria (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fat, oil and grease; and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). Violations exist when 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC, 
c.  Any other violation(s) of an effluent limit (average or daily maximum) that the City believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference (e.g., slug loads), or pass-through, or endangered the health of wastewater personnel or the public, 
d.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health/welfare or to the environment and has resulted in the regional treatment plant's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
2.  Violations of Compliance Time Schedules. Failure to comply with any compliance time schedule increment within 90 days after its due date; 
3.  Failure to meet reporting requirements for schedules of compliance, self-monitoring data, or categorical standards (baseline monitoring reports), 90-day compliance reports, and/or other periodic reports within 30 days from their due dates; 
4.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
5.  Any other violation or group of violations that the City considers to be significant. 
C.  All records related to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or the Regional Board upon request. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1409)  
9.20.810 - Record keeping. 
All industrial users shall keep records of waste hauling, reclamations, monitoring device calibration reports, sample analysis data, flow meter chart recordings, and records of flow meter calibration at the site of generation. All records are subject to inspection and shall be copied as needed. All records must be kept at the site of generation for a minimum of three years. The records retention period may be extended beyond three years in the event criminal or civil action is taken or if deemed necessary by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1410)  
9.20.820 - Confidentiality. 
All information provided by a user or obtained by the City through monitoring and inspection shall be made available to the public, unless the user specifically requests confidentiality and can demonstrate to the City that release of such information will violate the user's right to protection of trade secrets under applicable State law. Wastewater quantity and quality data shall not be treated as confidential information. Information determined by the City to be confidential shall not be disclosed without providing the user with a reasonable opportunity to seek judicial protection from such release. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1411)  
9.20.830 - Waivers. 
A.  If any discharge into the City sewer system contains, or may contain, constituents which will cause it to fail to conform to any of the requirements of this chapter, the City Engineer may grant approval for such discharge to the City sewer system with a waiver or modification of the requirement(s) which cannot be met if the following is determined: 
1.  The discharge will not cause harm to the City sewer system nor unreasonably or inequitably burden the operation of the system; and 
2.  When considered together with similar excesses in discharge of others limited by this chapter, will not materially affect the ability of the City to meet the requirements of the Chino Basin (Inland Empire) regional wastewater contract. 
B.  Waivers shall not apply to any National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and/or requirements. 
C.  When granting such waiver or modification of requirements, the City Engineer shall state in writing which requirement(s) are being waived or modified, along with the reasons as to why the waiver or modification is being issued. Any waiver granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to withdrawal at any time the City Engineer makes a subsequent finding that the City sewer system is unreasonably burdened or the ability of the City to meet the Chino Basin (Inland Empire) regional wastewater service contract requirements is materially affected by such waiver. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1412)  
9.20.840 - Industrial user discharge permits—Revocation. 
A.  The Public Works Director may revoke an industrial user discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
1.  Failure to notify the City of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
2.  Failure to provide prior notification to the City of changed conditions pursuant to Section 9.20.870(B)(4) of this chapter; 
3.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the industrial user discharge permit applications; 
4.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
5.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
6.  Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility premises and records; 
7.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
8.  Failure to pay fines; 
9.  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
10.  Failure to meet compliance time schedules; 
11.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership permitted facility; or 
12.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any terms of an industrial user discharge permit or this chapter. 
B.  Industrial user discharge permits shall become void upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All industrial user discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new industrial user discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1413)  
9.20.850 - Publication of noncompliance. 
In accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(2)(vii), the City shall annually publish in the area's largest daily newspaper a list of all industrial users who, over the previous 12-month period, have been in significant noncompliance as defined in Section 9.20.800 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1414)  
Article XIV. - Reporting Requirements 
 
9.20.860 - Compliance data report. 
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the City sewer system, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the City Engineer a compliance data report. Such report shall indicate the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user's facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance procedures or pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharge into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1501)  
9.20.870 - Baseline monitoring reports and periodic reports on continued compliance. 
A.  Baseline Monitoring Reports. Any user subject to a pretreatment standard (categorical user) is required to submit a baseline monitoring report (BMR) containing the information described in 40 CFR Part 403.12(b)(1—7). All existing users of the system have 180 days after their final categorical compliance date to file their company's BMR. All new users of the system must submit a BMR at least 90 days prior to plant start up. 
The baseline monitoring report shall include the following: 
1.  Name, address, and telephone number of the facility, including the name of the operator and owners; 
2.  List of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility; 
3.  A brief description of the nature, average rate of production and Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) of the operation(s); 
4.  Average and maximum daily flow data in gallons per day; 
5.  Current and past chemical analyses of each regulated waste stream with sampling and analysis to be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Parts 136 and 403.12(b)(5); 
6.  On-site plumbing and pretreatment system plans; 
7.  A statement signed by an authorized wastewater representative of the industrial user and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis; and 
8.  A compliance time schedule if additional pretreatment equipment or operation and maintenance is required to meet the pretreatment standards. 
B.  Periodic Reports on Continued Compliance. The EPA has established specific monitoring and reporting procedures with regard to periodic reports on continued compliance. Refer to 40 CFR Parts 403.12(b)(4,5), 403.12(e)(1,2,3) and 403.12(h)(l)(o) for details. The City may require up to four periodic reports on continued compliance for all significant industrial users each year, three months apart. 
The periodic report on continued compliance shall consist of the following: 
1.  Results of any self monitoring of the permitted discharge for the reporting period; 
2.  The measured average and maximum daily flows in gallons per day from each permitted discharge point going to the City sewer system; 
3.  A reasonable measure of the long-term production rate for industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits or actual average daily production rate for the reporting period for all industrial users on production based standards pursuant to 40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(3); 
4.  Plant operation and maintenance changes including those for pretreatment system equipment that could affect the wastewater quality or quantity from the user's facility; 
5.  A total toxic organic chemical compliance status report may be required of a significant industrial user. It may include the following: the most current toxic organic chemical analysis, a statement of compliance, and a compliance time schedule if there is an organic chemical violation. A toxic organic management plan (TOMP) may be required by the City if any of the toxic organic chemicals are found in the facility's effluent in excess of .01 mg/l or on the facility premises; 
6.  A cover letter signed by the industrial user's authorized representative stating that all the above items are current and are on file with the City and that they represent the industrial user's periodic report on continued compliance. 
C.  At the discretion of the City Engineer and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the City Engineer may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. The City reserves the right, however, in accordance with Section 308 of the Clean Water Act, to take grab or composite samples of the wastewater effluent to ensure compliance with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
D.  The City Engineer may impose mass pollutant limitations on users. In such cases, the periodic reports required by subsection B of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with techniques approved by the City Engineer. 
E.  Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the postmarked date. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, to a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of the receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1502)  
9.20.880 - Monitoring requirements. 
Any sample of effluent taken from a sample box, monitoring manhole, or other representative sampling location and presumed to be discharging into the City sewer system shall be subject to the following requirements: 
A.  The handling, storage and analysis of all samples taken for the determination of the characteristics of wastewater discharged shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136. When 40 CFR Part 136 does not include a sampling and/or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedure set forth in the EPA publication Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluent for Priority Pollutants (April 1977) and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the City Engineer. 
B.  The City Engineer may require periodic measurements of flow and wastewater characteristics for compliance with the requirements specified in the industrial user discharge permit or this chapter. Measurements of flow, suspended solids (SS), and biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) for surcharge determination shall be made by those industrial users specifically designated by the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall determine the number of 24-hour or 48-hour flow measurements and samples required, but the minimum requirement shall be two per year for all designated industrial users. Continuous monitoring may be required in cases involving large fluctuations in quantity or quality of wastes or if the wastewater appears to have characteristics which may damage the City sewer system. 
C.  All flow measurements, samplings and analyses shall be performed by qualified engineering personnel and laboratories acceptable to the City Engineer. All costs for such flow measurements, samplings, and analyses shall be borne by the industrial user. 
D.  When an industrial user operates as an integrated complex involving varying processes and having separate industrial waste sewer connections within the same contributory area, such industrial user may be considered as one unit with multiple connections. An analysis for each connection shall be required. 
E.  Should measurements or other investigations by the City Engineer reveal that an industrial user's BOD and/or SS significantly differ from those upon which the quality surcharge has been based, the industrial user shall apply for an amended permit and pay the appropriate charges and fees. 
F.  Samples shall represent the normal waste flow from the premises over a 24-hour or 48-hour period. The samples shall be composited by equal time or flow intervals, either manually with at least one sample collected hourly or by automatic integrated sampling equipment approved by the City Engineer. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1503)  
Article XV. - Monitoring Stations 
 
9.20.890 - Monitoring station specifications. 
A.  The City Engineer may require an industrial user to provide and operate monitoring stations, the purpose of which is to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or the wastewater treatment or pretreatment system at the user's facility. The monitoring station shall be located so that samples can be taken immediately downstream from the wastewater treatment or pretreatment station, if any exists, or where no wastewater treatment or pretreatment is employed, immediately downstream from the regulated waste stream. The monitoring station should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the City Engineer may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the station to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and to be located so that it shall be accessible at all times. 
There shall be ample room in or near the sampling manhole or monitoring station to allow accurate sampling, and preparation of samples for analysis. The monitoring station sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
B.  If the City requires an industrial user to install monitoring stations, each such user shall submit construction plans and/or instrumentation for approval by the City showing the following: 
1.  A pH-recording instrument with a strip chart to record all flows on a 24-hour continuous basis; 
2.  A conductivity meter with a strip chart to record all flows on a 24-hour continuous basis; 
3.  A calibrated flume, weir, flow meter, or similar device approved by the City and suitable to measure the nondomestic flow rate and total volume. 
C.  Upon plan approval, the City Engineer shall notify the industrial user of such approval in writing. 
D.  Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring stations shall be provided in accordance with the City's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Monitoring stations may be required to include a security closure that can be locked by the City during sampling or upon termination of service. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1601)  
9.20.900 - Accessibility of monitoring stations. 
The City shall be permitted to enter all properties from which waste or wastewater is being or is capable of being discharged into the City sewer system for purposes of inspecting, measuring, sampling and testing the discharge of waste or wastewater to ascertain whether the intent of this chapter is being met and the user is complying with all requirements. The City shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring operations. When a user has security measures in force, the user shall make necessary arrangements so that City personnel are permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities. 
Routine inspections and effluent monitoring by the City is required by the Federal Pretreatment Program, 40 CFR Part 403. Actual costs for such inspections and monitoring incurred by the City shall be borne by the industrial user. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1602)  
9.20.910 - Record keeping, maintenance, and operation of monitoring equipment. 
All industrial users shall keep and maintain records regarding the maintenance, calibration and standardization of the pH, conductivity, and flow meter for a minimum of three years. All monitoring equipment shall be maintained and calibrated according to the manufacturer's specifications. Once installed, all monitoring equipment shall be operated to facilitate continuous measurement. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1603)  
Article XVI. - Administrative Enforcement Remedies 
 
9.20.920 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter provides for administrative remedies in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the City to address any violation of this chapter. 
B.  The City of Montclair Pretreatment Program Enforcement Response Guide is incorporated in this article as if set out in its entirety. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1701)  
9.20.930 - Hearing board defined—Purpose. 
The Hearing Board, as used in this chapter, shall consist of three members appointed by the City Manager, one of which shall be from the Public Works Department. 
The Hearing Board shall be convened pursuant to Section 9.20.970 of this chapter for the purpose of determining whether a violation has occurred and, if it has, to issue an administrative order to gain correction of violation. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1702)  
9.20.940 - Emergency enforcement. 
Should the Director of Public Works determine that any discharge of pollutants to the City sewer system reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, he/she may immediately and effectively halt or prevent this discharge after informal notice to the user. All costs for severing and/or reinstating sewer service shall be borne by the user. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1703)  
9.20.950 - Notice of Violation. 
A.  Whenever the Director of Public Works determines that a violation of any provision of this chapter is occurring or exists, the Director may issue a written Notice of Violation to any person responsible for the violation. The notice of violation may include one or more of the following: 
1.  Stop Work Order. The City Engineer may serve a written stop work order on any person engaged in doing or causing to be done new construction, tenant improvements, alterations, or additions if: 
a.  No industrial user discharge permit has been granted by the City, 
b.  Work has begun without prior written approval by the City Engineer, or 
c.  Violations of this chapter are found at the site of the new construction, tenant improvements, alterations, or additions; 
Any person served a stop work order shall stop such work forthwith until written authorization to continue is received from the City Engineer; 
2.  Cease and Desist Order. Cease and desist orders shall direct a user to cease and desist all discharge violations, to comply immediately with all discharge requirements, and to take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened discharge violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge; 
3.  Compliance Time Schedule. Compliance time schedules direct a user to achieve or restore compliance by a specific date. If the user fails to achieve compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued; or 
4.  A requirement that the user shall submit to the City Engineer, within a prescribed period specified in the notice, which period shall not be less than 10 working days unless an emergency situation dictates a shorter period, a plan indicating the cause of the violation, corrective actions that will be taken to prevent recurrence and, if required, a proposed compliance time schedule indicating the dates those corrective actions will be completed. 
B.  A Notice of Violation issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain the following information: 
1.  The date and location of the violation; 
2.  The section of this chapter violated and a description of the violation; 
3.  The actions required to correct the violation; 
4.  The time period after which administrative penalties will begin to accrue if compliance with the notice of violation has not been achieved; and 
5.  Either a copy of this chapter or an explanation of the consequences of noncompliance with this chapter and a description of the hearing procedure. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1704)  
9.20.960 - Method of service. 
A.  All notices required by this chapter shall be served as provided in Section 9.20.060 of this chapter. 
B.  Written notice shall be mailed to the user at the site location or other business address, and to the property owner at the address as shown on the last equalized County assessment roll. 
C.  When personal service or service by mail upon the property owner is unsuccessful, a copy of the Notice of Violation shall be conspicuously posted at the property which is the subject of the Notice of Violation. 
D.  The failure of any person to receive any notice required under this chapter shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1705)  
9.20.970 - Hearing. 
A.  If the Director of Public Works determines that all violations have been corrected within the time specified in the notice of violation, no further action shall be taken. 
B.  If full compliance is not achieved within the time specified in the Notice of Violation, the Director of Public Works shall direct that the Hearing Board be convened to consider the matter. 
C.  If the recipient of the Notice of Violation disputes the allegation(s) set out in the Notice of Violation, such recipient may request in writing to the Director of Public Works that the Hearing Board be convened to consider the matter. 
D.  The Hearing Board shall cause a written Notice of Hearing to be served on the violator and, when real property is involved, a Notice of Hearing shall be served on the property owner at the address as it appears on the last equalized County assessment roll available on the date the notice of hearing is prepared. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1706)  
9.20.980 - Notice of Hearing. 
A.  Every Notice of Hearing shall contain the date, time and place at which such hearing shall be conducted by the Hearing Board. 
B.  Each hearing shall be set for a date not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the Notice of Hearing unless the Director of Public Works determines that the matter is urgent or that good cause exists for an extension of time. 
C.  This hearing serves to provide a full opportunity for a person to object to the determination that a violation has occurred and/or that the violation has continued to exist. The failure of any person to appear at such hearing shall constitute that person's failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1707)  
9.20.990 - Hearing—Findings and order. 
A.  At the place and time set forth in the Notice of Hearing, the Hearing Board shall conduct a hearing on the Notice of Violation issued pursuant to Section 9.20.950 of this chapter. 
B.  The Hearing Board shall consider any written or oral evidence presented regarding the violation and compliance by the user and/or by the real property owner. 
C.  Within 20 days following the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Board shall make findings as supported by evidence received at the hearing and shall issue written findings on each alleged violation as follows: 
1.  If the Hearing Board finds by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation has occurred and that the violation was not corrected within the time period specified in the Notice of Violation, the Hearing Board shall issue an administrative order pursuant to Section 9.20.1000 of this chapter. 
2.  If the Hearing Board finds that no violation has occurred or that the violation was corrected within the time period specified in the Notice of Violation, the Hearing Board shall issue a finding of those facts. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1708)  
9.20.1000 - Administrative order. 
If the Hearing Board determines that a violation occurred which was not corrected within the time period specified in the Notice of Violation, the Hearing Board shall issue an administrative order which imposes any or all of the following: 
A.  An order to correct, including a compliance time schedule when appropriate; 
B.  Administrative penalties as provided in Section 9.20.1010 of this chapter; 
C.  Administrative costs as provided in Section 9.20.1020 of this chapter; 
D.  Reimbursement of costs incurred by the City for abatement, remediation and restoration pursuant to Section 9.20.1030 of this chapter; 
E.  Termination of sewer service; 
F.  Revocation of industrial user discharge permit pursuant to Section 9.20.840 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1709)  
9.20.1010 - Administrative penalties. 
A.  The Hearing Board may impose administrative penalties for the violation of any provision of this chapter in an amount not to exceed a maximum of One Thousand (1000) Dollars per day for each ongoing violation, except that the total administrative penalty shall not exceed Twenty-Five Thousand (25,000) Dollars for any related series of violations, exclusive of administrative costs, interest and restitution for compliance reinspections, and for reimbursement of costs incurred by the City pursuant to Section 9.20.1030 of this chapter. 
B.  In determining the amount of the administrative penalty, the Hearing Board may take any or all of the following factors into consideration: 
1.  The duration of the violation; 
2.  The frequency, recurrence and number of violations, related or unrelated, by the same violator; 
3.  The seriousness of the violation; 
4.  The good faith efforts of the violator to come into compliance; 
5.  The economic impact of the penalty on the violator; 
6.  The impact of the violation on the community; 
7.  Such other factors as justice may require. 
C.  Administrative penalties imposed by the Hearing Board shall accrue from the date specified in the Notice of Violation and shall cease to accrue on the date established pursuant to subsection H of this section. 
D.  The Hearing Board, at its discretion, may suspend the imposition of applicable penalties for any period of time during which: 
1.  The violator has filed for necessary permits; and 
2.  Such permits are required to achieve compliance; and 
3.  Such permit applications are actively pending before the City. 
E.  Administrative penalties assessed by the Hearing Board shall be due by the date specified in the administrative order. 
F.  Administrative penalties assessed by the Hearing Board are a debt owed to the City and, in addition to all other means of enforcement, if the violation is located on real property, may be enforced by means of a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred. 
G.  If the violation is not corrected as specified in the Hearing Board's administrative order, administrative penalties shall continue to accrue on a daily basis until the violation is corrected, subject to the maximum amount set forth in subsection A of this section. 
H.  If the violator gives written notice to the Director of Public Works that the violation has been corrected and if the Director of Public Works finds that compliance has been achieved, the Director of Public Works shall deem the date such written notice was postmarked or personally delivered to the City, or the date of the final inspection, whichever first occurred, to be the date the violation was corrected. If no written notice is provided to the Director of Public Works, the violation will be deemed corrected on the date of the final inspection. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1710)  
9.20.1020 - Administrative costs. 
A.  The Hearing Board shall assess administrative costs against the violator when it finds that a violation has occurred and that compliance has not been achieved within the time specified in the Notice of Violation. 
B.  The administrative costs may include any and all costs incurred by the City in connection with the matter before the Hearing Board, including, but not limited to, costs of investigation, staffing costs incurred in preparation for the hearing and for the hearing itself, and costs for all reinspections necessary to enforce the Notice of Violation. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1711)  
9.20.1030 - Costs incurred by the City for abatement, remediation and/or restoration. 
In the event the user fails to take corrective action as called for in an administrative order, the City may make such corrections. The user shall be responsible for all costs and expenses incurred by the City as a result of such action. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1712)  
9.20.1040 - Failure to comply with administrative order. 
Failure to comply with the term of an administrative order of the Hearing Board may be enforced as: 
A.  A personal obligation of the violator; and/or 
B.  If the violation is in connection with real property, a lien upon the real property. The lien shall remain in effect until all of the administrative penalties, interest, administrative costs, and costs incurred by the City pursuant to Section 9.20.1030 of this chapter are paid in full. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1713)  
9.20.1050 - Recovery of penalties and costs. 
The City may collect the assessed administrative penalties, administrative costs, and costs incurred by the City pursuant to Section 9.20.1030 of this chapter by use of all available legal means, including recordation of a lien pursuant to Section 9.20.1070 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1714)  
9.20.1060 - Right of judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by an administrative order of the Hearing Board may obtain review of the administrative order in the Superior Court by filing with the court a petition for writ of mandate as provided by law. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1715)  
9.20.1070 - Lien procedure. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any cost incurred by the City pursuant to Section 9.20.1030 of this chapter, any administrative penalty and/or administrative cost imposed by the Hearing Board pursuant to this chapter in connection with real property, has not been satisfied in full within 90 days of imposition and/or has not been successfully challenged by a timely writ of mandate, this obligation may constitute a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred. 
B.  Prior to the recording of any such lien, the Public Works Director shall prepare and file with the City Clerk a report stating the amounts due and owing. The City Clerk shall then fix a time, date and place for hearing such report and any protests or objections thereto by the City Council. 
C.  The Director of Public Works shall cause written notice to be served on the property owner not less than 10 days prior to the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall be served as provided in Section 9.20.060 of this chapter. 
D.  Any person whose real property is subject to a lien may file a written protest with the City Clerk and/or may protest orally at a City Council meeting. 
E.  Each written protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the protesting party is interested and the grounds of such protest or objection. 
F.  The City Council, after the hearing, shall adopt a resolution confirming, discharging or modifying the amount of the lien. 
G.  Thirty days following the adoption of a resolution by the City Council imposing a lien, the City Clerk shall file the same as a judgment lien in the Office of the County Recorder of San Bernardino County, California. 
H.  The lien provided in this section shall have no force and effect until recorded with the County Recorder. Once recorded, the administrative order shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions of Section 697.340 of the Code of Civil Procedure and may be extended as provided in Sections 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive, of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
I.  Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of the judgment remaining unsatisfied pursuant to law. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1716)  
9.20.1080 - Satisfaction of lien. 
Once payment in full is received by the City for outstanding penalties and costs, the Director of Public Works shall either record a Notice of Satisfaction or provide the property owner or financial institution with a Notice of Satisfaction so they may record this notice with the Office of the County Recorder. Such Notice of Satisfaction shall cancel the City's lien. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1717)  
9.20.1090 - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
A.  Injunctive Relief. If the City determines that any person has engaged in, is engaged in, or is about to engage in any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of this chapter or any regulation or order promulgated thereunder, the City Attorney may make application to the Superior Court for an order enjoining the acts or practices or for an order directing compliance. As established in 40 CFR Part 403.8(f)(l)(vi)(A) a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order, or other appropriate order may be granted upon a showing that the person(s) has (have) engaged in, is (are) engaged in, or is (are) about to engage in the challenged acts or practices. 
B.  Civil Penalties. A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an industrial user discharge permit, or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the City for a minimum civil penalty of not less than One Thousand (1000) Dollars and no more than a maximum civil penalty of Twenty-Five Thousand (25,000) Dollars per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of violation. 
The City may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City. 
In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained by the user through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
C.  Criminal Penalties. Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than One Thousand (1000) Dollars per day of violation or by imprisonment for not more than one year or by both. 
Any person who negligently or knowingly introduces into the City sewer system any pollutant or hazardous substance, which such person knew or reasonably should have known could cause personal injury or property damage or is not in compliance with all applicable federal, State, or local requirements or permits, which causes the POTW to violate any effluent limitation or condition in a permit issued to the City or the Inland Empire Utilities Agency under the Clean Water Act, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than One Thousand (1000) Dollars per day of violation or by imprisonment for not more than one year or by both. 
Any person who knowingly makes a false material statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or who knowingly falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than One Thousand (1000) Dollars per day of violation or by imprisonment for not more than one year or by both. 
D.  Remedies Nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The City may take any, all, or any combination of enforcement actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the City's Pretreatment Program Enforcement Response Guide; however, the City may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1718)  
9.20.1100 - Recovery of fines or penalties imposed on the City. 
In the event the City is subject to the payment of fines or penalties pursuant to the legal authority and actions of other regulatory or enforcement agencies based on a violation of law, regulation or agreement and said violation can be established by the City as being caused by the discharge of any user of the City sewer system which is in violation of any provisions of this chapter or the user's industrial user discharge permit, the City shall be entitled to recover from the user all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, the full amount of said fines or penalties to which the City has been subjected. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1719)  
9.20.1110 - Damage to facilities or interruption of normal operations. 
Any obstruction, damage or other impairment to the City sewer system, including, but not limited to, spill containment, recovery and disposal systems, or the Inland Empire Utility Agency's sewer system or facilities, caused by a discharge of waste and/or wastewater may result in the Director of Public Works assessing a charge against the user for the work required to clean or repair the facility or the cost to resume normal operation. An administrative fee shall be added to the charges payable within 30 days of invoicing by the City. These charges and fees shall be in addition to any other fines, penalties, assessments and fees imposed by other regulatory or service agencies. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1720)  
9.20.1120 - Regional Pretreatment Agreement. 
It is acknowledged that the City approved that certain agreement known as the Regional Pretreatment Agreement, entered into by and among the Inland Empire Utilities Agency, the Cucamonga County Water District, and the cities of Montclair, Chino, Chino Hills, Fontana, Upland, and Ontario. Pursuant to the conditions of this agreement, the City allows and authorizes the Inland Empire Utilities Agency to regulate industrial users within the corporate limits of the City who are tributary to the regional sewer system and provides the Inland Empire Utilities Agency fully enforceable legal authority as the operator of the regional treatment plant to inspect, permit and control indirect discharges to the regional plants. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-6.1721) 
   
Chapter 9.24 - STORM DRAIN SYSTEM 
Sections:  
Article I. - Title and Scope of Provisions 
 
9.24.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "City Storm Drain System Regulations" and may be cited as such. 
(Prior code § 6-9.101)  
9.24.020 - Scope. 
A.  Authority. This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority conferred by law including, but not limited to, the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.), the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 122, Porter Cologne Act, and National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the future health, safety, and general welfare by controlling and/or eliminating nonstormwater discharges into the City storm drain system. This will be accomplished by eliminating all nonpermitted discharges to the City storm drain system, controlling the discharge from spills, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater; and reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable. 
The intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality of our watercourses, water bodies, groundwater, and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the regulations listed in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6-9.102) 
(Ord. No. 10-915, § 1, 8-2-10)  
Article II. - General Provisions 
 
9.24.030 - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the City Engineer shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the City Engineer may be delegated by the City Engineer to persons acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.301)  
9.24.040 - Notice. 
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any notice required to be given by the City under this chapter shall be in writing and served in person or by first class, registered or certified mail. Notice shall be deemed to have been given at the time of deposit, postage prepaid, in a facility regularly serviced by the United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.302)  
9.24.050 - Protection of the City storm drain system. 
Without prior written approval of the City Engineer, no person shall construct or modify or cause to be constructed or modified any structure, facility, or appurtenant items that may alter the normal functioning of the City storm drain system, including actions that may alter the capacity, fall, or structural integrity of a storm drain, channel, or related structure. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.303)  
9.24.060 - Spill-containment systems. 
A.  Persons storing chemicals or chemical waste outdoors shall be required to install spill containment subject to requirements established by the City Engineer and in accordance with applicable federal, state, regional board, and San Bernardino County standards. Persons storing any other materials or equipment that are potential sources of stormwater pollution are also required to install spill containment. 
B.  No person shall operate a spill-containment system that could allow incompatible materials and/or wastes to mix, thereby creating hazardous or toxic substances in the event of failure of one or more containers. 
C.  Spill-containment systems shall consist of a system of dikes, walls, barriers, berms, and/or other devices. Structural best management practices shall be designed to contain spillage from containers and to minimize the buildup of stormwater from precipitation and runoff from roofs and outside areas. Spill-containment systems shall also be constructed of impermeable and nonreactive materials to the materials and/or wastes being contained. 
D.  Any spill-containment system shall have the entire contained area covered with an approved solid roof structure to prevent rainwater from entering the containment area. 
E.  Spilled and/or leaked materials and/or wastes and any accumulated precipitation shall be removed from the spill-containment system in as timely a manner as is necessary to prevent the overflow of the spill-containment system. 
F.  Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, all chemicals or wastes discharged within the spill-containment system shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local rules, regulations, and laws and shall not be discharged into the City's sanitary sewer system, the City storm drain system, or onto the ground. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.304) 
(Ord. No. 10-915, § 1, 8-2-10)  
9.24.070 - Compliance with best management practices (BMPs). 
Any person undertaking any activity or operation in the City that could potentially cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or a discharge to stormwater to the City storm drain system shall implement best management practices (BMPs) as listed in the current California Storm Water Quality Association Handbooks to reduce pollutants in stormwater runoff and reduce nonstormwater discharges to the City storm drain system to the maximum extent practicable or to the extent required by law. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.305) 
(Ord. No. 10-915, § 1, 8-2-10)  
9.24.080 - Installation of drainage facility. 
The City may require an owner of land to install drainage facilities for the removal of surface and storm waters. In lieu of construction of these facilities, the City may require the payment of a fee for the purposes of defraying the actual or estimated costs of the City's constructing such drainage facilities if: 
A.  A drainage plan is approved by the City for a particular drainage area and contains an estimate of the total cost of constructing the local drainage facilities required by the plan and a map of the drainage area showing its boundaries and the location of the planned drainage facilities is on file; 
B.  The requirement of such drainage facilities is based upon findings by the City Council that a new subdivision and/or any proposed development of property within the planned local drainage area will require the construction of the facilities described in the drainage plan; 
C.  The fees are fairly apportioned within the local drainage area, either on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for subdivision or development or on the need for local drainage facilities created by the proposed subdivision or development upon other property within the local drainage area; 
D.  The fee on any property proposed for subdivision or development within a local drainage area does not exceed the pro rata share of the amount of the total actual or estimated costs of all facilities within the local drainage area; and 
E.  The drainage facilities planned are in addition to existing local drainage facilities serving the area. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.306)  
9.24.090 - Fees. 
The fees required by Section 9.24.080 of this chapter shall be paid into a Planned Local Drainage Facilities Fund. A separate fund shall be established for each local drainage area. Moneys in such separate funds shall be expended solely for the construction of local drainage facilities within the planned local drainage area from which the fees comprising such funds were collected or to reimburse the City for the cost of engineering and administrative services to form the assessment district. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.307)  
Article III. - Storm Drain Permits 
 
9.24.100 - Permits required. 
A.  Permits are required for the construction or modification of any storm drain or conveyor of drainage waters and appurtenant items within: 
1.  Dedicated easements, rights-of-way, or public places and/or facilities; 
2.  Private property that may directly or indirectly cause discharge into the City storm drain system. Indirect discharges include, but are not limited to, under-sidewalk drains, driveway approaches, and unrestricted sheet flow. 
B.  The discharge or diversion of stormwater or nonstormwater is permissible when connection to the City storm drain system is made in accordance with a valid permit and approved construction plan or, as applicable, an NPDES permit and/or authorization to discharge resulting from submittal of an NOI and the discharge conforms to the standards of this chapter. 
C.  The establishment, use, maintenance and/or continuation of any illicit drainage connection to the City storm drain system are prohibited. This prohibition is retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit or other authorization or whether permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.401)  
9.24.110 - Notification of intent and compliance with general permits. 
A.  Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger described in any NPDES permit including, but not limited to, the general construction permit and the general industrial permit shall submit to the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board a Notice of Intent or other required document and submit a copy to the City Discharger shall comply with all activities required by the applicable NPDES Permit. 
B.  Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit, discharge order, or waste discharge requirements related to stormwater discharges shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit, order, or requirements. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.402) 
(Ord. No. 10-915, § 1, 8-2-10)  
Article IV. - Inspection of City Storm Drain System 
 
9.24.120 - Authority to inspect. 
A.  The City Engineer shall be authorized to enter the premises of any user of the City storm drain system to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter and to: 
1.  Conduct inspections, sampling, monitoring and/or other authorized duties to enforce the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  Review any records, reports, test results, or other information required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such review may include the necessity to photograph, videotape, or copy any applicable information; 
3.  Inspect any wastes, chemicals, storage areas, storage containers, waste-generating processes, treatment facilities, and discharge locations. Such inspection may include the necessity to photograph or videotape any applicable wastes, chemicals, storage areas, storage containers, waste generating processes, treatment facilities, and/or discharge locations. 
B.  Adequate identification shall be provided by the City Engineer when entering the premises of any user. If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained, the City Engineer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspection of the premises. 
C.  If the City Engineer has reasonable cause to believe that nonstormwater discharge conditions on or emanating from the premises are so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the public health or safety, the City Engineer shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect the property and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection, whether the property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not formal permission to inspect has been obtained. 
D.  If a user has instituted security measures requiring proper identification and clearance before entry onto the premises, the user shall make all necessary arrangements so that, upon presentation of such identification, duly designated City personnel shall be permitted to enter the premises without delay for the purpose of performing their authorized duties. For facilities which require special clearances to conduct inspections, it shall be the responsibility of the user to obtain all necessary clearances on behalf of the City so that City inspections are not impaired. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.501)  
Article V. - Maintenance of City Storm Drain System 
 
9.24.130 - Removal of spilled or leaked waste and accumulated precipitation. 
Spilled or leaked waste and accumulated precipitation shall be removed from the spill containment system in a timely manner as is necessary to prevent overflow of the collection system. All chemicals or wastes collected from such spill containment system shall be disposed of appropriately and not be discharged to the City sewer system, the City storm drain system, or the ground unless approval is given by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.601)  
Article VI. - Storm Drain Reimbursement Districts 
 
9.24.140 - Reimbursement agreements defined. 
When the owner of land is required by the City to construct drainage facilities having a greater capacity than would be required to serve such property, the City may enter into a reimbursement agreement with such landowner whereby the difference in the costs of the required facilities, less the costs of the improvement required to serve the owner's land alone, shall be collected from owners of properties within the area which, in the opinion of the City Council, will benefit by such drainage facilities. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.701)  
9.24.150 - Reimbursement agreement prerequisites. 
When an entity referred to in Section 9.24.140 of this chapter has been required by the City to install off-site storm drain facilities as a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit, or as a condition precedent to the approval of a tentative or final subdivision map, or for any other reason the City Council deems to be in the public interest; and said entity agrees to construct such facilities at its sole expense in accordance with the requirements of the City; and it is found by the City Council that such facilities will be for the benefit of, or usable by, other properties in the City adjacent to such storm drain, the City Council may, by resolution, approve a reimbursement agreement with said entity whereby the City shall collect from any other person using or connecting with such facilities a charge for making such connection. No such agreement may be entered into unless said entity also agrees thereby to dedicate such storm drain facility to the City for public use. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.702)  
9.24.160 - Reimbursement district—Establishment. 
Upon the execution of a reimbursement agreement, there shall be established a reimbursement district consisting of those properties the City Council finds will be benefited by such facilities. Charges shall be made only to those persons desiring to connect to such storm drain facilities with property lying in whole or in part within such district. A map of the reimbursement district and a schedule of the charges necessary to make connection to such storm drain facilities shall be maintained by the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.703)  
9.24.170 - Accounting of payments received. 
There is created a storm drain reimbursement liability account within the General Fund, and all charges made and received in accordance with reimbursement agreements entered into pursuant to this article shall be deposited in such account. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.704)  
9.24.180 - Limitation of disbursements. 
No disbursement of funds collected as provided in a reimbursement agreement shall be made to the entity after 15 years from the dedication of such facilities to the City for public use. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.705)  
9.24.190 - Agreement not required. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring the City to enter into any such reimbursement agreement, even though it may have required the installation of off-site storm drain facilities, nor shall the City be liable for any reimbursement of the cost of such facilities except from the proceeds of such charges actually collected by the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.706)  
9.24.200 - Collection and refund of costs. 
A.  The City shall endeavor to collect such costs as called for in Section 9.24.140 of this chapter and cause the sum so collected to be refunded as provided in subsection B of this section. The City shall not be liable for any failure to make such collection or refund, and such obligation to collect such cost shall terminate 15 years from the date of such reimbursement agreement. 
B.  All sums so paid by any property owner shall be refunded to the entity who shall have contributed toward the construction of such drainage facilities and who entered into a reimbursement agreement with the City in a proportion that the amount contributed bears to the entire amount contributed, less that portion distributed against the property of the entity. 
C.  It shall be the obligation of the entity to inquire of the City whether any amounts have been paid to the City by a property owner who did not contribute toward the cost of the construction of the drainage facilities. If any such money remains on deposit with the City without being claimed by the party rightfully entitled to it within one year after it is deposited, such money shall be forfeited to the City; and it shall then be transferred to the General Fund of the City. 
D.  The City may contribute toward the construction of any such drainage facilities; and if so, it shall be entitled to a refund under the same provisions and method set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.707)  
9.24.210 - Plans and specifications. 
A.  Within 30 calendar days after the execution of a reimbursement agreement, the City Engineer may prepare plans and specifications for the construction of drainage facilities requested by the owner of land or allow the owner of land to have plans and specifications prepared by a licensed civil engineer of the owner's choosing, subject to approval of the City Engineer. Upon completion of such plans and specifications and written approval of the owner of the land, the City Engineer shall call for sealed bids from at least three qualified contractors, such bids to be opened at a specified time and place in the presence of at least one designated representative of the Public Works Division and the landowner (if the landowner elects to be represented). The City Engineer shall immediately thereafter prepare an estimate of the entire cost of the project, based on the lowest responsible bid price and overhead costs for engineering, inspection, and incidental expenses, and shall serve notice on the owner of land to post a deposit with the City in the full amount of the estimated cost. After the owner of the land has posted the specified amount with the City, all bids shall be submitted to the City Council for award of a contract to the lowest responsible bidder. 
B.  The construction of all drainage facilities shall be under the general supervision of the City Engineer, who shall monitor the progress of payments and completion of the work. 
C.  Immediately upon completion of such drainage facilities, the City Engineer shall distribute and assess the reasonable cost of the construction (hereinafter referred to as "cost") against all lots or property which are benefited by the construction in relation to the benefit received. The assessments shall be submitted to the City Council within 20 calendar days after acceptance of the construction by the City Engineer. The City Council shall, within 20 calendar days thereafter, complete its review of such assessments and make any changes it deems necessary to conform to its determination as to benefits received by the assessed properties. The assessments, as determined by the City Engineer and including any changes made by the City Council, shall be final and conclusive at the end of such 20-day period. A map of the district and a schedule of the assessments shall be maintained by the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.708)  
Article VII. - Discharges into the Storm Drain System 
 
9.24.220 - Nonstormwater discharges for construction projects. 
The following nonstormwater discharges are allowed under the general construction permit so long as they comply with BMPs, including, but not limited to, BMPs as described in a project's stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP); and they do not cause or contribute to violation of any water quality standard: 
A.  Landscape irrigation of erosion control measures; 
B.  Waterline flushing and testing as provided in Section 9.24.240 of this chapter; 
C.  Street washing; 
D.  Dewatering; 
E.  Dust control; 
F.  Soil compaction; 
G.  Discharges of nonstormwater as may be necessary for practical performance and completion of certain construction projects. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.801)  
9.24.230 - Prohibited discharges. 
The following activities are prohibited. 
A.  Discharging of nonstormwater runoff directly or indirectly to the City storm drain system or any street or lined or unlined drainage ditch, which leads to the public storm drain system unless such discharge is allowed under Section 9.24.240 of this chapter or is permitted by an NPDES permit. If such discharge is permitted by Section 9.24.240 of this chapter or an NPDES permit but causes the City to violate any portion of its NPDES permit for stormwater discharges, such discharge is also prohibited. 
B.  Throwing, depositing, placing, leaving, maintaining, or keeping or permitting to be thrown, deposited, placed, left, maintained or kept any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, or accumulations in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit, or other drainage structure, business place, or upon any public or private lot of land in the City so that the same might be or become a pollutant. 
C.  Throwing or depositing litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.802) 
(Ord. No. 10-915, § 1, 8-2-10)  
9.24.240 - Exceptions to prohibited discharges. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibited discharges listed in Section 9.24.230 of this chapter: 
A.  Discharges for which an approval has been issued by the Regional Board Office or State Board including discharges authorized under NPDES permits issued by the State or Regional Boards. 
B.  Discharges from potable waterline flushing and other potable water sources. 
C.  Discharges from firefighting and fire hydrant testing and flushing. 
D.  Discharges from landscape irrigation, lawn watering, and other irrigation activities. 
E.  Diverted stream flows. 
F.  Rising groundwaters and natural springs. 
G.  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined in 40 CFR Part 35.2005(20)). 
H.  Passive foundation drains. 
I.  Air conditioning condensate. 
J.  Water from crawlspace pumps. 
K.  Passive footing drains. 
L.  Noncommercial vehicle washing, e.g., residential car washing (excluding engine degreasing) and car washing for fundraisers by nonprofit organizations. 
M.  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands. 
N.  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges (cleaning wastewater and filter backwash shall not be discharged into the storm drain system or to the waters of the U.S.). 
O.  Emergency fire fighting flows (i.e., flows necessary for the protection of life and property) do not require BMPs and need not be prohibited). Appropriate BMPs to reduce the discharge of pollutants consistent with the MEP standard must be implemented when they do not interfere with health and safety issues. 
P.  Waters not otherwise containing wastes as defined in California Water Code Section 13050(d). 
Q.  Other types of discharges identified and recommended by the permittee and approved by the Regional Board. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.803) 
(Ord. No. 10-915, § 1, 8-2-10)  
9.24.250 - Accidental discharges. 
A.  Each discharger shall provide spill containment and/or protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. 
B.  Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or discharger's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City for review and shall be approved by the City before construction of such facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the discharger of the responsibility to modify the discharger's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. In case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the discharger to immediately telephone and notify the City of the incident. The notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken. 
C.  Written Notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the discharger shall submit to the City Engineer a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the discharger to prevent similar occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the discharger of any fines, civil penalties, or compliance with all applicable laws and legal requirements. 
D.  Notice to Employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the discharger's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees of whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 6-9.804)  
Article VIII. - Administrative Enforcement Remedies 
 
9.24.260 - Notice of correction (NOC). 
Whenever the City Engineer or his or her designee finds that any discharger has the potential to violate or has already violated any prohibition, limitation, or requirement contained in this chapter, any NPDES stormwater permit, or the Basin Plan, the City may serve upon such person a written Notice of Correction stating the nature of the violation and the necessary actions that must be implemented to correct the situation. The NOC shall stipulate a time period by which the problem must be corrected and the penalties for noncompliance. 
(Ord. 04-845 § 1(part))  
9.24.270. - Notice of violation. 
When the City Engineer or his or her authorized representative finds that any discharger has failed to comply with a Notice of Correction or has violated or continues to violate any prohibition, limitation, or requirement contained in this chapter; any NPDES stormwater permit; or the Basin Plan, the City may serve upon such person a written Notice of Violation stating the nature of the violation and the penalties for noncompliance. At a minimum, the Notice of Violation shall require that the discharger submit to the City Engineer, within a time period specified in the notice, a plan indicating the cause of the violation and corrective actions that will be taken to prevent recurrence. A discharger shall be guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by the discharger. 
(Ord. 04-845 § 1(part)) 
(Ord. No. 10-915, § 1, 8-2-10)  
9.24.280 - Administrative orders. 
The City Engineer may require compliance with any prohibition, limitation, or requirement contained in this chapter; any NPDES stormwater permit; or the Basin Plan by issuing an Administrative Order enforceable in a court of law or by directly seeking court action. Administrative Orders may include Compliance Orders, Stop Work Orders, Cease and Desist Orders, Termination of Service Orders, and Immediate Termination of Service Orders. 
A.  Compliance Orders. The City Engineer or his or her designee may issue a Compliance Order to any discharger who fails to correct a violation of this chapter, any NPDES stormwater permit, or the Basin Plan. The order shall be in writing, specify the violation(s), and require appropriate compliance measures within a specified time period. The Compliance Order may include the following terms and requirements. 
1.  Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to eliminate an existing prohibited discharge or illegal connection or to prevent the imminent threat of a prohibited discharge. 
2.  Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering, or proper disposal of any pollutant having the potential to contact stormwater runoff. 
3.  Installation of stormwater treatment devices, containment structures, wash racks, and addition and removal of stormwater drains. 
4.  Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent imminent threat of or continuing violations of this chapter including, but not limited to, requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents promulgated by any federal, state, or regional agency. 
The City Engineer or his or her designee may adopt a proposed compliance schedule submitted by the user or may adopt a revised compliance schedule if, in his or her judgment, the proposed compliance schedule would allow the user to cause harm to the receiving waters and/or the City storm drain system. 
B.  Stop Work Order. The City Engineer or Building Official may serve a written Stop Work Order on any person engaged in doing, or causing to be done, new construction, tenant improvements, alterations, or additions if: 
1.  No construction permit has been granted by the City. 
2.  Work has begun prior to the submittal of a written WQMP and subsequent approval by the City Engineer or his or her designee. 
3.  Violations of this article are found at the site of the new construction, tenant improvements, alterations, or additions. 
Any person served a Stop Work Order shall stop such work forthwith until written authorization to continue is received from the City Engineer or Building Official. A Stop Work Order shall require the discharger to pay a One Thousand Dollar ($1,000) penalty fee to the City for the issuance thereof. 
C.  Cease and Desist Order. When the City Engineer or his or her designee finds that any industrial and/or commercial discharger has violated or threatens to violate any prohibition, limitation, or requirement contained in this chapter; any NPDES stormwater permit or the Basin Plan, or NPDES stormwater permit, the City may issue a Cease and Desist Order directing the discharger to: 
1.  Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or prohibited discharge to the City's stormwater drainage system. 
2.  Immediately contain or divert any flow of water off the property where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
3.  Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter. 
A Cease and Desist Order shall require the discharger to pay a One Thousand Dollar ($1,000) penalty fee to the City for the issuance thereof. 
D.  Termination of Service. When the City Engineer finds any industrial and/or commercial discharger who has a direct connection into the City's stormwater drainage system or has violated an Administrative Order, the City Engineer may terminate storm drain service to the discharger. The discharger shall be liable for all costs for termination of storm drain service incurred by the City. This provision is in addition to any other statutes, rules, or regulations authorizing termination of service for delinquency payment or for any other reasons. Storm drain service shall be reinstituted by the City Engineer after the discharger has complied with all the provisions of the Administrative Order. The discharger shall also be liable for all costs for reinstituting storm drain service. 
E.  Immediate Termination of Service. The City Engineer may immediately suspend storm drain service and any nonstormwater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the City Engineer, to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment or which significantly or could significantly cause pollution to the receiving waters, ground, and/or storm drainage system of the City. Any industrial and/or commercial discharger notified that its storm drain service has been suspended shall immediately cease and eliminate the discharge into the City stormwater drainage system. 
In the event of failure to comply voluntarily with the Termination of Service Order, the City Engineer shall take appropriate steps including immediate severance of all applicable storm drain connections. All persons responsible for a discharge that may endanger the health or welfare of the community or the environment shall be liable for all costs incurred by the City in terminating storm drain service. Storm drain service shall be reinstituted by the City Engineer after the actual or threatened discharge has been eliminated. A detailed written statement, submitted by the industrial and/or commercial discharger describing the cause of the harmful contribution and the measures to prevent any future occurrence, shall be submitted to the City Engineer within 10 working days of the date of storm drain service termination. 
(Ord. 04-845 § 1(part)) 
(Ord. No. 10-915, § 1, 8-2-10)  
9.24.290 - Permit suspension, revocation, or modification. 
A.  The City Engineer may suspend or revoke any permit when it is determined that: 
1.  The permittee has violated any term, condition, or requirement of the permit or any applicable provision of this Article VIII; 
2.  The permittee's discharge or the circumstances under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is no longer appropriate to except the discharge from the prohibitions on prohibited discharge contained within this article; 
3.  The permittee fails to comply with any schedule for compliance issued pursuant to this article; or 
4.  Any regulatory agency, including the EPA or a Regional Water Quality Control Board having jurisdiction over the discharge, notifies the City that the discharge should be terminated. 
B.  The City Engineer may modify any permit when it is determined that: 
1.  Federal or state law requirements have changed in a manner that necessitates a change in the permit; 
2.  The permittee's discharge or the circumstances under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is appropriate to modify the permit's terms, conditions, or requirements; or 
3.  A change to the permit is necessary to ensure compliance with the objectives of this article or to protect the quality of receiving waters. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the permittee, or, in the case of a general permit, each person who has filed an application herein, shall be informed of any change in the permit terms and conditions at least 45 business days prior to the effective date of the modified permit. 
C.  The determination that a permit shall be denied, suspended, revoked, or modified may be appealed by a permittee pursuant to the same procedures applicable to appeal of an Administrative Compliance Order hereunder. In the absence of a judicial order to the contrary, the permittee may continue to discharge pending issuance of the final administrative decision. 
(Ord. 04-845 § 1(part))  
9.24.300 - Administrative hearing. 
A.  Any discharger may request, or the City Engineer may order, an administrative hearing, at which time a discharger who causes or allows, or who has caused or allowed, an unauthorized discharge to enter into the City's storm-water drainage system or who continues to allow a violation of this chapter to exist may show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken against him. The City Manager, or the City Manager's designee, an employee not directly involved in the enforcement of this chapter, shall preside over the administrative hearing, at which time each party, including the discharger and the City Engineer or his designee, shall have the right to present evidence. 
B.  A Notice of Hearing shall be served on the discharger specifying the time and place of the hearing and referencing the specific violation and/or violations of this chapter, the reasons why the action is to be taken, and the proposed enforcement action directing the discharger to show cause before the Hearing Officer why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The Notice of Hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 10 working days prior to the hearing. Service of the Notice of Hearing may be made on any agent or officer of the discharger. 
(Ord. 04-845 § 1(part))  
9.24.310 - Administrative civil penalties. 
A.  Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 54739 and 54740.5, the City Engineer may issue an administrative complaint to any person who violates this chapter, any prohibition or limitation thereof, or any compliance order, cease and desist order, stop work order, or injunction. The administrative complaint shall allege the act or failure to act that constitutes the violation, the proposed civil penalty, and the authority under which it is imposed. 
B.  The administrative complaint, served on the alleged violator by personal delivery or by certified mail, shall inform the person served that a hearing before the City Engineer shall be conducted within 60 days of the service of the complaint. The right to a hearing may be waived by the person who has been issued the administrative complaint, in which case the City shall not conduct a hearing. A person dissatisfied with the decision of the City Engineer may appeal to the City Council of the City of Montclair within 30 days of notice of the Engineer's decision. 
C.  If after the hearing or appeal, if any, it is found that the person has violated reporting or discharge requirements, the City Engineer or City Council may assess a civil penalty against that person. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the City Engineer or City Council may take into consideration all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the economic benefit derived through any noncompliance, the nature and persistence of the violation, the length of time over which the violation occurs, and corrective action, if any, attempted or taken by the discharger. 
D.  Civil penalties may be assessed as follows: 
1.  In an amount that shall not exceed Three Thousand (3,000) Dollars for each day for failing or refusing to timely comply with any compliance order established by the City. 
2.  In an amount that shall not exceed Five Thousand (5,000) Dollars per violation for each day of discharge in violation of any discharge limitation, area wide urban runoff permit condition, or requirement issued, reissued, or adopted by the City. 
3.  In an amount that shall not exceed Ten (10) Dollars per gallon for discharges in violation of any stop work order, cease and desist order, or other orders or prohibition issued, reissued, or adopted by the City. 
4.  The amount of any civil penalties imposed under this section that have remained delinquent for a period of 60 days shall constitute a lien against the real property of the discharger from which the discharge originated, resulting in the imposition of the civil penalty. The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded with the County Recorder and, when recorded, shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien and continue for 10 years from the time of recording unless sooner released and shall be renewable in accordance with the provisions of Sections 683.110 through 683.220, inclusive, of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
E.  All money collected under this section shall be deposited in a special account of the City and shall be made available for the monitoring, treatment, and control of discharges into the City Storm Drainage System or for other mitigation measures. 
F.  Unless appealed, an order imposing administrative civil penalties shall become effective and final upon issuance thereof, and payment shall become due within 30 days of issuance of an invoice by the City of Montclair. Copies of these orders shall be served by personal service or by certified mail upon the party served with the administrative complaint and upon other persons who appeared at the hearing and requested a copy. 
G.  The City may, at its option, elect to petition the Superior Court to confirm any order establishing civil penalties and enter judgment in conformity therewith in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1285 through 1287.6, inclusive, of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. 04-845 § 1(part))  
9.24.320 - Compensation for damages. 
Any person who damages monitoring equipment, has the potential to affect or affects human health or the environment, discharges pollutants into the City's storm drainage system, which causes or has the potential to cause increased maintenance of the system, nonroutine inspection, or sampling of the system, system blockages, or other damage or interference in the City's stormwater drainage system, or causes any other damages, including the imposition of fines or penalties on the City by federal, state, or local regulatory agencies shall be liable to the City for all damages and additional costs, including fines and penalties. An administrative fee, which shall be fixed by the City Manager based on the City's current overhead cost-allocation percentage, shall be added to these charges and shall be payable to the City within 30 calendar days of invoicing. 
(Ord. 04-845 § 1(part))  
9.24.330 - Appeals. 
Any decision of the City Engineer may be appealed. An appeal must be initiated within 10 working days after receipt of the notice of any decision or action by filing, with the City Engineer, a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal. The hearing on appeal shall be held on a date no more than 15 working days after receipt of the letter of appeal. The appellant shall be given at least five working days' notice of the time and place of the hearing. The City Manager, or the City Manager's designee, an employee not directly involved in the enforcement of this chapter, shall provide the appellant and any other interested party the reasonable opportunity to be heard and in order to show cause why the determination of the City Engineer should not be upheld. Within 45 working days of the hearing, the City Manager, or the City Manager's designee, shall make a written decision regarding the appeal. The decision of the City Manager, or the City Manager's designee, shall be final. The imposition of fines or penalties shall be stayed during the appeal period unless the City Engineer determines that such a stay would threaten the public safety, health, or welfare. 
(Ord. 04-845 § 1(part))  
9.24.340 - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
A.  In addition to the penalties established by this chapter, any threat to public health, safety, or welfare shall be declared and deemed a public nuisance. Such public nuisance may be summarily abated and/or remedied by the City Engineer, and/or civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the City Attorney. 
B.  The cost of such abatement, remediation, and/or restoration shall be borne by the owner, lessee, or tenant of the property causing the violation. The cost thereof shall be a lien upon and against the property, and such lien shall continue in existence until the same shall be paid. 
(Ord. 04-845 § 1(part))  
Article IX. - Judicial Enforcement Remedies 
 
9.24.350 - Legal action. 
A.  The City Attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal, equitable, or injunctive relief in the Municipal or Superior Court of the County against any person who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, the Basin Plan, federal or state discharge standards or permit conditions, or who violates the requirements of any administrative order. 
B.  In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, the City may recover all reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporter's fees, expenses of litigation by appropriate suit of law against the person(s) found to have violated any provision of this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued thereunder; and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City. 
(Ord. 04-845 § 1 (part))  
9.24.360 - Civil penalties. 
A.  Persons who continue to violate any provision of this chapter shall be liable to the City for a maximum civil penalty of Twenty-Five Thousand (25,000) Dollars but not less than Three Thousand (3,000) Dollars per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the discharger's violation, corrective actions by the discharger, the compliance history of the discharger, and any factor as justice requires. 
B.  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a discharger. The City may institute further legal action to collect such penalties in the event that the violator of this chapter fails or refuses to pay said penalty within 30 days from the date that it has been assessed. 
(Ord. 04-845 § 1 (part))  
9.24.370 - Criminal prosecution. 
A.  Any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter or permit conditions, or who violates any Administrative Order or any other provision of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine of not less than Three Thousand (3,000) Dollars and/or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such discharger and shall be punishable therefore as provided by this section. 
B.  Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, stormwater permit, or order issued hereunder or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than Three Thousand (3,000) Dollars per day of violation or by imprisonment or by both. 
(Ord. 04-845 § 1 (part))  
9.24.380 - Falsifying information. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, record, report, plan, or other document filed with the City or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate monitoring devices or methods required under this chapter shall have violated this chapter and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 04-845 § 1 (part))  
9.24.390 - Recovery of fines or penalties imposed on the city. 
In the event the City is subject to the payment of fines or penalties pursuant to the legal authority and actions of other regulatory or enforcement agencies based on a violation of law, regulation, or agreement, and said violation can be established by the City as being caused by the discharge of any user of the City Storm Drain System which is in violation of any provisions of this chapter and/or the user's NPDES Permit, the City shall be entitled to recover from the user all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, the full amount of said fines or penalties to which the City has been subjected. 
(Ord. 04-845 § 1 (part))  
9.24.400 - Damage to facilities or interruption of normal operations. 
Any obstruction, damage, or other impairment to the City Storm Drain System caused by a violation of this chapter and/or the users NPDES Permit may result in the Public Works Director assessing a charge against the user for the work required to clean or repair the facility or the cost to resume normal operation. An administrative fee shall be added to the charges payable within 30 days of invoicing by the City. These charges and fees shall be in addition to any other fines, penalties, assessments, and fees imposed by other regulatory or service agencies. 
(Ord. 04-845 § 1 (part))  
Article X. - Sediment and Erosion Control of Construction Sites 
 
9.24.410 - Grading. 
A.  All earth-moving or grading operations requiring a grading permit (as noted in Chapter 10, Section 10.08.010) shall be required to also have an approved erosion-control plan. 
B.  Grading work is prohibited on any single grading site under permit unless an erosion-control plan has been approved or waived by the City Engineer. Where necessary, temporary and/or permanent erosion-and-sediment-control devices or methods, as approved by the City Engineer, shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety during this period. 
C.  The City Engineer or his or her designee may order restriction or cessation of land disturbance or development operations upon determination that the weather, soil, slope, or general site conditions may cause serious accelerated erosion or sediment damage either onsite or downstream from the site. 
(Ord. 06-886 § 1 (part))  
9.24.420 - Erosion-and-sediment-control plans. 
A.  Erosion-and-sediment-control plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval with grading plan submittal unless otherwise waived by the City Engineer. No grading permit shall be issued unless an erosion-and-sediment-control plan has been submitted or waived by the City Engineer. The erosion-and-sediment-control plan may be waived for grading on single residential lot projects provided an erosion-control system, approved by the City Engineer, is installed, placed, planted, or constructed before October 15. An erosion-and-sediment-control plan is required for all projects if the City Engineer or his or her designee determines that erosion or sediment discharge adversely affects adjacent properties. The approved erosion-and-sediment-control plan shall be updated, if necessary, by October 15 of each year for projects under a grading permit. 
B.  The erosion-and-sediment-control plan shall include details of protective measures, including desiltation basins or other temporary drainage or control measures or both, as may be necessary to protect adjoining public or private property from damage by erosion, flooding, or mud and/or debris deposits which may originate from the site or result from the grading operations. 
C.  All slope planting as required by the erosion-and-sediment-control plans, which is to be completed after September 5 of each year, will require jute matting or other acceptable turf matting or erosion-and-sediment-control blankets prior to planting or hydroseeding. 
(Ord. 06-886 § 1 (part))  
9.24.430 - Submittal and processing requirements. 
A.  All projects requiring a grading permit must have erosion-and-sediment-control plans submitted for approval. Projects that have an approved erosion-and-sediment-control plan from the previous year must submit an updated erosion-and-sediment-control plan for approval reflective existing conditions or necessary changes that are needed for conformance with current conditions. 
B.  The erosion-and-sediment-control plans must be approved and erosion-and-sediment-control devices installed and certified and inspected as being properly constructed by the engineer of record. Sediment control must be continuously maintained throughout the construction process. Updating of the plans will be required for phases of construction not covered by the previously approved plans. 
C.  Approval and processing of the erosion-and-sediment-control plans requires payment of plan-checking fees, inspection fees, and the posting of securities as further noted in this section. 
D.  First submittal for erosion-and-sediment-control plans shall include the plan-checking fee, two blue line copies of the plans, and two copies of the bond estimate. 
(Ord. 06-886 § 1 (part))  
9.24.440 - Information on erosion-and-sediment-control plans. 
An erosion-and-sediment-control plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
A.  A 24-hour telephone number of the person responsible for performing emergency erosion-control work; 
B.  The stamp and signature of the Civil Engineer who prepared the erosion-control plan; 
C.  The erosion-and-sediment-control general notes (copies available for the Public Works Department and Building Division); 
D.  Identification of all desilting and erosion-protection facilities necessary to protect adjacent property from sediment deposition; 
E.  Identification of the streets and drainage devices that will be completed and paved by October 15; 
F.  Provision for the placement of gravel bags, slope planting, or other measures to control erosion from all slopes above and adjacent to roads open to the public; 
G.  Provision for maintaining access to desilting facilities during wet weather; 
H.  A schedule for the construction and ongoing maintenance of all required erosion-and-sediment-control facilities; 
I.  Identification of discharge points where concentrated runoff occurs. 
(Ord. 06-886 § 1 (part))  
9.24.450 - Erosion-and-sediment-control systems. 
A.  All sediment shall be contained onsite. Runoff from disturbed areas shall be detained or filtered by berms, swales, ditches, filter strips, or other means as necessary to prevent the escape of sediment from the site. Sediment-control devices shall be installed prior to or concurrent with the initial grading operations and shall be maintained throughout the development process. 
B.  Erosion shall be prevented at locations where runoff is concentrated. Where runoff will be discharged to natural ground or channels, appropriate energy dissipaters shall be installed to prevent erosion at the point of discharge. 
C.  All erosion-and-sediment-control measures required to retain sediment onsite and to safely discharge any accelerated runoff generated by the project shall be installed during the initial construction phase of the project. 
D.  Desilting facilities shall be provided at drainage outlets from the graded site. 
E.  Desilting basins shall be designed to provide a desilting capacity capable of containing the anticipated runoff for a period of time adequate to allow sediment of suspended particles. 
F.  Desilting basins shall be constructed around the perimeter of projects. Basins should be located where maintenance access is provided from paved roads during wet weather. 
G.  Desilting basins constructed from compacted earth shall be compacted to a relative compaction of 90 percent of maximum density. A soil engineering report including the type of field-testing performed, location, and results of testing shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval upon completing the desilting basin(s). 
H.  Equipment and workers for emergency work shall be available at all times. Necessary materials shall be available onsite and stockpiled at convenient locations to facilitate rapid construction of temporary erosion-control devices, if needed. 
I.  Erosion-and-sediment-control provisions shall include and complement drainage patterns during the current and future phases of grading throughout the rainy season. 
(Ord. 06-886 § 1 (part))  
9.24.460 - Erosion-and-sediment-control maintenance. 
A.  Erosion-and-sediment-control systems shall be serviced and maintained to provide continuous capacity and to adequately function as designed. After precipitation exceeding one-quarter inch in any 12-hour period or upon direction of the City Engineer or his or her designee, silt and debris shall be removed from check dams and desilting basins and the basins pumped dry and otherwise restored to the original design condition. 
B.  The performance of the erosion-and-sediment-control system shall be evaluated by the City Engineer or his or her designee and revised and replaced as ordered. 
C.  The construction and maintenance of all erosion-and-sediment-control systems shall conform to the approved erosion-and-sediment-control plan unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. 
D.  The contractor, permittee, project owner, or property owner shall be responsible for and take necessary precautions to prevent public trespass into areas where impounded water creates a hazardous condition. Necessary precautions may include, but not be limited to, appropriate perimeter fencing or a 24-hour guard in order to prevent unauthorized persons from entering the basin(s). 
(Ord. 06-886 § 1 (part))  
9.24.470 - Erosion-and-sediment-control design and implementation. 
A.  All erosion-and-sediment-control systems require approval by the City Engineer and approval and certification by the engineer of record. Such approved and certified systems shall be completed, inspected, and in place before grading begins. All erosion-and-sediment-control systems must be continuously maintained throughout the construction process. 
B.  All removable protective devices shown shall be in place at the end of each working day when the five-day rain probability forecast exceeds 40 percent. The forecast shall be as determined by the National Weather Service. 
C.  If construction of erosion-and-sediment-control systems outside of the project boundaries are necessary, permission to construct such systems from the owner of such offsite property must be obtained. Plans for the offsite systems shall be included with the onsite plans submitted to the City Engineer. The plans for the offsite erosion-and-sediment-control systems shall include permission to grade and maintain the erosion-and-sediment-control systems from all affected property owners and letters of clearance and/or permits from all appropriate governmental entities. 
D.  Paved streets, sidewalks, and other improvements shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition, free of loose soil, construction debris, and trash. Street sweeping or other equally effective means shall be used on a regular basis to control erosion that has been deposited on streets or sidewalks. Watering shall not be used to clean streets except for the removal of fine material not otherwise removed by sweeping or other mechanical means. 
E.  The contractor, permittee, project owner, or property owner shall be responsible for inspection, modification, and proper maintenance of the erosion-and-sediment-control devices as necessary. If the contractor, permittee, project owner, or property owner fails or refuses to properly maintain the erosion-and-sediment-control devices, the City Engineer or his or her designee: 
1.  May cause emergency maintenance work to be done in order to protect potentially impacted property. The cost shall be deducted for the erosion-and-sediment-control security posted for the project; 
2.  May revoke the grading permit in writing. The permit shall not be renewed until erosion-and-sediment-control system approved by the City Engineer is installed or necessary maintenance of an existing system is completed. 
F.  If any grading subject to Section 10.08.010 of this Code has commenced on private property without a valid grading permit, the property owner shall be required to obtain a valid permit before continuing; and grading and may be required to prepare and implement an erosion-and-sediment-control plan approved by the City Engineer. If the property owner fails to install an approved erosion-and-sediment-control system, the City Engineer shall cause emergency work to be done to protect potentially impacted property and to protect environmentally sensitive areas. The procedures of Sections 9.24.480(A)(2) through (4) of this chapter need not apply for emergency erosion-and-sediment-control work between during the construction process. The cost of such emergency work shall be charged to the owner pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 9.24.480(D)(5) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 06-886 § 1 (part))  
9.24.480 - Erosion-and-sediment-control security. 
A.  Requirement for Security. Prior to approval of the grading permit, an erosion-and-sediment-control plan for the project site shall be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer; and securities meeting the requirements contained herein shall be posted with the City. The security shall guarantee the following: 
1.  Compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances; 
2.  Compliance with any and all terms and conditions of the permittee's approved erosion-and-sediment-control plan; 
3.  Completion of the erosion-and-sediment-control system, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer or his or her designee and in accordance with the approved erosion-and-sediment-control plan; 
4.  Completion of all emergency and routine maintenance and repair of the erosion-and-sediment-control system(s) to ensure the continuous integrity of the system(s) to the satisfaction of the City Engineer or his or her designee and as may otherwise be required by this section; 
5.  Restoration and repair of public streets or other property adversely impacted by erosion from permittee's project. 
B.  Amount and Form of Security. The amount of the security shall be equal to 100 percent of the total estimated cost of the erosion-and-sediment-control system(s). The permittee's estimate of such cost shall be based on the established unit costs available from the City and shall be subject to review and approval by the City Engineer. At least 75 percent of the required security shall be in cash and shall be deposited with the City Engineer. The remainder of the erosion-control security shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer and City Attorney and consist of one or more of the following: 
1.  Cash deposit; 
2.  Bond; 
3.  Certificate of deposit; 
4.  Letter of credit, in City format, from one or more local financial institution(s) subject to regulation by the state or federal government. 
C.  Failure to Provide Security. If a permittee fails to provide the security required by this section prior to grading, the City Engineer may revoke the permittee's grading permit without prior notice to the permittee. Any such revocation shall be in writing. 
D.  Use of Cash Deposit. The City Engineer may use the cash deposit to cause certain erosion-and-sediment-control work to be done under any of the following circumstances: 
1.  Failure of permittee to commence emergency repair or maintenance work within 12 hours of receipt of a written demand therefor from the City Engineer or within 12 hours of the City Engineer's attempt to communicate such demand via the telephone number listed on the approved plans or as provided by the permittee; 
2.  Failure of permittee to commence other repair or maintenance work within 72 hours of receipt of a written demand therefor from the City Engineer; 
3.  Failure of permittee to diligently pursue completion of any required repair or maintenance work or to complete such work within a reasonable time period established by the City Engineer; 
4.  Failure of permittee to complete installation of an erosion-and-sediment-control system prior to grading; 
5.  Failure of permittee, after notice from the City Engineer, to clean or repair public streets or other public property where debris, damage, or erosion resulted from the permittee's project. Permittee shall be liable to the City for the cost of any repair work that becomes necessary as a result of and in accordance with the provisions of this section. The City Engineer may withdraw from the permittee's cash deposit for erosion-and-sediment-control security any funds necessary to pay for such work. The City Engineer shall notify the permittee of any withdrawal from the permittee's cash deposit. If the cost for such work exceeds the balance of the permittee's funds on deposit, the City Engineer shall cause an invoice to be sent to the permittee demanding payment of the amount by which the cost of the work exceeds the permittee's deposit. The permittee shall, within 10 days of receipt of such invoice, deposit with the City Engineer that amount of cash necessary to bring the permittee's deposit up to its original balance. If the permittee fails to pay such amount in full within 30 days from the date of the invoice, the permittee's grading permit shall be automatically revoked. Renewal of the grading permit shall not be completed until the invoice is paid in full. No final grading inspection shall be completed until the permittee has fully satisfied all monetary obligations to the City imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section. Additionally, no further construction permits including, but not limited to, building permits or occupancy permits shall be issued until such monetary obligations are fully satisfied. 
E.  Release of Security. Upon the end of construction as determined by the City Engineer, the City Engineer may release any erosion-and-sediment-control security posted or deposited pursuant to this section upon receipt of a written request for such release by the permittee. 
The City Engineer shall not release a permittee's security if the permittee has an outstanding monetary obligation to the City incurred pursuant to the provisions of subsection (D)(5) of this section or if cleanup or repair of public streets or other public property for which the permittee is responsible has not been completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
Any unused portion of the permittee's erosion-and-sediment-control security may also remain on deposit with the City throughout the grading of the project and may not be released until completion of the landscaping improvements for the project if it is determined by the City Engineer that because of the nature, configuration, or location of the project it is in the best interest of the City to retain such erosion-control security until the project's completion. 
(Ord. 06-886 § 1 (part))  
9.24.490 - Prohibited discharges of construction sites. 
A.  Any construction project that requires a Water Quality Management Plan shall be prohibited from allowing the following discharges into the storm drain system. 
1.  Discharges that could have an impact on human health or the environment; cause or threaten to cause pollution, contamination, or nuisance, discharges that exceed any applicable water quality standard contained in a Statewide Water Quality Control Plan or local Basin Plan, and discharges containing a hazardous substance equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity listed in Federal Regulations 40 CFR Parts 117 and 302. 
2.  Materials that can cause or contribute to pollution or a violation of any applicable water quality standards including, but are not limited to, sediments, solid or liquid chemicals spills, wastes from paints, stains, sealants, glues, limes, pesticides, or herbicides, wood preservatives or solvents, asbestos fibers, paint flakes or stucco fragments, fuels, oils, or lubricants, hydraulic, radiator, or battery fluids, fertilizers, vehicle/equipment wash water or concrete wash water; concrete, detergent, or floatable wastes; wastes from any engine/equipment steam cleaning or chemical degreasing, and chlorinated potable water line flushings. 
B.  Unless exempted or authorized by an NPDES permit, all nonstormwater discharges require prior approval by the local stormwater agency or the State Water Resources Control Board. 
1.  During construction, temporary storage of such materials identified above must occur in designated areas physically separated from potential stormwater runoff, with ultimate disposal in accordance with federal, state, regional, county, and City requirements. 
2.  Dewatering of contaminated groundwater or discharging contaminated solids via surface erosion is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 10-915, § 1, 8-2-10)  
9.24.500 - Water Quality Management Plan—Compliance and implementation. 
A.  The City Engineer or his/her designee shall have the authority to require the development of a Water Quality Management Plan (WQMP) for any development, redevelopment, utility, or road improvement project within the City limits. 
B.  The City Engineer or his/her designee may inspect the premises of any person, business, discharger, or entity for which a WQMP has been prepared at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to determine whether the best management practices (BMPs) associated with the project WQMP are being installed, implemented, and functioning as designed. Photographs may be taken for purposes of documentation and enforcement. 
1.  Establishment of a Regulatory Fee. The City Council may establish a regulatory fee by resolution and from time to time adjust the fee by Resolution to recover the reasonable cost of permit issuance, administration, inspections, sampling, metering, and monitoring by the City Engineer or his/her designee. Such fee shall cover, but not exceed, the full cost of permit issuance, administration, inspections, sampling, metering, and monitoring and shall be allocated in a manner that bears a fair and reasonable relationship to the activities of the fee payers that are relative to the need for the WQMP. 
2.  Recovery of Additional Inspection Costs. If any discharger fails to meet the requirements of the WQMP and additional site inspections are, therefore, required, such dischargers shall be liable for the cost of additional inspection and any improvements, repairs, modifications, or maintenance necessary. These costs may be recovered through additional inspection fees to cover permit inspection and administration expenses. The City may also pursue any civil action deemed necessary against the discharger to recover excess WQMP inspection and compliance costs. 
(Ord. No. 12-930, § 1, 5-7-12)  
9.24.600 - Post-construction inspections of best management practices—Associated with Water Quality Management Plans. 
A.  Maintenance and Operations of Best Management Practices (BMPs) Improvements and Facilities. The owner of a structural BMP installed pursuant to Section 9.24.500 shall maintain and operate the BMP to preserve and continue its function in controlling stormwater quality and quantity at the degree or amount of function for which the BMP was designed. 
B.  Operation and Maintenance Agreement. At the time that as-built plans are provided to the City Engineer or designee prior to final approval of a project for compliance with this article, but in all cases prior to placing the BMPs in service, the applicant or owner of the site shall execute an operation and maintenance agreement that shall be binding on all current and subsequent owners of the site, portions of the site, and/or lots or parcels served by the BMP. This maintenance agreement shall be recorded as specified in Section 11.60.180. Failure to execute an operation and maintenance agreement may result in assessment of penalties as specified in Chapter 9.24 Article VIII, Administrative Enforcement Remedies. Until the transference of all property, sites, or lots served by the BMP, the original owner or applicant shall have primary responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the maintenance agreement. At the discretion of the City Engineer or his/her designee, certificates of occupancy may be withheld pending receipt of an operation and maintenance agreement. The operation and maintenance agreement shall require the owner or owners to maintain, repair, and, if necessary, reconstruct the structural BMP, and shall state the terms, conditions, and schedule of maintenance for the structural BMP. In addition, it shall grant to the City of Montclair a right of entry in the event that the City Engineer or his/her designee has reason to believe it has become necessary to inspect, monitor, maintain, repair, or reconstruct the BMP; however, in no case shall the right of entry, of itself, confer an obligation on the City of Montclair to assume responsibility for the BMP. 
C.  Inspection Program. Inspections and inspection programs by the City of Montclair may be conducted or established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to, routine inspections, random inspections, inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations, and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in BMPs; and evaluating the condition of BMPs. If the owner or occupant of any property refuses to permit such inspection, the City Engineer or his designee shall proceed to obtain an administrative search warrant pursuant to Code of Civil Procedures 1822.50. No person shall obstruct, hamper, or interfere with the City inspector while carrying out his or her official duties. 
D.  Records of Installation and Maintenance Activities. The owner of each structural BMP shall keep records of inspections, maintenance, and repairs for at least five years from the date of creation of the record and shall submit the same upon reasonable request to City official. 
E.  Violation Unlawful. Any failure to comply with an applicable requirement, prohibition, standard, or limitation imposed by this article or the terms or conditions of any permit or other development or redevelopment approval or authorization granted pursuant to this article is unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this article. 
F.  Each Day a Separate Offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation or offense. 
G.  Responsible Persons/Entities. Any person who erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters (whether actively or passively), operates, or maintains or who fails to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, operate, or maintain any structure, facility, improvement, BMP, practice, or condition in violation of this article; as well as any person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a condition that results in or constitutes a violation of this chapter or fails to take appropriate action so that a violation of this article results or persists; or an owner, any tenant or occupant, or any other person, who has control over, or responsibility for, the use or development of the property on which the violation occurs shall be subject to the remedies, penalties, and/or enforcement actions in accordance with this section. For the purposes of this article, responsible person(s) shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  Any person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a condition that constitutes a violation of this article or fails to take appropriate action so that a violation of this article results or persists. 
2.  The owner of the land on which the violation occurs, any tenant or occupant of the property, any person who is responsible for stormwater controls or practices pursuant to a private agreement or public document, or any person who has control over, or responsibility for, the use, development, or redevelopment of the property. 
(Ord. No. 12-930, § 1, 5-7-12)  
Chapter 9.26 - FLOOD PLAIN REGULATION AND MANAGEMENT 
Sections:  
Article I. - Title, Statutory Authorization, Statement of Purpose, and Methods of Reducing Flood Losses 
 
9.26.100 - Title. 
This chapter of the Montclair Municipal Code shall be known as the City of Montclair Flood Plain Regulation and Management Ordinance and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.110 - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 5302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Montclair does hereby adopt the following flood plain management regulations. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.120 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the City of Montclair are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health, and safety hazards; disruption of commerce and governmental services; extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief; and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards that increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood losses. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.130 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly- and privately- owned land within flood prone, mudslide (i.e., mudflow), or flood-related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
H.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.140 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities. 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
C.  Control the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers that help accommodate or channel floodwaters. 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development that may increase flood damage. 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert floodwaters or that may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
Article II. - Definitions 
 
9.26.200 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
A Zone . See "Special flood hazard area." 
Accessory structure means a structure that is either: 
1.  Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or 
2.  A small, low-cost shed for limited storage, less than 150 square feet and One Thousand Five Hundred (1,500) Dollars in value. 
Accessory use means a use that is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
Alluvial fan means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone- or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors and which is subject to flash flooding; high velocity flows; debris flows; erosion, sediment movement, and deposition; and channel migration. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the Flood Plain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from 1 to 3 feet, a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard . See "Special flood hazard area." 
Base flood means a flood that has a 1 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE, and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1 percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade—i.e., below ground level - on all sides. 
Building . See "Structure." 
City Council means City Council of the City of Montclair. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a flood plain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a flood plain. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood, flooding, or floodwater means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows). 
2.  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Flood plain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "Flooding." 
Flood Plain Administrator is the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the flood plain management regulations. 
Flood plain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the flood plain including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, flood plain management regulations, and open space plans. 
Flood plain management regulations means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, Building Codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control), and other application of police power that control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, State, or local regulations in any combination thereof that provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 1 foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
Floodway fringe is that area of the flood plain on either side of the "regulatory floodway" upon which encroachment may be permitted. 
Fraud and victimization as related to Article VI of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City Council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Governing body is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
Hardship as related to Article VI of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The City Council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs that have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system, which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including basement (see "Basement" definition). 
1.  An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area and is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The flood openings standard in Section 9.26.510(C)(3); 
b.  The anchoring standards in Section 9.26.510(A); 
c.  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 9.26.510(B); and 
d.  The standards for utilities in Section 9.26.520. 
2.  For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "Basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value is defined in the City of Montclair as the most probable price which a property should bring in a competitive and open market under all conditions requisite to a fair sale, the buyer and seller each acting prudently and knowledgeably, and assuming the price is not affected by undue stimulus. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
New construction , for flood plain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
Obstruction includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
One hundred year flood or 100-year flood . See "Base flood." 
Program deficiency means a defect in a community's flood plain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those flood plain management regulations. 
Public safety and nuisance as related to Article VI of this chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 1 foot. 
Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with State or local flood plain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing State or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Sheet flow area . See "Area of shallow flooding." 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means an area in the flood plain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means: 
1.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred; or 
2.  Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This is also known as "repetitive loss." 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains of coastal or riverine areas. 
Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
Article III. - General Provisions 
 
9.26.310 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Montclair. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.320 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for San Bernardino County, California and Incorporated Areas" dated January 17, 1997, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated January 17, 1997, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the City Council by the Flood Plain Administrator. The study, FIRMs, and FBFMs are on file in the Engineering Division of the Public Works Department located at 5111 Benito Street, City of Montclair, California. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.330 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.340 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.350 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.360 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Montclair, its City Council, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.370 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
Article IV. - Administration 
 
9.26.410 - Designation of the Flood Plain Administrator. 
The City Engineer is appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.420 - Duties and responsibilities of the Flood Plain Administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the Flood Plain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine: 
1.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures; 
2.  All other required State and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; 
4.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than 1 foot at any point within the City of Montclair. 
5.  All Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
B.  Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures. 
1.  Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers to Questions about Substantially Damaged Buildings," develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage to include defining "Market Value." 
2.  Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community staff. 
C.  Review, Use, and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data have not been provided in accordance with Section 9.26.320, the Flood Plain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or State agency, or other source, in order to administer Article V. [Note: A base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas—A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations," dated July 1995.] 
D.  Notification of Other Agencies. 
1.  Alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation. 
b.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
c.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
2.  Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations: 
a.  Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the Flood Plain Administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). 
b.  All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and flood plain management requirements are based on current data. 
3.  Changes in corporate boundaries: Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits. 
E.  Documentation of Flood Plain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
1.  Certification required by Sections 9.26.510(C)(1) and 9.26.540 (lowest floor elevations); 
2.  Certification required by Section 9.26.510(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
3.  Certification required by Section 9.26.510(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard); 
4.  Certification of elevation required by Section 9.26.530(A)(3) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards); 
5.  Certification required by Section 9.26.560(B) (floodway encroachments); 
6.  Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
F.  Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 9.26.440. 
G.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 9.26.330. 
H.  Biennial Report. Complete and submit Biennial Report to FEMA. 
I.  Planning. Assure community's General Plan is consistent with flood plain management objectives herein. 
J.  Nonconversion of Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor. To ensure that the areas below the BFE shall be used solely for parking vehicles, limited storage, or access to the building and not be finished for use as human habitation without first becoming fully compliant with the Flood Plain Management Ordinance in effect at the time of conversion, the Flood Plain Administrator shall: 
1.  Determine which applicants for new construction and/or substantial improvements have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are 5 feet or higher. 
2.  Enter into a "Nonconversion Agreement for Construction Within Flood Hazard Areas" or equivalent with the City of Montclair. The Agreement shall be recorded with the Office of the San Bernardino County Recorder as a deed restriction. The Nonconversion Agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the Flood Plain Administrator and County Counsel. 
3.  Have the authority to inspect any area of a structure below the base flood elevation to ensure compliance upon prior notice of at least 72 hours. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.430 - Development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 9.26.320. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City of Montclair. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information: 
A.  Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
1.  Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures; storage of materials and equipment; and their location; 
2.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities; 
3.  Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities; 
4.  Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable; 
5.  Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 9.26.320 or 9.26.420(C); 
6.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
7.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 9.26.510(C)(2) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93. 
B.  Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in Section 9.26.510(C)(2). 
C.  For a crawl space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 9.26.510(C)(3) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93. 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
E.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 9.26.420(E) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.440 - Appeals. 
The City Council of the City of Montclair shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Flood Plain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
Article V. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 
 
9.26.510 - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads including the effects of buoyancy. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed: 
1.  With flood-resistant materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation; 
2.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
4.  Within Zones AH or AO so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.  Elevation and Floodproofing. 
1.  Residential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor including basement: 
a.  In AE, AH, and A1-30 Zones elevated two above the base flood elevation. 
b.  In an AO Zone elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height 2 feet above the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM or elevated at least 4 feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
c.  In an A Zone, without BFEs specified on the FIRM (unnumbered A Zone) elevated two above the base flood elevation as determined under Section 9.26.420(C). 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the Community Building Inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Flood Plain Administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform to subsection (C)(1) of this section or: 
a.  Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under subsection (C)(1) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; 
c.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of subsections (C)(2)(a) and (C)(2)(b) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Flood Plain Administrator. 
3.  Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  For nonengineered openings: 
i.  Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than 1 square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade; 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and 
iv.  Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow floodwater to directly enter; or 
b.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect. 
4.  Manufactured Homes. 
a.  See Section 9.26.540. 
5.  Garages and Low-Cost Accessory Structures. 
a.  Attached Garages. 
i.  A garage attached to a residential structure constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters. See subsection (C)(3) of this section. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials. See subsection B of this section. 
ii.  A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below-grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6. 
b.  Detached Garages and Accessory Structures. 
i.  "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Article 2, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(A)  Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage; 
(B)  The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials; 
(C)  The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement; 
(D)  Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE; 
(E)  The accessory structure must comply with flood plain encroachment provisions in Section 9.26.560; 
(F)  The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters in accordance with subsection (C)(3). 
ii.  Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in this section. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.520 - Standards for utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
1.  Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; 
2.  Discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.530 - Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development. 
A.  All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall: 
1.  Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BFE); 
2.  Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans; 
3.  If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F) to the Flood Plain Administrator: 
a.  Lowest floor elevation; 
b.  Pad elevation; 
c.  Lowest adjacent grade. 
B.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
C.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.540 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
A.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood shall: 
1.  Within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated 2 feet above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
B.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement and be elevated so that either the: 
1.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least 2 feet above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the Community Building Inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Flood Plain Administrator. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.550 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
A.  All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE will either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 9.26.430 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 9.26.540(A). 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.560 - Floodways. 
Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than 1 foot at any point within the City of Montclair. 
B.  Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the City of Montclair shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
C.  If subsections A and B of this section are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article V. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
Article VI. - Variance Procedure 
 
9.26.610 - Nature of variances. 
The issuance of a variance is for flood plain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance. 
The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the Flood Ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.620 - Conditions for variances. 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the procedures of Articles IV and V of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Article II of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the City Council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City Council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
E.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
1.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as Twenty-Five (25) Dollars for One Hundred (100) Dollars of insurance coverage; and 
2.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Flood Plain Administrator in the Office of the San Bernardino County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
F.  The Flood Plain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
9.26.630 - Appeal board. 
A.  In passing upon requests for variances, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the: 
1.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
4.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for that area; 
9.  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; 
11.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
B.  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
1.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" to the applicant; 
3.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see "Public safety and nuisance"), cause "fraud and victimization" of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
C.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections A through D, inclusive, are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
D.  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 9.26.620(A) and the purposes of this chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-904 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 9.28 - TREES 
Sections: 
 
9.28.010 - Adoption of Tree Policy. 
There is adopted by the City Council for the purpose of the protection and preservation of trees planted within the City rights-of-way and at City facilities that document entitled "Tree Policy" incorporated in the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A. 
(Prior code § 7-4.01)  
Chapter 9.29 - SIDEWALK VENDING 
 
9.29.010 - Purpose. 
The City finds that the vending of prepared or pre-packaged foods, goods, and/or wares at semi-permanent locations on public sidewalks and rights-of-way may pose unsafe conditions and special dangers to the public health, safety, and welfare of residents and visitors. The purpose of this chapter is to implement regulations on both roaming and stationary sidewalk vending that protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community while complying with the requirements of general state law, as amended from time to time, to promote safe vending practices, prevent safety, traffic, and health hazards, and preserve the public peace, safety, and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 18-978-U, § 5, 12-17-18)  
9.29.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions apply: 
Certified farmers' market means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter. 
City means the City of Montclair. 
Park means a public park owned by the City. 
Pathway means a paved path or walkway owned by the City or other public entity that is specifically designed for pedestrian travel, other than a sidewalk. 
Person means and includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnership of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts Trust, business or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the City. 
Roaming sidewalk vendor or vending means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation specifically designed for pedestrian travel that is owned by the City or other public entity. 
Sidewalk vendor or vending means a person who sells, offers to sell, operates, engages in or carries on a food or merchandise vending business from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance, or from one's person, upon a public sidewalk or other public pedestrian path. 
Sidewalk vending activities or sidewalk vendor activity means actions that qualify a person as a sidewalk vendor or actions done in anticipation of becoming a sidewalk vendor such as, but not limited to, placement, or maintenance of any sidewalk vendor receptacles. 
Sidewalk vending receptacle or sidewalk vendor receptacle means a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance used for sidewalk vending activities. 
Stationary sidewalk vendor means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location. 
Swap meet means a location operated in accordance with Article 6 (commencing with Section 21660) of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that article. 
Temporary special event means a temporary outdoor celebration, ceremony, reception, function, or festival, involving a gathering of people which occurs only periodically that is conducted pursuant to Chapter 11.68 of the Montclair Municipal Code or that is conducted by a neighborhood, City, or school on public property, or by a church, or civic group on privately owned property where all other appropriate permits are obtained, if applicable, such as encroachment permits, County Health Department permits, and/or a California seller's permit with the sales tax number issued by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration to the vendor. The temporary event shall be limited to no more than three consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 18-978-U, § 5, 12-17-18)  
9.29.030 - Permits required. 
A.  In order to better serve the public welfare, all sidewalk vendors shall, first apply for and then obtain a sidewalk vending permit from the Finance Director or Finance Director's designee prior to engaging in any sidewalk vending activities. Permits are required for the purpose of determining that an overconcentration of vendors will not occur in a location that may lead to unsafe vending practices, safety concerns, and traffic and sidewalk congestion and for matters of public health to determine where specific vendors selling food goods may be located in the event of reports of food contamination. 
A written application for a sidewalk vendor permit shall be filed with the Finance Director, or Finance's designee, on a form provided by the City. 
The following information shall be required: 
1.  Name, current mailing address, and phone number of the vendor; 
2.  If the vendor is an agent of an individual, company, partnership, or corporation, the name and business address of the principal who will be in charge of any roaming or stationery sidewalk vendors, sidewalk vending activity and/or be responsible for the persons(s) working at the sidewalk vending receptacle; 
3.  The name, address, and telephone number of all persons that will be employed as roaming or stationery sidewalk vendors or at a sidewalk vending receptacle; 
4.  The number of sidewalk vending receptacles the sidewalk vendor will operate within the City under the permit; 
5.  Whether the vendor intends to operate as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor and, if roaming, the intended path of travel; 
6.  The location(s) in the City where the stationary sidewalk vendor intends to operate and a description or site plan map of the proposed location(s) where vending will take place, showing that the sidewalk location maintains a minimum of 36 inches of accessible route area, in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act; 
7.  The day(s) and hours of operation the sidewalk vendor intends to operate at such location(s); 
8.  The dimensions of the sidewalk vendor's sidewalk vending receptacle(s) including a picture of each sidewalk vending receptacle operating under the permit and any signs that will be affixed thereto; 
9.  If the sidewalk vendor is selling merchandise, a description of the merchandise/goods to be offered for sale or exchange; 
10.  If the sidewalk is selling food, a description of the type of food to be sold, where such foods are prepared on site, whether such foods will require a heating element inside or on the sidewalk vending receptacle for food preparation, and the type of heating element, if any; 
11.  If the vendor is preparing or selling food, a copy of the County Health Department permit issued to the vendor; 
12.  A copy of the California seller's permit with the sales tax number issued by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration to the vendor; 
13.  A copy of the vendors Social Security card with the number; or 
A copy of the individual taxpayer identification number issued to the vendor; or 
A copy of a valid state identification issued to the vendor; 
14.  If the vendor proposes to be a stationary sidewalk vendor, an encroachment permit pursuant to Section 9.16.040 of the City of Montclair Municipal Code which must be obtained from the Public Works Department; 
15.  An acknowledgement that the sidewalk vendor will comply with all other generally applicable local, state, and federal laws; 
16.  A certification by the vendor that to his or her knowledge and belief, the information contained in the application is true; 
17.  An agreement by the sidewalk vendor to defend, indemnify, release and hold harmless the City, its City Council, boards, commissions, officers and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, obligations, damages, actions, causes of action, suits, losses, judgments, fines, penalties, liabilities, costs and expenses (including without limitation attorney's fees, disbursements and court costs) of every kind and nature whatsoever which may arise from or in any manner relate (directly or indirectly) to the permit or the vendor's sidewalk vending activities. This indemnification shall include, but not be limited to, damages awarded against the City, if any, costs of suit, attorneys' fees, and other expenses incurred in connection with such claim, action, or proceeding whether incurred by the permittee, City, and/or the parties initiating or bringing such proceeding; 
18.  An acknowledgement that use of public property is at the sidewalk vendor's own risk, the City does not take any steps to ensure public property is safe or conducive to the sidewalk vending activities, and the sidewalk vendor uses public property at their own risk; 
19.  An acknowledgement that the sidewalk vendor will obtain and maintain throughout the duration of the any permit issued under this Chapter, any insurance required by the City's Risk Manager in consultation with advice from the City's insurance carriers; 
20.  Any other relevant information required by the Finance Director, or the Finance Director's designee. 
B.  Prior to the issuance of a sidewalk vendor permit, the applicant shall obtain and shall cause to be filed with the Executive Director of Public Safety/Chief of Police or his or her designee a LiveScan background check administered through the Police Department and conducted by the California Department of Justice within the previous six months of the application date. 
The vendor and any employee of a person proposed to conduct sidewalk vending from a sidewalk vending receptacle must obtain a LiveScan background check prior to conducting any sidewalk vending activities. 
C.  At the time the application or renewal application is filed, the applicant shall pay the permit processing fee established by separate resolution of the City Council. Such fee is necessary to recover service costs, and to document the location(s) and number of street vendors to prevent an overconcentration of vendors in parks, streets and at school locations and for other matters of public safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 18-978-U, § 5, 12-17-18)  
9.29.040 - Review of permit application; decision. 
A.  Upon acceptance of a properly completed and filed sidewalk vendor permit application filed with the Finance Director and receipt of an acceptable LiveScan report issued by the Department of Justice, the Executive Director of Public Safety/Police Chief or his or her designee shall conduct a preliminary investigation to determine compliance with this chapter and shall make such determination within no more than 60 days of acceptance to approve or deny the application. The Executive Director of Public Safety/Police Chief or his or her designee shall provide the applicant with written notice of his or her decision to the address indicated in the application. 
B.  The Executive Director of Public Safety/Police Chief or his or her designee may deny an application for a permit if he or she makes any of the following findings: 
1.  The applicant has failed to pay the application permit fee. 
2.  The applicant has made one or more material misstatements in the application for a permit. 
3.  The applicant does not have either a valid social security card, valid state identification; or valid individual taxpayer identification number. 
4.  The applicant's vending operation, as described in the application, is inconsistent with the standards, conditions, and requirements of this chapter. 
5.  The applicant is required to register under the provisions of California Penal Code Section 290. 
6.  Within three years of the date of the application, the applicant has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction or pled nolo contendere to any felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058, or at the time of application is on probation or parole for any offenses set forth in this section for an offense that was committed within three years of the date of the application. 
7.  It is determined that the applicant does not possess all federal, state, and local permits and licenses necessary to engage in the activity in which he or she seeks to engage. 
8.  It is determined that the applicant has been convicted of a crime in the last three years involving the commission of any act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit with the intent to benefit himself or another pursuant to Section 475 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
C.  If the application is denied, the reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be notified that his or her application is denied and that no permit will be issued. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form. 
D.  If the Executive Director of Public Safety/Police Chief or his or her designee approves the applicant's permit, he or she shall endorse his or her approval on the application and shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, deliver the permit to the applicant. 
E.  During all hours of vending, each individual engaged in sidewalk vending shall wear an identification badge issued by the Executive Director of Public Safety/Police Chief or his or her designee. The identification badge shall be worn approximately chest-high on the vendor's outermost garment, in a location visible to customers and City inspectors. The sidewalk vendor identification badge shall be maintained in good and readable condition at all times. 
F.  In order to obtain an identification badge, each individual engaged in sidewalk vending must have their photograph taken by the Police Department to be used for the issuance of the identification badge. A nonrefundable and non-appealable fee, set by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid for the issuance of a sidewalk vendor identification badge and replacement of a lost, stolen, or damaged sidewalk vendor identification badge. 
G.  Exemptions. A sidewalk vending permit shall not be required for the following activities: 
1.  The sale of agriculture products on the site where the product is grown. 
2.  Catering for private parties held exclusively on private property and not open to the general public. 
3.  Events, including City-sponsored and/or City-approved events and other events permitted pursuant to a lawfully issued temporary event permit including but not limited to a certified farmers' market, swap meet, street fairs, outdoor concerts, sport league opening day, and business sidewalk sales. 
H.  Term of Permit. A sidewalk vending permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall automatically expire one year from the date issued, unless an earlier expiration date is noted on the permit. 
I.  Transferability. A sidewalk vending permit shall not be transferable to any other entity or person and is valid only as to the original applicant for the term stated. 
(Ord. No. 18-978-U, § 5, 12-17-18)  
9.29.050 - Stationary sidewalk vending locations and standards. 
A.  Stationary sidewalk vendors shall be prohibited from operating or establishing in any residential zone of the City, including R1-Single Family Residential, R2-Two Family Residential, R3-Multiple Family Residential, and any area within in a Specific Plan zoning designation that contains residential land use. 
B.  In addition, the City Council finds that there are unique design and access limitation on certain public properties containing internal pedestrian paths that prevent stationary sidewalk vendors from operating in them without detrimentally affecting the public health, safety, and welfare. Among these are areas with high pedestrian traffic and use characteristics where stationary sidewalk vending is incompatible with high pedestrian traffic volumes, while still leaving sufficient access to allow disabled and emergency personnel to access all portions of these facilities. These facilities include the Civic Center and the Montclair Transcenter. The Civic Center complex is located at 5111 Benito Street and the Montclair Transcenter is approximately 19 acres located on the Richton Street and Monte Vista Avenue. The boundaries of this area are shown in the attached Exhibit A. 
C.  Stationary sidewalk vendors may operate in non-residential zones of the City, including mixed use zones that do not contain residential dwelling units, provided they meet the following: 
1.  The sidewalk vendor is duly licensed and meets all requirements of Section 9.29.030; 
2.  The sidewalk vendor can set up their vending operation while still leaving a minimum of 36 inches of accessible path of travel, without obstruction, along the public sidewalk or public pathway; 
3.  Sidewalk vending hours shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of every day; 
4.  All food and merchandise shall be stored either inside or affixed to the sidewalk vendor receptacle or carried by the sidewalk vendor. Food and merchandise shall not be stored, placed or kept on any public property; 
5.  Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not touch, lean against or be affixed at any time to any building or structure including, but not limited to, lampposts, signs, mailboxes, traffic signals, fire hydrants, benches, bus shelters, newsstands, trashcans, or traffic barriers; 
6.  Sidewalk vendor may not store the vendor receptacle on public property and sidewalk vendor must remove sidewalk vending receptacle from the sidewalk at the close of business each day; 
7.  The sidewalk vendor must maintain the vending area in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition; 
8.  Sidewalk vendors shall not leave their sidewalk vending receptacle unattended to solicit business for their sidewalk vending activities; 
9.  For the safety, health, and sanitation of the public, vendor may not offer, sell, use or vend any live animal(s); 
10.  Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in the sale of alcohol, cannabis or cannabis products, adult oriented material, tobacco products, products that contain nicotine or products used to smoke/vape nicotine or fireworks products pursuant to Sections 11.11.050 and 6.14.020; 
11.  The sidewalk vendor shall not block entrances to buildings, driveways, parking spaces, or building windows; 
12.  No vending shall occur within 20 feet of a fire hydrant, fire escape, mailbox, bus stop, any curb designated as white, yellow, green, blue, red, or a bus zone, a handicapped parking space, or access ramp, automated teller machine, entry or exit to a building, trash receptacle, bike rack, bench, public, or private driveway, or other item of public use; 
13.  No vending shall occur within 30 feet of any street intersection, alley or sidewalk to prevent visual obstructions at street, alley and freeway intersections; 
14.  Vendors must maintain a separation of 25 feet from the next street vendor to prevent sidewalk congestion and allow room for queuing; 
15.  Vending must occur on the paved surface of the sidewalk; vendors may not stand, display, or place vending receptacle within any landscaped, or unpaved surface for the safety of the vendor and public walking or standing on an uneven surface and to prevent damage to landscaping within parkways, right-of-ways or other property; 
16.  Vending transactions may not occur with a customer in an operating vehicle or in a traffic lane. Vendor may not distribute goods or food to a customer from the face of the curb into parked vehicles; 
17.  No tables, chairs, fences, shade structures, umbrellas, other site furniture, rugs, towels, fabric of any kind laid directly on the sidewalk for the display of goods, or any freestanding signs shall be permitted in conjunction with the vendors vending activities; 
18.  No vendor may use electronic devices, audio equipment, loudspeakers for the purpose of amplifying sound, selling by public outcry or yelling to promote sales pursuant to Section 6.12.100; 
19.  Sidewalk vendor shall not advertise any product or service that is not related to the food or merchandise being offered for immediate sale; 
20.  Sidewalk vendor may not block or impede the path of the person(s) being offered food or merchandise to purchase; 
21.  The vendor shall not attach or use any water lines, electrical lines, or gas lines during vending operations; 
22.  Exterior storage or display of refuse, equipment, materials, goods, wares, or merchandise associated with the vendor is prohibited; 
23.  For public safety and visibility, a vending receptacle and any attachments thereto, including umbrellas or shade canopies, shall not exceed an overall height of five feet including depth of four feet and length of five feet unless a variance to these standards is necessary pursuant to regulations of the County of San Bernardino Health Department and may not include attachments such as balloons, streamers, ribbons, pinwheels, flags, and other visual marketing aids; 
24.  All signage and advertising related in any way to the sidewalk vendor shall be attached to the sidewalk vending receptacle, if any, or the sidewalk vendor's person. Sidewalk vendors shall not use any electrical, flashing, wind powered or animated signage; 
25.  An open flame shall not be used on or within any sidewalk vending receptacle and no vending receptacle shall contain or use any explosive or hazardous material(s); 
26.  No vendor shall display or sell merchandise from the hood, trunk, bed, hatchback, or seats of a vehicle parked adjacent to the public right-of-way or in a parking lot; 
27.  No vending shall occur within 100 feet of a certified farmers' market, a swap meet, or an event held pursuant to a temporary special event permit to limit vehicular and pedestrian congestion from an overconcentration of vendors in a certified farmers' market area or an area where a temporary special event is occurring and to eliminate potential consumer confusion regarding the type and purpose of goods sold; 
28.  No vending shall occur within 100 feet of the Civic Center facilities, Montclair Transcenter, a fire station, police station, private or public school, place of worship, or child day-care facility; 
29.  Sidewalk vending shall not occur on any pathway dedicated for public use as a trail intended for recreational use of bicycles and other pedestrian-related forms of recreation; 
30.  No sidewalk vending receptacle may access a sidewalk or pathway by use of a motorized or animal-drawn vehicle rolling or driving over a curb, delineator, or through a parkway. 
(Ord. No. 18-978-U, § 5, 12-17-18)  
9.29.060 - Sidewalk vending in parks, certified farmers' markets. 
A.  Sidewalk vending of food or merchandise by roaming or stationary vendors shall be prohibited in any City park with a concession stand operated by a vendor under exclusive contract with the City selling similar food or merchandise, in a park where a temporary special event is occurring or in an area occupied by a certified farmer's market. 
B.  Sidewalk vending by roaming or stationary vendors shall not locate or stop a sidewalk vending receptacle within 100 feet of any public picnic area, playground area, playground equipment, sports field or sports court, skateboard park, shade structure, or gazebo. 
C.  Subject to Section 9.29.050(A), sidewalk vendors may operate in City Parks provided they meet the following: 
1.  The sidewalk vendor is duly licensed and meets all requirements of Section 9.29.030; 
2.  For stationary sidewalk vending, the sidewalk vendor can set up their vending operation while still leaving a minimum of 36 inches of accessible path of travel, without obstruction, along the public sidewalk or public pathway; 
3.  The sidewalk vendors may conduct business in parks no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and must cease operation one hour prior to the close of the park; 
4.  All food and merchandise shall be stored either inside or affixed to the sidewalk vendor receptacle or carried by the sidewalk vendor. Food and merchandise shall not be stored, placed, or kept on any public property; 
5.  Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not touch, lean against, or be affixed at any time to any building or structure including, but not limited to lamp posts, signs, fire hydrants, benches, shade structures, gazebos, or trashcans; 
6.  Sidewalk vendor may not store the vendor receptacle in a public park and sidewalk vendor must remove sidewalk vending receptacle from the park at the close of business each day; 
7.  The sidewalk vendor must maintain the vending area in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition; 
8.  Sidewalk vendors shall not leave their sidewalk vending receptacle unattended to solicit business for their sidewalk vending activities; 
9.  For the safety, health, and sanitation of the public, vendor may not offer, sell, use, or vend any live animal(s); 
10.  Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in the sale of alcohol, cannabis or cannabis products, adult oriented material, tobacco products, products that contain nicotine or products used to smoke/vape nicotine, or fireworks products pursuant to Sections 11.11.050 and 6.14.020; 
11.  The sidewalk vendor location does not block entrances to buildings, driveways, parking spaces, building windows and does not block access to any park equipment, playing field, or park amenity; 
12.  No vending shall occur within 20 feet of a fire hydrant, any curb designated as white, yellow, green, blue, red, a handicapped parking space or access ramp, entry or exit to a building, trash receptacle, bike rack, bench or driveway or other item of public use; 
13.  Vendors must maintain a separation of 25 feet from the next street vendor to prevent sidewalk congestion and allow room for queuing; 
14.  Vending must occur on the paved surface of the sidewalk; vendors may not stand, display, or place sidewalk vending receptacle within any landscaped or unpaved surface for the safety of the vendor and public walking or standing on an uneven surface and to prevent damage to park landscaping; 
15.  No tables, chairs, fences, shade structures, umbrellas, other site furniture, rugs, towels, fabric of any kind laid directly on the sidewalk for the display of goods or any freestanding signs shall be permitted in conjunction with the vendors vending activities; 
16.  No vendor may use electronic devices, audio equipment, loudspeakers for the purpose of amplifying sound, selling by public outcry, or yelling to promote sales pursuant to Section 6.12.100; 
17.  Sidewalk vendor shall not advertise any product or service that is not related to the food or merchandise being offered for immediate sale; 
18.  Sidewalk vendor may not block or impede the path of the person(s) being offered food or merchandise to purchase; 
19.  The vendor shall not attach or use any water lines, electrical lines, or gas lines during vending operations; 
20.  Exterior storage or display of refuse, equipment, materials, goods, wares, or merchandise associated with the vendor is prohibited; 
21.  For public safety and visibility, a vending receptacle and any attachments thereto, including umbrellas and shade canopies, shall not exceed an overall height of five feet including width of four feet and length of five feet unless a variance to these standards is necessary pursuant to regulations of the County of San Bernardino Health Department and may not include attachments such as balloons, streamers, ribbons, pinwheels, flags, and other visual marketing aids; 
22.  All signage and advertising related in any way to the sidewalk vendor shall be attached to the sidewalk vending receptacle, if any, or the sidewalk vendor's person. Sidewalk vendors shall not use any electrical, flashing, wind powered, human or animated signage; 
23.  An open flame shall not be used on or within any sidewalk vending receptacle and no vending receptacle shall contain or use any explosive or hazardous material(s); and 
24.  No vending shall occur within the immediate vicinity of an event held pursuant to a temporary special event permit or a certified farmers' market. 
(Ord. No. 18-978-U, § 5, 12-17-18)  
9.29.070 - Roaming sidewalk vending. 
A.  Roaming sidewalk vendors shall meet the following: 
1.  The sidewalk vendor is duly licensed and meets all requirements of section 9.29.030; 
2.  Sidewalk vending hours for residential zones shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and no later than 30 minutes after sundown; 
3.  Sidewalk vending hours for non-residential zones shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of every day; 
4.  All food and merchandise shall be stored either inside or affixed to the sidewalk vendor receptacle or carried by the sidewalk vendor. Food and merchandise shall not be stored, placed, or kept on any public property; 
5.  Sidewalk vendor may not store the vendor receptacle on public property and sidewalk vendor must remove sidewalk vending receptacle from the sidewalk at the close of business each day; 
6.  When conducting a transaction, the sidewalk vendor must leave the area of the transaction in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition; 
7.  Sidewalk vendors shall not leave their sidewalk vending receptacle unattended to solicit business for their sidewalk vending activities; 
8.  For the safety, health and sanitation of the public, vendor may not offer, sell, use or vend any live animal(s); 
9.  Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in the sale of alcohol, cannabis or cannabis products, adult oriented material, tobacco products, products that contain nicotine or products used to smoke/vape nicotine or fireworks products pursuant to Sections 11.11.050 and 6.14.020; 
10.  A sidewalk vendor shall not block an entrance to a building, driveway, parking space, or building window when stopped to conduct a transaction; 
11.  No vendor shall conduct a transaction within 20 feet of a fire hydrant, fire escape, mailbox, bus stop, any curb designated as white, yellow, green, blue, red, handicapped parking space, or access ramp, automated teller machine, entry or exit to a building, trash receptacle, bike rack, bus stop, bench or public or private driveway or other item of public use when stopped to conduct a transaction; 
12.  No vendor shall conduct a transaction within 30 feet of any street corner or alley to prevent visual obstructions at street, alley, and freeway intersections; 
13.  When stopped to conduct a transaction, vending must occur on the paved surface of the sidewalk, unless no sidewalk exists. When no walkway exists, vendor may conduct the transaction within a paved or unpaved public right-of-way area out of the way of oncoming traffic; vendors may not conduct a transaction, stand, display, or place a vending receptacle in a landscaped area within a parkways, a right-of-way, or other private or public property; 
14.  Vending transactions may not occur with a customer in an operating vehicle or in a traffic lane. Vendor may not distribute goods or food to a customer from the face of the curb into parked vehicles; 
15.  No vendor may use electronic devices, audio equipment, loudspeakers for the purpose of amplifying sound, selling by public outcry or yelling to promote sales pursuant to Section 6.12.100; 
16.  Sidewalk vendor shall not advertise any product or service that is not related to the food or merchandise being offered for immediate sale; 
17.  Sidewalk vendor may not block or impede the path of the person(s) being offered food or merchandise to purchase; 
18.  Exterior storage or display of refuse, equipment, materials, goods, wares, or merchandise associated with the vendor is prohibited; 
19.  For public safety and visibility, a vending receptacle and any attachments thereto, including umbrellas and shade canopies, shall not exceed an overall height of five feet including width of four feet and length of five feet unless a variance to these standards is necessary pursuant to regulations of the County of San Bernardino Health Department and may not include attachments such as balloons, streamers, ribbons, pinwheels, flags, and other visual marketing aids; 
20.  All signage and advertising related in any way to the sidewalk vendor shall be attached to the sidewalk vending receptacle, if any, or the sidewalk vendor's person. Sidewalk vendors shall not use any electrical, flashing, wind powered or animated signage; 
21.  An open flame shall not be used on or within any sidewalk vending receptacle and no vending receptacle shall contain or use any explosive or hazardous material(s); 
22.  No vending shall occur within 100 feet of a certified farmers' market, a swap meet, or an event held pursuant to a temporary special event permit to limit vehicular and pedestrian congestion from an overconcentration of vendors in a certified farmers' market area, swap meet, or an area where a temporary special event is occurring and to eliminate potential consumer confusion regarding the type and purpose of goods sold; 
23.  No vending shall occur within 100 feet of the Civic Center facilities, a fire station, police station, private or public school, place of worship, or child daycare facility; 
24.  Sidewalk vending shall not occur on any pathway dedicated for public use as a trail intended for recreational use of bicycles and other pedestrian-related forms of recreation. 
(Ord. No. 18-978-U, § 5, 12-17-18)  
9.29.080 - Suspension; rescission. 
A.  For the protection and safety of the public, a sidewalk vendor permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or rescinded by the Executive Director of Public Safety/Police Chief or his or her designee after four or more violations of this chapter in accordance with Section 9.29.100 of this chapter, at their discretion, or for any of the following causes: 
1.  Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of vending; 
2.  Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the permit; or 
3.  Vending in a manner that creates a public nuisance or constitutes a danger to the public. 
B.  Notice of the suspension or rescission of a sidewalk vendor permit issued under chapter shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the holder of the sidewalk vendor permit at the address shown on the permit application form. 
C.  No person whose street vending permit has been revoked pursuant to this chapter shall be issued a street vending permit for a period of two years from the date revocation becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 18-978-U, § 5, 12-17-18)  
9.29.090 - Appeals to City Manager. 
In the event that any applicant or permittee desires to appeal from any order, rescission, or other ruling of the Executive Director of Public Safety/Police Chief or his or her designee made under the provisions of this chapter, such applicant or any other person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal such action or decision to the City Manager within 15 days after the notice of the action or decision has been mailed to the person's address as shown on the permit application. An appeal shall be taken by filing with the Office of the City Manager a written appeal statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal, along with the City's appeal fee, which shall be established by resolution of the City Council. The filing of the appeal shall stay the enforcement of any decision suspending or rescinding the permit. The Executive Director of Public Safety/Chief of Police or his or her designee shall transmit the written statement to the City Manager within 10 days of its filing and payment of the appeal fee, and the City Manager shall set a time and place for a hearing on appeal. A hearing shall be set not later than 60 days from the date of filing of the applicant's written appeal statement with the police department. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided for the mailing of notice of suspension or rescission at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. At the hearing, the permittee and the City shall be entitled to legal representation and may present relevant evidence, testify under oath, and call witnesses who shall testify under oath. The City Manager shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in a hearing, except that hearsay evidence may not be the sole basis for the decision of the City Manager. The City Manager may continue the hearing as deemed necessary. The decision of the City Manager, or his or her designee, on the appeal shall be final and binding on all parties concerned. 
(Ord. No. 18-978-U, § 5, 12-17-18)  
9.29.100 - Penalties. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any requirements of this chapter. A violation of this chapter shall by punished by: 
1.  An administrative fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation. 
2.  An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one year of the first violation. 
3.  An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within one year of the first violation. 
B.  A violation of vending without a sidewalk vending permit may, in lieu of the penalties set forth in subsection A, set forth above, be punished by: 
1.  An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first violation. 
2.  An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second violation within one year of the first violation. 
3.  An administrative fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional violation within one year of the first violation. 
C.  If an individual is subject to subsection B, set forth above, for vending without a sidewalk vending permit, upon the individual providing proof of a valid permit issued by the City, the administrative fines set forth in this chapter shall be reduced to the administrative fines set forth in subsection A, respectively. 
D.  The proceeds of any administrative fines assessed pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the treasury of the City. 
E.  Failure to pay an administrative fine assessed under this chapter shall not be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor. Additional fines, fees, assessments, or any other financial conditions beyond those authorized in this chapter shall not be assessed. 
F.  Any violation of this chapter shall not be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor, and any person alleged to have violated any provisions of this chapter shall not be subject to arrest except when otherwise permitted under law. 
G.  When assessing an administrative fine pursuant to this chapter, the adjudicator shall take into consideration the person's ability to pay the fine. The City shall provide the person with notice of his or her right to request an ability-to-pay determination and shall make available instructions or other materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination. The person may request an ability-to-pay determination at adjudication or while the judgment remains unpaid, including when a case is delinquent or has been referred to a comprehensive collection program. 
1.  If the person meets the criteria described in subdivision (a) or (b) of Government Code Section 68632, the City shall accept, in full satisfaction, 20 percent of the administrative fine imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
2.  The City may allow the person to complete community service in lieu of paying the total administrative fine, may waive the administrative fine, or may offer an alternative disposition. 
H.  A person who is currently serving, or who completed, a sentence, or who is subject to a fine, for a conviction of a misdemeanor or infraction for sidewalk vending, whether by trial or by open or negotiated plea, who would not have been guilty of that offense under SB 946 had SB 946 been in effect at the time of the offense, may petition for dismissal of the sentence, fine, or conviction before the trial court that entered the judgment of conviction in his or her case. 
(Ord. No. 18-978-U, § 5, 12-17-18)  
Chapter 9.105 - SMALL CELL FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
Sections: 
 
9.105.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and standards, consistent with all applicable federal, state, and local laws for small cell facilities and eligible facilities requests in the City's public right-of-way and to ensure that facilities are carefully located, designed, constructed, modified, maintained, unified, and removed when no longer in use in conformance with all applicable health, safety, and welfare regulations. 
A.  Exemptions. 
1.  In the event that there is an emergency, disaster, special event, or other extenuating circumstances, the Community Development Director may exempt from the requirements of this chapter the installation of a "cell on wheels," "cell on truck," or a similar structure for a temporary period in connection with the emergency or event, but no longer than required for the emergency or event, provided that installation does not involve excavation, movement, or removal of existing facilities. 
2.  The placement or modification of wireless facilities by the City or by any other agency of the state solely for public safety purposes. 
(Ord. No. 19-980, § III, 3-18-19)  
9.105.020 - General requirements. 
The following requirements shall apply to wireless facilities, as defined in Section 9.02.020 of the Montclair Municipal Code, which are proposed for installation within the public right-of-way: 
A.  The permitting procedures and authorizations set forth in this chapter shall apply only to small cell facilities and eligible facilities requests in the public right-of-way. Except for small cell facilities, facilities qualifying as eligible facilities requests, exempt facilities, or any other type of facility expressly allowed in the public right-of-way by state or federal law, no other wireless facilities shall be permitted pursuant to this Chapter. 
B.  No person shall occupy or use the public right-of-way without first obtaining City approval and appropriate permit(s), per the provisions of Chapter 9.105 of the Montclair Municipal Code, and any requisite consent of the City. Before placing wireless facilities in the public right-of-way (other than exempt facilities), an applicant must apply for and receive all necessary approvals and permits, including, but not limited to, a general encroachment permit for work within public right-of-way as provided under Chapter 9 of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
C.  In occupying or using the public right-of-way, no person shall compromise the public health, safety, and welfare. 
D.  Nothing in this chapter precludes the City from applying its generally applicable health, safety, and welfare regulations when granting a permit for a wireless facility in the City's public right-of-way. 
E.  Any wireless facility already existing in the public right-of-way as of the date of this Chapter's adoption shall remain subject to the provisions of the Montclair Municipal Code in effect prior to this Chapter, unless and until a renewal of such then-existing permit is granted, at which time the provisions of this Chapter shall apply in full force going forward as to such facility. The review of any request for a renewal of a permit for such pre-existing wireless facilities shall be conducted pursuant to this Chapter, rather than the portion(s) of the Municipal Code under which it was previously reviewed. 
(Ord. No. 19-980, § III, 3-18-19)  
9.105.030 - Administration. 
Community Development Director ("the Director") or his or her designee is responsible for administering this Chapter. As part of the administration of this Chapter, the Director may: 
A.  Interpret the provisions of this Chapter and the design standards; 
B.  Develop forms and procedures for submission of applications consistent with this Chapter; 
C.  Determine the amount of and collect, as a condition of the completeness of any application, any fee established by this Chapter in accordance with applicable laws and regulations; 
D.  Establish deadlines for submission of information related to an application, and extend or shorten deadlines where appropriate and consistent with state and federal laws and regulations; 
E.  Issue any notices of incompleteness, requests for information, or conduct or commission such studies as may be required to determine whether a permit should be issued; 
F.  Require, as part of, and as a condition of completeness of any application, notice to members of the public that may be affected by the Application; and 
G.  Take such other steps as may be required to timely act upon applications, including issuing written decisions and entering into agreements to mutually extend the time for action on an application. 
(Ord. No. 19-980, § III, 3-18-19)  
9.105.040 - Application and approval process. 
A.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-submittal conference with City staff and potential applicants is strongly encouraged to discuss potential project applications on a conceptual level. 
B.  Application Required. Prior to installation, modification, relocation or removal of a wireless facility in the public right-of-way, the applicant shall apply to the City in-person and receive approval from the City. 
C.  Required Application Materials. An applicant shall submit an application on the form approved by the Community Development and Public Works Departments, which may be updated from time-to-time, but in any event shall require the submission of all required fee(s), documents, information, and any other materials necessary to allow the City to make required findings and ensure that the proposed facility will comply with applicable federal and state law and the Montclair Municipal Code, and will not endanger the public health safety, or welfare. Application forms shall be obtained from the Department of Community Development. 
D.  Application Processing Fee. An application processing fee shall be collected at the time an application is submitted for review and approval. The fee amount shall be in conformance with the limits prescribed by law and/or the established fee resolution of the City of Montclair. 
E.  Incompleteness. Applications will be processed to determine completeness and consistency with all applicable federal, state, and local laws. If an application is incomplete, the Community Development Department and/or Public Works Department shall notify the applicant in writing of the specific deficiencies with the submitted application and/or materials. 
F.  Application Approval. The final review and determination regarding a complete application shall be made by the Director. 
1.  Except for eligible facilities requests, the Director shall approve an application if, on the basis of the application and other materials or evidence provided in review thereof, they find the following: 
a.  Safety and compliance of the design of the proposed facilities, relevant structures, landscaping, luminaries and other site features which may include functional aspects of the site development, including compliance with any applicable design standards, as adopted by resolution of the City Council; and 
b.  Compliance with all applicable requirements and standards of state and federal law; and 
2.  For eligible facilities requests, the Director shall approve an application if, on the basis of the application and other materials or evidence provided in review thereof, it finds the following: 
a.  That the application qualifies as an eligible facilities request; and 
b.  That the proposed facility will comply with all generally applicable laws. 
3.  Application approval shall not be construed to waive standard permit fees for building or public works permits authorizing construction activities conducted within the City. 
4.  Decisions shall be in writing and include the reasons for the decision. 
5.  The Director is authorized, in his or her discretion, to select and retain independent consultant(s) with expertise in telecommunications in connection with the review of any application under this Chapter. Such independent consultant review may be retained on any issue that involves specialized or expert knowledge in connection with an application, including, but not limited to, application completeness or accuracy, structural engineering analysis, or compliance with FCC radio frequency emissions standards. 
(Ord. No. 19-980, § III, 3-18-19)  
9.105.050 - Design standards. 
The City Council shall adopt by resolution detailed design standards to provide guidance and a degree of consistency in the design of small cell facilities proposed for placement within the public right-of-way. The guidelines are not intended to dictate a one-size-fits-all approach for use at all times and/or for all potential locations, but to illustrate how small cell facilities can be aesthetically integrated into the existing public streetscape and neighborhood character with the least amount of adverse visual impact as possible. 
In the event that strict compliance with any provision contained in the approved design standards, as applied to a specific proposed small cell facility, would effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services, the Director may grant exceptions from strict compliance. All waivers approved pursuant to this subsection shall be (1) granted only on a case-by-case basis; and (2) narrowly-tailored to minimize deviation from the requirements of the adopted design standards. 
(Ord. No. 19-980, § III, 3-18-19)  
9.105.060 - Standard conditions of approval. 
All applications approved to install a small cell facility within the public right-of-way shall be subject to the following standard conditions of approval, in addition to any supplemental conditions imposed by the City and other sections of this Ordinance, unless modified by the Director: 
A.  Installation Time Frame. Approved small cell facilities within the public right-of-way shall be fully complete per approved plans within 180 days from the date of approval. 
1.  An applicant may submit a written request for a time extension to the Community Development Director for an extended time frame not to exceed 180 days from the last day of the previous approval time frame. 
2.  Requests for a time extension shall be submitted in writing to the Community Development Director at least ten calendar days prior to the expiration date of the initial small cell facility approval date. Requests for the time frame extension shall provide a reason for the delay. 
3.  Failure to complete the project within above specified periods shall deem the project approval null and void and require the removal of all work performed in the right-of-way or require the submittal of a new project application and payment of associated fees, including the cost for new building and/or public works permits. 
B.  Permit Duration. A small cell permit shall be valid for a period of ten years, unless pursuant to another provision of the Code or these conditions, it expires sooner or is terminated. At the end of ten years from the date of issuance, such permit shall automatically expire, unless an extension or renewal has been granted. A person holding a small cell permit must either (1) remove the small cell facility within 30 days following the permit's expiration (provided that removal of support structure owned by City, a utility, or another entity authorized to maintain a support structure in the right-of-way need not be removed, but must be restored to its prior condition, except as specifically permitted by the City); or (2) at least 90 days prior to expiration, submit an application to renew the small cell permit, which application must, among all other requirements, demonstrate that the impact of the small cell facility cannot be reduced. The small cell facility must remain in place until it is acted upon by the City and all appeals from the City's decision exhausted. 
C.  Other Permits Required. Upon the approval [of] a small cell facility application, and prior to the commencement of work in the public right-of-way, the applicant shall obtain all required public works and/or building permits to construct and/or install the approved small cell facility and pay all applicable fees. 
D.  Insurance. Permittees obtaining a permit to install a small cell facility in the public right-of-way, its successors and assigns, at its expense, and without cost to the City, shall procure and maintain a single limit commercial general liability insurance policy for bodily injury and property damage and general aggregate amount as determined by the City Risk Manager. All coverages are to be arranged on an occurrence basis and include coverage for those hazards normally identified during construction. All insurance coverage required herein shall be written in a form and by a company or companies reasonably approved by the Risk Manager of the City of Montclair and authorized to do business in the State of California. All such insurance policies shall be specifically endorsed to include all liability assumed by the permittee hereunder and shall name the City of Montclair as an additional insured as its interest may appear under this permit. 
E.  Transferability. The approval to operate a small cell facility within the public right-of-way may be transferred to a new person upon written notice to the City if no change to the physical configuration of the approved facility is proposed. A new person seeking to make changes to the physical components of an existing approved facility and/or desiring to upgrade to new technology may be subject to the requirement of submitting a new application and review process to utilize the subject location. 
F.  Emergency Contact and Access. The permittee shall provide a contact person and phone number where a live individual can contacted in the event of an emergency. In the event of an emergency, the City or its designee may enter onto the facility to inspect upon a 24 hours' notice to the permittee. The permittee shall cooperate with all inspections and may be present for any inspection of its facility by the City. The City reserves the right to enter or direct its designee to enter the facility and support, repair, disable, or remove any elements of the facility in emergencies or when the facility threatens imminent harm to persons or property. 
G.  Maintenance. The permittee shall continually maintain the appearance of all components related to the small cell facility or wireless support structure. A description of the anticipated maintenance and monitoring program for the antennae and back-up equipment, including frequency of maintenance services, back-up service plans for disruption of service due to repair, maintenance or monitoring activities shall be provided to the City and kept on file for reference at any time. 
H.  Generally Applicable Health and Safety Regulations. All small cell facilities shall be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained in compliance with all generally applicable federal, state, and local health and safety regulations, including, without limitation, all applicable regulations for human exposure to RF emissions. 
I.  No Liability. The City shall not be liable to the permittee by reason of inconvenience, annoyance, or injury to the small cell facilities and related ground or pole-mounted equipment or activities conducted by the permittee therefrom, arising from the necessity of repairing any portion of the public right-of-way, or from the making of any necessary alteration or improvements, in or to, any portion of the public right-of-way, or in, or to, City's fixtures, appurtenances, or equipment. 
J.  Signal Interference Prohibited. In the event that a permittee's small cell facility interferes with the public safety radio system, or the City's or State of California's traffic signal system, then the permittee shall, at its cost, immediately cooperate with the City to either rule out permittee as the interference source or eliminate the interference. Cooperation with the City may include, but shall not be limited to, temporarily switching the transmission equipment on and off for testing. 
K.  Annual Fee for Use of City-Owned Structures. For small cell facilities installed on City-owned structures, the permittee shall be required to pay the annual fee established in the master license agreement with the City. 
L.  Annual Certification. On or before January 15 th of every year after commencing operations, the Permittee shall submit written confirmation to the City that each facility is operating as approved. The certification shall indicate that the facility is operating as approved and that the facility complies with the most current FCC safety standards. 
M.  Indemnification. The permittee and, if applicable, the owner of the property on which the small cell facilities or wireless support structures in the public right-of-way are installed shall indemnify, protect, defend, and hold the City and its elected officials, officers, employees, agents, and volunteers harmless against any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, fees to include reasonable attorney fees and costs of defense, proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability and suits of any kind and nature, including personal or bodily injury or death, property damage or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought, to the extent that it is caused by the negligence of the permittee who owns or operates small cell facilities and wireless service in the public right-of-way, any agent, officer, director, representative, employee, affiliate, or subcontractor of the permittee, or their respective officers, agents, employees, directors, or representatives while installing, repairing, or maintaining facilities in the public right-of-way. 
N.  Surety Bond. All owners must procure and provide to the City a bond, or provide proof of an equivalent financial mechanism, to ensure compliance with all provisions of this Chapter. The bond must be maintained for as long as the owner has small cell facilities and/or wireless support structures located in the public right-of-way. The bond or equivalent financial method must specifically cover the cost of removal of unused or abandoned small cell facilities, wireless support structures, and all other related facilities and equipment, based on the greater of two contractors' quotes for removal that are provided by the permittee, and damage to City property caused by a permittee or its agent of each small cell facility and/or wireless support structure in case the City has to remove or pay for its removal. Two acceptable alternatives to a bond include a funds set-aside and a letter of credit. 
O.  Priority of City Right-of-Way Improvements. All small cell facilities located and/or utilizing existing structures, within the public right-of-way are subject to modification and/or relocation as the result of right-of-way improvements due to: 
1.  New development on private property requiring or conditioned to underground existing overhead wires and utility poles; or 
2.  Implementation of a City Council approved capital improvement project (CIP) necessitating removal or placement of existing overhead wires, utility poles, and/or other structures underground. 
P.  Relocation of a Small Cell Facility. The relocation of any small cell facility shall require the submittal and approval of a new project application and payment of associated processing and permit fees. 
Q.  City Removal for Safety and Imminent Danger Reasons. In the event that the installation or operation of a small cell facility is determined by the City Engineer or Building Official to pose an imminent danger to the public, health, safety, or welfare, then the City may: 
1.  Order the permittee to take immediate action, at the permittee's sole cost and expense, to remedy the dangerous condition(s), including the requirement to disconnect, remove, or relocate all, or a component of, the applicable small cell facility; or 
2.  Upon the failure of the permittee to promptly remedy the dangerous condition, the City, at the permittee's sole cost and expense, may take appropriate action to address the dangerous condition(s), including the disconnection, removal, or relocation of any component of the small cell. 
R.  Removal/Abandonment of Facilities. Any small cell facility that ceases to be operational for a period of more than 180 days, without due cause as approved by the City, shall be considered to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities shall, at the permittee's sole cost and expense, be removed in its entirety from the public right-of-way, with 60 days or notice from the City. 
S.  Restoration. The permittee shall repair, at its sole cost and expense, any damage to the public right-of-way, any facilities or landscaping located within the public right-of-way, and/or the property of any third party resulting from the permittee's installation, removal, or relocation activities (or any other of the permittee's activities hereunder) within ten calendar days following the date of such activities. Restoration of the public right-of-way and such property must be to substantially the same condition as it was immediately before the date that the permittee was granted a small cell permit for the applicable location, or did the work at such location (even if the permittee did not first obtain a small cell permit). This includes restoration or replacement of any damaged trees, shrubs, or other vegetation. Such repair, restoration, and replacement shall be subject to the approval of the Community Development Director and/or Public Works Director. 
T.  Changes in State or Federal Standards and Regulations. When required by any revised applicable state or federal standards and regulations, the owners of the small cell facilities governed by this chapter shall bring any facilities and/or structures into compliance with the revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of the standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the regulating agency. Failure to bring small cell facilities into compliance with any applicable revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for removal at the owner's expense. 
U.  Tree and Vegetation Trimming. The permittee and its contractors and agents shall obtain prior written permission from the City Public Works Director before removing or trimming any trees or other vegetation in the public right-of-way to install or maintain clearances for a small cell facility. When trimming trees or vegetation on private property, the permittee and its contractors and agents shall notify the City and obtain prior written permission from the affected property owner(s). Improper pruning or "topping" of trees is prohibited and may result in fines and/or require replacement of the tree, at the permittee's sole cost and expense, to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director. The City shall not be liable for any damages, injuries, or claims arising from the permittee's actions under this section. 
V.  Noise. The permittee is required to incorporate ambient noise suppression measures and/or to place the equipment in locations less likely to impact adjacent residences or businesses to ensure compliance with all applicable noise regulations. 
W.  Code Compliance. The permittee shall at all times maintain compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, regulations and other rules, including, without limitation, those applying to the use of public right-of-way. 
X.  No Waiver of Standing. The City's grant of a permit for a small cell facility request does not waive, and shall not be construed to waive, any standing by the City to challenge any FCC orders or rules related to small cell facilities, or any modification to those FCC orders or rules. 
(Ord. No. 19-980, § III, 3-18-19)  
9.105.070 - Standard conditions of approval—eligible facilities requests. 
In addition to the conditions imposed by the Director, all permits for an eligible facility requests granted pursuant to this Article shall be subject to the following additional conditions, unless modified by the Director: 
1.  Permit subject to conditions of underlying permit. Any permit granted in response to an application qualifying as an eligible facilities request shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the underlying permit. 
2.  No Permit Term Extension. The City's grant or grant by operation of law of an eligible facilities request permit constitutes a federally-mandated modification to the underlying permit or approval for the subject tower or base station. Notwithstanding any permit duration established in another permit condition, the City's grant or grant by operation of law of a eligible facilities request permit will not extend the permit term for the underlying permit or any other underlying regulatory approval, and its term shall be coterminous with the underlying permit or other regulatory approval for the subject tower or base station. 
3.  No Waiver of Standing. The City's grant or grant by operation of law of an eligible facilities request does not waive, and shall not be construed to waive, any standing by the City to challenge Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act, any FCC rules that interpret Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act, or any modification to Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act. 
(Ord. No. 19-980, § III, 3-18-19)  
9.105.080 - Effect of partial invalidity. 
The provisions of this Chapter are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section, subsection, or clause of this Chapter is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such a ruling shall not affect the other parts of this Chapter that can be given effect. 
(Ord. No. 19-980, § III, 3-18-19)  
9.105.090 - Penalty. 
The City Manager may excuse violations of this Chapter for reasons of force majeure. For purposes of this section, "force majeure" means a strike, acts of God, acts of public enemies, orders of any kind of a government of the United States of America or of the State of California or any of their departments, agencies, or political subdivisions; riots, epidemics, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, tornadoes, storms, floods, civil disturbances, explosions, partial or entire failure of utilities or any other cause or event not reasonably within the control of the permittee, but only to the extent the disabled party notifies the other party as soon as practicable regarding such force majeure and then for only so long as and to the extent that the force majeure prevents compliance or causes non-compliance with the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 19-980, § III, 3-18-19)  
Title 10 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.02 - DEFINITIONS 
 
10.02.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this title: 
Abandoned means real property that is vacant and that meets any of the following conditions: 
1.  Is under a current notice of default. 
2.  Is under a current notice of trustee's sale. 
3.  Is pending a tax assessor's lien sale. 
4.  Has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure. 
5.  Has been transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
Accessible property means any property that is accessible through a gate, fence, wall, or other barrier that is broken, unlocked, unsecured, or otherwise missing or lacking. 
Accessible structure means a building or structure (as defined by the Building Code) that is unsecured in any manner that could allow access to the interior of the building or structure by unauthorized persons. 
Agreement means any agreement or written instrument which provides that title to real property shall be transferred or conveyed from one owner to another in any manner (whether by sale, gift, exchange, transfer, partition, assignation, placement in a trust, or any other method). 
Assignment of rents means an instrument that transfers the beneficial interest under a deed of trust from one lender or entity to another. 
Bank of elevators means a group of elevators or a single elevator controlled by a common operating system; that is, all those elevators which respond to a single call button constitute a bank of elevators. There is no limit on the number of cars which may be in a bank or group, but there may be not more than four carts within a common hoist way. 
Beneficiary means a lender or holder of a note secured by a deed of trust. 
Building access means an exterior door opening conforming to all of the following: 
1.  Suitable and available for Fire Department use; 
2.  Located not more than two feet above the adjacent ground level; 
3.  Leading to a space, room or area having foot traffic communication capabilities with the remainder of the building; 
4.  Designed to permit penetration through the use of Fire Department forcible-entry tools and equipment unless other approved arrangements have been made with the fire authority having jurisdiction. 
Bureau of Fire Prevention means "Office of the Fire Marshal." 
Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention means "Fire Marshal." 
City means the City of Montclair. 
Deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale means a recorded document that transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust. 
Deed of trust means an instrument by which an interest in title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan (and often used in California instead of a mortgage). This definition applies to any and all subsequent deeds of trust (e.g., second deed of trust, third deed of trust). 
Default means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary or conditional. 
Distressed means a property that meets any of the following conditions: 
1.  Is under a current notice of default. 
2.  Is under a current notice of trustee's sale. 
3.  Is pending a tax assessor's lien sale. 
4.  Has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure. 
5.  Has been transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions shall include, but shall not be limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, and/or mail; past-due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk, and/or other debris; the absence of window coverings, such as curtains, blinds, and/or shutters; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items and/or commercial furnishings consistent with the permitted residential or commercial uses of the real property; or statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, or government employees that the property is vacant. 
Fence means any structure forming a physical barrier which is so constructed that not less than 50 percent of the vertical surface is open to permit the transmission of light, air and vision through such surface in a horizontal plane and shall include wire, mesh, steel mesh, chain link, louvered, stake, and other similar materials. 
Fire control center means a central location within a high-rise building for Fire Department operations and monitoring of such systems and equipment as required in this title. For the purpose of this section, fire control center also means fire command center. 
Foreclosure means the process by which real property is sold to satisfy a debt. 
Hedge , when applied to fences, walls and hedges, means a plant or series of plants or landscape materials which form a physical barrier or enclosure. 
High-rise building , in other than Group 1-2 occupancies, means every building of any type of construction or occupancy having floors used for human occupancy located more than 45 feet above the lowest floor level having building access (see California Building Code Section 403.1.2), except buildings used as hospitals as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 1250. 
Immediate neighborhood , when applied to property appearance, means the subject parcel of property, all parcels adjacent thereto, any parcel(s) or portions thereof located across any street bordering the subject parcel, all parcels adjacent thereto, and any other parcel from which the particular nuisance condition in question is visible. 
Jurisdiction , as used in the California Fire Code, means the City of Montclair. 
Local means within 40 driving miles distance of the subject property. 
Notice of default means a recorded notice that a default has occurred under deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's sale and/or other foreclosure proceeding. 
Out-of-area means not within 40 driving miles distance of the subject property. 
Owner means any person having legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property. 
Owner of record means the person having title to the property at any given point in time as recorded with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office. 
Person means and include any individual, partnership of any kind, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture, or other organization, however formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns or any combination of such persons. "Person" also includes any public entity or agency that acts as an owner in the City. 
Personal property means property that is not real property, and includes, without limitation, any appliance, article, device, equipment, item, material, product, substance, or vehicle. 
Real property means any improved or unimproved real property owned by any person and/or any building, structure, or other improvement thereon, or any portions thereof. 
Responsible party means any person that has title to or control over real property. "Responsible party" includes, but is not limited to, owners, owners of record, beneficiaries, lien holders, trustees, servicing companies, real estate agents, and property management companies as well as any person acting on behalf of another responsible party. 
Securing means and include such measures as may be directed by Fire Chief (or designee thereof) that assist in rendering real property inaccessible to unauthorized persons including, but not limited to, the repair of fences, walls, and other barriers; chaining or padlocking of gates; and/or the repair or boarding of doors, windows, and/or other openings. The boarding of any window, door, or other opening shall be completed to a minimum of the current United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) securing standards at the time the boarding is completed or required and shall be consistent with the requirements of this chapter. 
Trash containers , when applied to property appearance, means any container such as trash bags, boxes or bins used to store trash, rubbish or other such refuse matter that meets the requirements of Section 6.16.020 of this Code and is placed at a collection point. 
Trustee means the person holding a deed of trust on real property. 
Trustor means a borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt. 
Vacant means real property and any building or structure thereon that is not legally occupied. 
Wall means any structure or device forming a physical barrier which is so constructed that 50 percent or more of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of light, air and vision through such surface in a horizontal plane and shall include concrete, concrete block, or other materials which are solids and are so assembled as to form a solid barrier. 
(Ord. 00-796 § 1; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code §§ 4-3.103, 4-3.302, 5-20.01, 8-4.01) 
(Ord. No. 08-906, § 1, 1-5-09; Ord. No. 10-913, § 2, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 10-919, § 1, 1-3-11; Ord. No. 13-939, § 1, 1-6-14; Ord. No. 17-964, § 1, 2-21-17)  
Chapter 10.04 - UNIFORM CODES FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS*[] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior code history: Prior code Section 8-14.02. 
 
10.04.010 - Adoption. 
That certain document in book form entitled "Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings," 1997 Edition, as prepared and published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, is referred to and by such reference incorporated in this chapter and adopted as a supplement to the Building Code of the City. One copy of the Code, certified by the City Clerk of the City, shall be filed and will be kept on file for use and examination by the public in the Office of the Keeper of Records Office in the City. 
(Ord. 02-825 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): Ord. 99-789 § 1 (part); prior code § 8-14.01)  
Chapter 10.08 - BUILDING CODE 
 
10.08.010 - Adoption. 
Except as provided in this chapter, those certain building codes known and designated as the California Building Code, 2016 Edition, Volumes 1 and 2, including Appendix Chapters "I," and "J," based on the 2015 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council, shall be and become the Building Codes of the City of Montclair for regulating the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building and/or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures throughout the City. The California Building Code and its appendix chapters will be on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. 
(Ord. 07-899 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 10-918, § 1, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 13-938, § 1, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 17-964, § 1, 2-21-17)  
10.08.020 - Building Code amendments. 
The following section of Chapter 1, "Scope and Administration, Division I, California Administration," is hereby amended as follows: 
1.8.8 Appeals Board. Subsection 1.8.8 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
The following portions and sections of Chapter 1, "Scope and Administration, Division II, Scope and Administration," are hereby amended as follows: 
The following language shall be added to Subsection 101.2, "Scope": 
In order to properly maintain and safeguard healthful living conditions and comply with all provisions of the Building Codes, it is hereby declared unlawful to use any streetcars, boxcars, house cars, motor bus bodies, or similar means of conveyance or structures of similar nature of construction, for places of habitation, residence, or place of business in this City. However, nothing contained herein shall prohibit the use of any house trailer or mobile home for places of abode or habitation in an approved mobile home park, provided such structures comply with all other conditions and requirements of this Code. 
The following language shall be added to Subsection 102.1, "General": 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code or any part thereof is in conflict with the Fire Code, the most restrictive shall be applicable. 
Subsection 104.12, "Cooperation of Other Officials and Officers," shall be added as follows: 
104.12 Cooperation of Other Officials and Officers. The Building Official may request and shall receive the assistance and cooperation of other officials of this jurisdiction so far as is required in the discharge of the duties required by this Code or other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
Subsection 105.2, "Work exempt from permit," is hereby amended as follows: 
Item 1 under "Building" is hereby amended as follows: 
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet or measures over 8 feet in height to the highest point of the roof. 
Item 2 under "Building" is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
Item 4 under "Building" is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
4. Retaining walls that are not over three (3) feet in height as measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II, or IIIA liquids. 
Item 9 under "Building" is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
Subsection 105.5, "Expiration," is hereby adopted and amended to read as follows: 
Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of the technical codes shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefore shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and provided further, that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee. 
A permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under the permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this Section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. Permits shall not be extended more than once. 
Section 107, "Submittal Documents," is hereby adopted and amended as follows: 
Subsection 107.5, "Retention of construction documents," is hereby amended by adding the following language: 
The City shall have electronic images created of all plans, engineering calculations, and records that are submitted for the purpose of obtaining a building permit. 
Section 109, "Fees," is hereby adopted and amended as follows: 
Subsection 109.2, "Schedule of permit fees," is hereby amended by adding the following language: 
When submittal documents are required by Section 109, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submittal of documents for plan review. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the Development Review Fee Schedule established by resolution of the City Council. When the City retains a private entity or person to perform plan review, the plan review fee shall be in an amount sufficient to defray the cost of such services, plus a 15 percent fee to cover the cost of administration, but in no case shall the plan review fee be less than the amount specified in this Section. 
Subsection 109.4, "Work commencing before permit issuance," is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
109.4 Work Commencing before permit issuance. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this Code has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be required in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum fee set forth in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt an applicant from compliance with all other provisions of either this Code or the technical codes, nor from the penalty prescribed by law. Whenever the same person or entity is found to have performed work for which a permit is required without first obtaining said permit four or more times, said investigation fee shall be ten times the fee amount set forth in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. 
Subsection 109.6, "Refunds," is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
109.6 Refunds. The Building Official may authorize refunding of a fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected. The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code. The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or cancelled before any examination time has been expended. The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written request filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of payment. 
Section 110, "Inspections," is adopted and amended by adding the following subsection: 
110.1.1 Workmanship. It is the intention of the City that all construction carried on under the review of the Building Division is of good quality. The Building Official shall be empowered to enforce the installation of work that is straight, level, plumb, square, etc., as the situation requires. All work shall be well fit and of a durable nature. Paint in all cases shall not be below normal standard for the use applied. The proper grading of walks, drives and yards shall be required when being installed with the work requiring a building permit. A minimum thickness of 3½ inches for flat concrete work and 2 inches for asphalt paving shall be required. All exterior flat concrete work shall include such breaks for expansion as deemed necessary by the Building Official. 
Subsection 110.3.4, "Frame inspection," is hereby amended by adding the following language: 
The structure shall have lath paper completely installed at the time of framing inspection. 
Subsection 110.3.5, "Lath and gypsum," is hereby amended by deleting the "exception" in its entirety. 
Subsection 110.3.8, "Other inspections," is hereby amended by adding the following language: 
A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. This Section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of the technical codes but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection. Reinspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or deviation from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file an application therefore in writing upon a form furnished for that purpose and pay the reinspection fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by this jurisdiction. In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, additional inspection of the work will not be performed until the required fees have been paid. 
Subsection 110.5, "Inspection requests," is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
110.5 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by the permit to notify the Building Official that such work is ready for inspection. The Building Official may require that every request for inspection be filed at least one working day before such inspection is desired. Such request may be requested in writing or by telephone at the option of the Building Official. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections required by either this Code or the technical codes to provide access to and means for inspection of the work. 
Section 111, "Certificate of Occupancy," is hereby adopted and amended by adding the following subsection: 
111.5 Utility release. The following minimum requirements shall be completed prior to any occupancy or utility connection: 
(1) Written clearance from the Fire and Public Works Departments and Planning and Business License Divisions. 
(2) Written clearance from Monte Vista Water District, NPDES Coordinator and Environmental Manager, when applicable. 
(3) The following, when applicable: 
(a) Verification of school fees paid. 
(b) Grading certificate received. 
(c) All subsequent plan review and permit fees paid. 
(d) Sewer assessment fees paid. 
(e) Hazardous materials statements received. 
(f) Subcontractor's list received. 
(g) Parkland development fees received. 
(h) Transportation development impact fees received. 
Section 114, "Violations," is hereby adopted and amended as follows: 
Subsection 114.4, "Violation penalties," is hereby amended by adding the following language: 
Whenever the same person or entity is found to have performed work for which a permit is required without first obtaining said permit four or more times, said investigation fee shall be ten times the fee amount set forth in Section 108. 
(Ord. 07-899 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 10-918, § 2, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 13-938, § 2, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 17-964, § 2, 2-21-17)  
Chapter 10.12 - BUILDING MOVING AND VEHICLE LOAD PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Permit required. 
No person shall move any load over, along or across any street within the City when the weight and/or size of the load, plus the weight and/or size of the vehicle or equipment, exceeds the limitations of the Vehicle Code of the State, except that, where it is impractical to change the physical characteristics of the load, the Engineering Division may issue a permit to move such load and/or vehicle where it is determined that it will not result in damages to public or private property, and will not cause a traffic hazard, and the applicant will comply with all the requirements and conditions of the Engineering Division. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-2.01)  
10.12.020 - Permit applications. 
Any person desiring to move any building or vehicle load through, over or along any street within the City shall first make an application for a permit to so do. The application shall be made in writing upon forms furnished by the Engineering Division. Each application shall set forth a description of the building or vehicle load proposed to be moved, together with a detailed description of the load, including the materials of which the same is constructed; the dimensions, and if it is a building, the condition of the interior and the condition of the exterior of the building; the description of the lot from which the building is to be moved, giving the street and number thereof if located within the City; the description of the lot to which it is proposed such building is to be moved, giving the street and number of such lot if located within the City; the portion of the lot to be occupied by the building when moved; and a statement that the owner will comply with all the laws governing the removal of the building and the maintenance of the building when moved. The application shall also state the streets and portions of streets over which the building or vehicle load is proposed to be moved. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-2.02)  
10.12.030 - Save harmless agreement and liability insurance. 
On each application, the applicant or the applicant's agent shall sign a statement agreeing to preserve and save harmless the City, and each officer and employee thereof, from any liability or responsibility for any accident, loss or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as the proximate result of the applicant's activities pursuant to the permit for which application has been made. 
The permittee shall save harmless the City, and its officers, agents and employees, of and from any and all liability or responsibility for any property damage or loss, injury or death to any person arising out of or occurring as the proximate result of any of the work or movement undertaken. 
The permittee shall show proof of public liability and property damage insurance in the amount of not less than One Million (1,000,000) Dollars combined single limits with respect to any property damage aforesaid. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-2.04)  
10.12.040 - Fees required. 
At the time of filing the application for a building moving or vehicle load permit with the Engineering Division, the applicant shall pay a moving permit fee as set forth by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 8-2.06)  
10.12.050 - Issuance of permits. 
Upon the filing of the application in the manner and form prescribed by this chapter, and upon showing proof of liability insurance, and upon the payment of the fees required, the Engineering Division shall issue a permit authorizing the moving of the subject building or vehicle load in accordance with the terms and conditions required by the Engineering Division. 
The permit shall designate such streets over which the building or vehicle load may be moved as will interfere as little as possible with traffic on the public streets of the City and as will damage as little as possible any property belonging to the City and any private property which might be damaged by such removal. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-2.08)  
10.12.060 - Refusal to issue permits. 
Even though the applicant complies with every applicable provision of this chapter and all applicable provisions of other statutes, the City Engineer may refuse to issue a permit if he or she finds that it is not in the best interests of the general public to do so. 
(Prior code § 8-2.09)  
10.12.070 - Use of streets. 
No person shall move a building or vehicle load over any street, or part of any street, other than the streets designated in the permit. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-2.10)  
10.12.080 - Size and weight of buildings and vehicle loads. 
No permit shall be issued for the moving of any building or vehicle load which is sufficiently heavy to injure any street or pavement within the City, or the size of which will obstruct the traffic upon the streets of the City. 
(Prior code § 8-2.11)  
10.12.090 - Hours of moving—Notices. 
Every applicant for the moving of a building or vehicle load through, over or across any public street of the City shall notify the Engineering Division in writing of the day and hour when it is proposed to move the vehicle load or building which notice shall be given not less than 12 hours before the time stated in the notice. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-2.13)  
10.12.100 - Damages to property—Notices. 
Every person who receives a permit to move any building or vehicle load through, over or across any street in the City shall notify the City Engineer, in writing, of any damage done to property belonging to the City within 24 hours after the damage or injury has occurred. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-2.14)  
10.12.110 - Warning lights and barricades. 
Every person moving a building or vehicle load through, over or across any street within the City shall cause red lights to be displayed during the nighttime on every side of the building or vehicle load in such a manner as to warn the public of the obstruction and shall, during the daytime, place barricades across the streets in such a manner as to protect the public from damages or injury by reason of the moving of the building or vehicle load and shall, when required by the City Engineer, and when such building is located in any portion of the City where traffic is congested, require the person removing the same to pay the expense of a traffic officer to protect the traveling public from damage and injury. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-2.15)  
10.12.120 - Permits nontransferable. 
Permits issued under the authority of this chapter shall be nontransferable. 
(Prior code § 8-2.16)  
10.12.130 - Permits available in or on vehicles. 
The permittee shall make the permit available for inspection by the Public Works Director or his/her representative by any peace officer or other person having the responsibility for the safety or maintenance of the City streets. Each permit for moving shall be in or on the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers. In cases where a building or structure is moved in more than one section at the same time, on each section on which the original permit is not attached there shall be fixed a true copy of the original permit. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-2.19)  
10.12.140 - Cancellation of permits. 
The Public Works Director or his/her representative may cancel the permit unless the activity therein permitted commences and is completed within the time specified in the permit. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 8-2.20)  
10.12.150 - Investigations and responsibility. 
The permittee shall be responsible for being aware of all existing facilities lawfully within the City streets that are within the limits of his or her activity. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing public or private facility without the consent of its owner. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by its owner or with the permission of and to the satisfaction of its owner. The cost of moving publicly and privately owned facilities shall be borne by the permittee, unless he/she makes other arrangements with the owner of the facility(ies). 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-2.21)  
10.12.160 - Expiration of permits—Time extensions. 
Each permit shall specify the time the permit shall become null and void, and the permit shall become null and void on the date so specified, unless the Engineering Division extends the time. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-2.22)  
Chapter 10.16 - BUILDING SECURITY 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Purpose of regulations. 
The purpose of this chapter is to require security devices in certain buildings as a measure toward preventing burglary, theft, and unlawful entry. 
(Prior code § 4-9.01)  
10.16.020 - Administration and enforcement. 
The Building Official is designated to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4-9.02)  
10.16.030 - Rules and regulations. 
The Building Official may adopt such rules and regulations as will carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter. Such rules and regulations may include, but are not limited to, the types and location of security and locking devices, inspections for building security, tests that shall be conducted to determine the adequacy of the security, and exemptions from the requirements for security devices. 
(Prior code § 4-9.03)  
10.16.040 - Buildings requiring security devices. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all buildings used for the purpose of conducting, managing, or carrying on any business and to all motels, hotels, and multifamily dwellings of four or more units, and to all residences of less than four units which require building permits for any reason. All such buildings shall, when unattended, be secured so as to prevent burglary, theft, or unauthorized entry. The security of such buildings shall include physical security and security devices to protect exterior openings into buildings. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-9.04)  
10.16.050 - Responsibility for security. 
The owner of a building requiring security pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall bear the responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4-9.05)  
10.16.060 - Copies of rules and regulations. 
One complete and current copy of the rules and regulations adopted by the Building Official shall be kept on file in the officer of the City Clerk and shall be available for inspection during the regular hours the City Hall is open for business. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 4-9.06)  
Chapter 10.20 - ELECTRICAL CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Prior code history: Prior code Section 8-3.02. 
 
10.20.010 - Adoption. 
Except as provided in this chapter, the California Electrical Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2014 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association, shall be and become the Electrical Code of the City of Montclair, regulating all installation, arrangement, alteration, repair, use, and other operation of electrical wiring, connections, fixtures, and other electrical appliances on premises within the City. The California Electrical Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. 
(Ord. 07-899 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 10-918, § 3, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 13-938, § 3, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 17-964, § 3, 2-21-17)  
10.20.020 - Electrical code amendments. 
The 2016 Edition of the California Electrical Code is hereby adopted with no amendments. 
(Ord. No. 10-918, § 4, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 13-938, § 3, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 17-964, § 3, 2-21-17)  
10.20.030 - Small residential rooftop solar energy system review process. 
A.  The following words and phrases as used in this section are defined as follows: 
Building Official means the Building Official of the City of Montclair or his/her designee. 
Electronic submittal means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  E-mail, 
2.  The internet, 
3.  Facsimile transmission. 
Small residential rooftop solar energy system means all of the following: 
1.  A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal; and 
2.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time; and 
3.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling; and 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction. 
Solar energy system has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. 
B.  Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall: 
1.  Verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and 
2.  At the applicant's cost, verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads. 
C.  For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in a timely manner and may include a consolidated inspection by the Building Official. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however, the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this subsection. 
D.  An application that satisfies the information requirements in the checklist, as determined by the Building Official, shall be deemed complete. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the Building Official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. 
E.  Upon confirmation by the Building Official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the checklist, the Building Official shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations. 
(Ord. No. 15-952, § 1, 7-20-15)  
10.20.040 - Electric vehicle charging systems expedited, streamlined permitting process. 
A.  The following words or phrases as used in this section are defined as follows: 
Electric vehicle charging station or charging station means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in vehicle. 
Electronic submittal means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  E-mail, 
2.  The internet, 
3.  Facsimile transmission. 
Specific adverse impact means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
B.  The purpose of this section is to promote and encourage the use of electric vehicles by implementing an expedited, streamlined permit review process for electric vehicle charging stations and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply in order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited administrative permit review process and checklist may refer to the recommendations in the checklist prescribed by the most current version of the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist" of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook" published by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. The City of Montclair's adopted checklist shall be published on the City of Montclair website. 
C.  Electric Vehicle Charging System Requirements. 
1.  All electric vehicle charging systems shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
2.  Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load. 
3.  Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer's installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall not adversely affect building elements. 
D.  Permit Application Procession. 
1.  All documents required for submission of an electric vehicle charging system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible City of Montclair website. 
2.  The City of Montclair shall adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
3.  The electric vehicle charging system permit process and checklist shall substantially conform to recommendations contained in the most current version of the Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist contained in the Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
4.  The Building Official shall allow the electronic submittal of the electric vehicle charging station application, forms and other documents, with the exception of building plans, in lieu of a wet signature, The City does not have available the technology necessary to provide for the electronic submittal of building plans. 
E.  Permit Review Requirements. 
1.  The Building Official shall implement an administrative review process to expedite approval of electric vehicle charging stations. Where the application meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standards and there are no specific, adverse impacts upon public health or safety, the Building Department shall complete the building permit approval process, which is nondiscretionary. Review of the permit application shall be limited to the Building Official's review of whether the application meets local, state and federal health and safety requirements. 
2.  The Building Official may require an applicant to apply for a conditional use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures in Chapter 1.08. 
3.  If a conditional use permit is required, the City may only deny such application if it makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions made by the Building Official may be appealed to the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures in Chapter 1.08. 
4.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
5.  A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the City on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. 
6.  The City shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080. 
7.  An application for an electric vehicle charging station shall be deemed complete and the permit available for issuance, when the Building Official determines that the application satisfies all the requirements found in the checklist. 
8.  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written plan check correction notice will be available to the applicant within 10 working days, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be given to the applicant for resubmission. 
(Ord. No. 17-969, § 1, 10-2-17)  
Chapter 10.24 - FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES 
 
10.24.010 - Permit required—Fee. 
No person shall erect or install any fence or block or masonry wall without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Building Official. The fee for a fence permit shall be pursuant to the City's Development Review Fee Schedule as established by resolution of the City Council which shall include the cost of inspection of such fence. The fee for a block or masonry wall permit shall be in accordance with the Development Review Fee Schedule as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-4.02) 
(Ord. No. 13-938, § 4, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 17-964, § 4, 2-21-17)  
10.24.020 - Installation requirements. 
All walls, fences and hedges shall be installed, erected and planted in strict compliance with the zoning provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-4.03)  
10.24.030 - Construction of walls—Plans. 
Plans shall be submitted for approval for the construction of walls. 
(Prior code § 8-4.04)  
Chapter 10.28 - FIRE CODE  
Article I. - Fire Prevention[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-964, § 5, adopted February 21, 2017, repealed the former Article I, §§ 10.28.010—10.28.060, and enacted a new Article I as set out herein. The former Article I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 13-939, § 2, adopted January 6, 2014. 
 
10.28.010 - Adoption. 
A.  There is adopted by the City Council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, hazardous materials or explosion, that certain code known as the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 International Fire Code as published by the "International Code Council," and referenced as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 9, including: Chapter 5, Sections 503 and 510.3, and Appendices A, B, BB, C, CC, F, H, and K, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by this chapter. The California Fire Code and its appendix chapters will be on file for public examination in the Office of the Fire Marshal, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this chapter, and from the date on which the ordinance codified in this chapter shall take effect, the provision thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Montclair and the jurisdiction of the Fire Department. 
B.  The modifications and changes adopted in this chapter are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geological, and topographical conditions as set forth in Resolution No. 13-3014 on file in the City Clerk's Office and incorporated in this Chapter as though fully set forth. These facts and findings are made pursuant to Sections 17958, 17958.5, and 17958.7 of the California Health and Safety Code and the California Building Standards Commission. 
(Ord. No. 17-964, § 5, 2-21-17)  
10.28.020 - Bureau of Fire Prevention—Established—Supervision. 
A.  The California Fire Code shall be enforced by the Office of the Fire Marshal in the Fire Department of the City, which is established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the Fire Chief or his/her designee. 
B.  The Fire Chief or his/her designee shall also act as the Fire Marshal. 
(Ord. No. 17-964, § 5, 2-21-17)  
10.28.030 - Storage of flammable or combustible liquids—Districts in which prohibited. 
A.  The limits referred to in Chapter 55, Section 5504.3.1.1 of the California Fire Code in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is restricted are established as follows: The storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited. 
B.  The limits referred to in Chapter 57, Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the California Fire Code in which the storage of Class I and Class II flammable and combustible liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is restricted are established as follows: The storage of Class I and Class II flammable and combustible liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited. 
C.  Section 5704.2.9.6.1 is amended to include the limits of storage of Class IIIA and Class IIIB combustible liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is restricted and amended as follows: The storage of Class IIIA and Class IIIB liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings shall be limited to tanks not exceeding 500 gallons. 
D.  Section 5704.2.9.6.1.1, "Location of tanks with pressures 2.5 psig or less," is amended to read as follows: 
Aboveground tanks operating at pressures not exceeding 2.5 psig (17.2 kPa) for the storage of Class I, II, or IIIA liquids shall be restricted to listed concrete vaults in industrial and manufacturing areas where, in the opinion of the Fire Marshal, aboveground tanks would not create undue hazard to nearby occupants or property. Quantities shall be limited to 1000 gallons of Class I liquid and 2000 gallons of Class II and IIIA liquids. In no case shall the aggregate of Class I and Class II liquids exceed 2500 gallons at one site. 
E.  Section 5504.2.9.6.1.2, "Location of tanks with pressures exceeding 2.5 psig," is amended to read as follows: 
Aboveground tanks operating pressures exceeding 2.5 psig (17.2 kPa) or equipped with emergency venting allowing pressures to exceed 2.5 psig (17.2 kPa) for the storage of Class I, II, or IIIA liquids shall be restricted to listed concrete vaults in industrial and manufacturing areas where, in the opinion of the Fire Marshal, aboveground tanks would not create undue hazard to occupants or property. Quantities shall be limited to tanks not exceeding 1000 gallons of Class I liquid and 2000 gallons of Class II and IIIA liquids. In no case shall the aggregate of Class I and Class II liquids exceed 2500 gallons at one site. 
F.  Section 5504.2.9.6.1.5, "Location of tanks for Class IIIB liquids," is amended to read as follows: 
Aboveground tanks for the storage of Class IIIB liquids, excluding unstable liquids, shall be restricted to industrial and manufacturing areas where, in the opinion of the Fire Marshal, aboveground tanks would not create undue hazard to occupants or property. Quantities shall be limited to tanks not exceeding 2500 gallons. In no case shall the aggregate of Class IIIB liquids exceed 5000 gallons at one site. 
(Ord. No. 17-964, § 5, 2-21-17)  
10.28.040 - Storage of liquefied petroleum gas restricted. 
The limits referred to in Chapter 61, Section 6104.2 of the California Fire Code, in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are established as follows: Aboveground liquefied petroleum gas containers shall be limited to containers of not more than 2,000 gallons water capacity. The maximum aggregate capacity per site shall not exceed that as specified in Section 6104.2. 
(Ord. No. 17-964, § 5, 2-21-17)  
10.28.050 - Storage of explosives and fireworks restricted. 
Chapter 56, Section 5603.1.1, "Scope," is amended to read as follows: 
5603.1.1 Scope. The storage of explosives is prohibited within the jurisdiction. Exceptions: Exceptions are as outlined in Section 5603.1.1: 
(1) The Armed Forces of the United States, Coast Guard, or National Guard. 
(2) Explosives in forms prescribed by the official United States Pharmacopeia. 
(3) The possession, storage, and use of small arms ammunition when packaged in accordance with DOT packaging requirements. 
(4) The use of explosive materials by federal, state, and local regulatory, law enforcement, and fire agencies acting in their official capacities. 
(5) Items preempted by federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 17-964, § 5, 2-21-17)  
10.28.060 - Amendments. 
A.  Subsection 103.2 Appointment established. 
Subsection 103.2 of Section 103 of Chapter 1 of the California Fire Code is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
B.  Subsection 103.4.2 is added to Section 103 of Chapter 1 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
103.4.2 Liability for Costs. The expenses for the response or any action by the Montclair Fire Department that is the result of a violation of the provisions of this Code or any damage caused by malicious mischief or any action determined to be negligent requiring any assistance, corrective, or preventive action conducted by Fire Department personnel shall be a charge against the responsible person, company, or agent whose violation or action caused the Fire Department response. Expenses caused by such response or actions shall constitute a debt of such person, company, or agent. The Fire Marshal shall keep an itemized account of expenses incurred by the City in carrying out the duties hereunder and shall prepare and file a report of such expenses, as outlined in the Montclair Fire Department Policy Manual, with the City Treasurer, together with the names and addresses of those responsible. The City Treasurer shall give notice to such person, company, or agent, who shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard regarding such charges by requesting to be heard within 15 days after the mailing of such notice. The City Treasurer shall take such reasonable and necessary action to recover such expenses from any and all responsible persons, companies, or agents. 
C.  Subsection 104.10.2 is added to Section 104 of Chapter 1 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
104.10.2 Police Powers. The Fire Marshal and members of the arson investigation unit shall have the powers of a police officer in performing their duties under this Code and as defined in Section 830.37 of the California Penal Code. 
D.  Subsection 105.3.9 is added to Section 105 Chapter 1 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
105.3.9 Conditions of Permits. Fees. The City Council of the City of Montclair shall establish, as permitted by law, standard governing fees for the issuance of permits. Said fees shall be established by Resolution. 
E.  Subsection 108.1 Board of Appeals established. 
Subsection 108.1 of Section 108 of Chapter 1 of the California Fire Code is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
F.  Subsection 109.4 of Section 109 of Chapter 1 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair, or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Marshal or his/her designee, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than One Thousand (1,000) dollars or by imprisonment in the City or County jail for a period not to exceed 180 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
G.  Subsection 315.3.5 is added to Section 315 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
315.3.5 Mobile Home Sales Lots. The spacing between individual mobile homes located on mobile home sales lots shall not be less than ten (10) feet and not less than five (5) feet from any property line. 
H.  Subsection 503.2.4 of Section 503 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
503.2.4 Turning radius. The required turning radius of a fire apparatus access road or any required interior roadway of any facility or commercial or residential development shall be determined by the Fire Department. 
I.  Subsection 503.4.1 is added to Section 503.4 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
503.4.2 Penalties. The parking of vehicles within a properly posted or designated fire apparatus access road may be cited or removed at the owner's expense as provided by law. 
J.  Subsection 903.2 of the California Fire Code is replaced to read as follows: 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic fire sprinkler systems in buildings and structures shall be required in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12 and as follows: 
(1) Every structure hereafter constructed, erected, or moved onto a property, regard-less of separation walls as outlined in the California Building Code, shall have an approved automatic fire sprinkler system installed throughout therein. 
(2) Every structure, except Group R, Division 3, and Group R, Division 4 occupancies, here-after remodeled, rebuilt, or renovated where such costs exceed fifty (50) percent of the assessed valuation as determined by the San Bernardino County Tax Assessor shall have an approved automatic fire sprinkler system installed throughout therein. 
(3) Group R, Division 3, and Group R, Division 4 occupancies, including attached Group U occupancies, where fifty (50) percent or more of the existing floor area is hereafter added to, remodeled, rebuilt, or renovated shall have an approved automatic fire sprinkler system installed throughout therein. 
(4) Every approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall have one (1) exterior Audible Device, connected to water flow alarm device installed on each riser. 
(5) Each approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall maintain a stock of at least one spare sprinkler that corresponds to the types and temperatures of those installed in the system. The stock of spare sprinklers and wrench shall be stored in a cabinet which shall be mounted as close to the system riser as practical. 
Exceptions: 
(1) Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries, and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic fire alarm system and are separated from the remainder of the building by fire barriers consisting of not less than one-hour fire-resistance-rated walls and two-hour fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling assemblies. 
(2) Automatic fire sprinkler protection for fixed guideway transit systems shall be as per Section 903.2.17. 
(3) Outdoor, detached storage facilities of 200 square feet or less. 
(4) Any work for which a building permit is not required. 
(5) Block walls. 
(6) Swimming pools and spas. 
(7) Lattice patio covers. 
(8) Reroofing. 
(9) Decks. 
(i) Except a covered deck constructed as part of a new building or structure. 
(10) Gazebos. 
(11) Solar photovoltaic panels supported by a structure over parking stalls where the panels constitute the roof. 
K.  Subsection 903.3.1 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
903.3.1 Standards. Sprinkler systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, unless otherwise permitted by Sections 903.3.1.2 and 903.3.1.3, and the following: 
(1) Every sprinkler system shall have at least one (1) fire department connection located within fifty (50) feet of a fire hydrant. 
Exceptions: 
(i) Sprinkler systems complying with NFPA 13 D (latest edition). 
(ii) Sprinkler systems supplying fewer than twenty (20) heads. 
(2) Sprinkler system risers shall be located within buildings or structures. 
(3) Post indicator valves, riser control valves, or secondary control valves shall be located and installed as determined by the Montclair Fire Department. 
(4) Each fire department connection and any controlling valves shall bear a nameplate indicating occupancy name, address, or both as determined by the Fire Department. 
(5) Minimum underground pipe size shall be six (6) inches in diameter. 
Exceptions: 
(i) Sprinkler systems hydraulically calculated may have an underground pipe size of a smaller diameter upon approval of the Fire Department. 
(ii) Sprinkler systems designed per NFPA 13 D (latest edition). 
(6) Minimum sprinkler system design requirements for new multi-occupancy retail centers shall be as required for NFPA 13 (latest edition), ordinary hazard (group 2). 
(7) Minimum sprinkler system design requirements for new industrial "spec" buildings shall be as required for NFPA 13 (latest edition), extra hazard (group 1). 
(8) NFPA 13 R (latest edition) sprinkler systems shall utilize separate underground water mains to supply the fire sprinkler system and the domestic water supply. 
L.  Subsection 907.1.6 is added to Section 907 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
907.1.6 False Alarms. More than two (2) false alarms transmitted from any required or nonrequired fire alarm system in a one (1) month period of time or three (3) false alarms transmitted from any required or nonrequired fire alarm system in any two (2) month period of time shall result in an assessment of fees for services provided by the Fire Department for all subsequent false alarms in the remainder of the calendar year. 
M.  Subsection 1021.1.4 is added to Section 1021 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
1021.1.4 Second Exit Required. Where the third floor and above within an individual dwelling unit, a Group R, Division 3 congregate residence, or a Group R, Division 4 occupancy exceeds 750 square feet of gross floor area, a second exit shall be provided. For the purposes of this section, the gross floor area shall include all interior and exterior walls, stairways, shafts, and courts. 
(Ord. No. 17-964, § 5, 2-21-17)  
10.28.070, 10.28.080 - Reserved.  
Article II. - Permits, Reviews and Fees 
 
10.28.090 - Purpose. 
Any person, establishment, business, occupancy, or process which comes under the following categories shall pay to the Fire Department an inspection and/or permit fee as set forth in this section. The regulation of the following processes will allow the Fire Department to better monitor the conditions hazardous to life and property. Additionally, the permit process will enhance the monitoring of building requirements and the installation of fire protection systems as prescribed by Article I of this chapter. 
(Ord. 02-824 § 2 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.201)  
10.28.100 - Permits required. 
Reference California Fire Code, Chapter 1, Subsection 105.1.1 of Section 105. 
(Ord. 07-900 § 2: Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.202) 
(Ord. No. 10-919, § 3, 1-3-11; Ord. No. 13-939, § 3 1-6-14; Ord. No. 17-964, § 6, 2-21-17)  
10.28.110 - Plan reviews required. 
A.  Fire detection systems; 
B.  Fire sprinkler systems; 
C.  Hood duct systems; 
D.  All occupancy plans. 
(Ord. 02-824 § 2 (part): Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.203)  
10.28.120 - Permit application forms. 
Any person required to secure a permit shall file an application with the Fire Department's Office of the Fire Marshal setting forth the information required on the application. 
(Ord. 02-824 § 2 (part): Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.204)  
10.28.130 - Plan review submissions. 
A.  Occupancy plans may be required to be submitted to the Community Development Department. 
B.  Fire detection, fire sprinkler, and hood duct systems plans must be submitted directly to the Office of the Fire Marshal. 
(Ord. 02-284 § 2 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.205)  
10.28.140 - Fees. 
A.  These fees are to cover the costs of performing the plan review and the processing thereof. Such fees shall not be returned to the applicant because the fees are for services rendered. The fees to be paid shall be set by City Council resolution. 
B.  Permit Application Fees. 
1.  Each permit applicant is required to pay a one-time fee for each permit issued. 
2.  Fees for permits shall be collected by the Montclair Fire Department at the time such application is made or permits are secured. 
3.  Fees may be waived for permits issued that do not require an inspection by Fire Department personnel. 
C.  Plan Review Fees. 
1.  Fees for occupancy plan reviews shall be collected by the Fire Department's Office of the Fire Marshal at the time that the plans are submitted for approval. 
2.  Fees for fire detection, fire sprinkler and automatic fire extinguishing system plans shall be collected by the Montclair Fire Department at the time the plans are submitted for approval. 
(Ord. 02-824 § 2 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.206)  
Article III. - High-Rise Building Regulations 
 
10.28.150 - Intent. 
A.  If no specific standards or requirements are specified in this chapter, or contained within other applicable laws, adopted codes or ordinances, compliance with the standards of the American Insurance Association, Factory Mutual Engineering, the National Fire Protection Association, or other nationally recognized fire safety standards as are approved by the Fire Marshal and Building Official, shall be deemed prima facie evidence of compliance with this intent. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.301) 
(Ord. No. 10-919, § 4, 1-3-11; Ord. No. 13-939, § 4, 1-6-14; Ord. No. 17-964, § 7, 2-21-17)  
10.28.160 - Scope. 
A.  Every high-rise building 45 feet in height above the lowest floor level having building access as defined in Section 10.02.010 hereafter constructed shall conform to Section 10.28.180. 
B.  Every high-rise building hereafter constructed in excess of 75 feet in height above the lowest floor level having building access as defined in Section 10.02.010 shall conform to all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.303) 
(Ord. No. 10-919, § 4, 1-3-11; Ord. No. 13-939, § 4, 1-6-14; Ord. No. 17-964, § 7, 2-21-17)  
10.28.170 - California Building Code. 
Whenever the term "Uniform Building Code" is used, it shall hereafter be known as the "California Building Code" and be referenced as such and shall refer to the latest edition as adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 07-900 § 3 (part): Ord. 02-824 § 3 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.304)  
10.28.180 - Automatic sprinkler system. 
A.  Every high-rise building shall be provided with an automatic fire sprinkler system. 
B.  The fire sprinkler system shall conform to National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet No. 13 and the following: 
1.  The NFPA Pamphlet No. 13 used shall be the latest edition adopted by the City Council. 
2.  Shutoff valves and water flow devices shall be provided for each floor. In addition to actuating a local alarm on the floor upon which the water flow is detected, operation of such valves shall transmit an alarm to a U.L.-certified central receiving station and to the Fire Control Center if the Fire Control Center is required by other sections of this chapter. 
3.  System piping shall be hydraulically designed to the following standards: 
a.  Light Hazard Occupancies as defined in Appendix A of NFPA 13. — Ordinary Hazard, Group 1 Density Curve; 
b.  Ordinary Hazard Occupancies (Group 1) as defined in Appendix A of NFPA 13. — Ordinary Hazard, Group 2 Density Curve; 
c.  Ordinary Hazard Occupancies (Group 2) as defined in Appendix A of NFPA 13. — Ordinary Hazard, Group 3 Density Curve; 
d.  Ordinary Hazard Occupancies (Group 3) as defined in Appendix A of NFPA 13. — Extra Hazard, Group 1 Density Curve; 
e.  Extra Hazard Occupancies (Groups 1 or 2) as defined in Appendix A of NFPA 13. — Extra Hazard, Group 2 Density Curve. 
4.  Any room or area of the building where the application of water is considered undesirable, or may complicate fire fighting or rescue attempts, may have the sprinklers deleted if alternative extinguishing systems, such as carbon dioxide or halon, are installed. Such rooms may include: 
a.  Generator and transformer rooms; 
b.  Safe deposit or other vaults of fire-resistive construction, when used for the storage of records, files, and other documents when stored in metal cabinets or on metal shelving; 
c.  All communications equipment areas; 
d.  Other areas with specific prior approval from the Fire Chief and Building Official based on a review of justifiable fire protection engineering criteria. 
5.  The actuation of any sprinkler head shall: 
a.  Operate the voice alarm system, and shall place into operation all equipment necessary to prevent the recirculation of smoke; 
b.  Transmit an alarm directly to a U.L.-certified central receiving station and to the Fire Control Center if the Fire Control Center is required by other sections of this chapter. Such signal shall be zoned with a minimum of one zone per floor and a maximum of 10,000 square feet per zone. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.305)  
10.28.190 - Alarm and communications. 
A.  Every high-rise building shall have manual fire alarm boxes, which shall be located adjacent to exits into corridors, stairway shafts, and in every elevator lobby, and shall: 
1.  Operate the voice alarm system, and place into operation all equipment necessary to prevent the recirculation of smoke equipment; 
2.  Transmit an alarm directly to a U.L.-certified central receiving station and to the Fire Control Center if the Fire Control Center is required by other sections of this chapter. Such signal shall be zoned with a minimum of one zone per floor and a maximum of 10,000 square feet per zone. 
B.  Three communication systems shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Voice Alarm System. The operation of any smoke detector, sprinkler, water flow device or manual fire alarm station shall automatically sound an alert signal to the desired areas followed by voice instructions giving appropriate information and direction to the occupants. 
a.  The Fire Control Center, when required by other sections of this chapter, shall contain controls for the voice alarm system so that a selective or general voice alarm may be manually initiated. 
b.  The system shall be supervised to cause the activation to an audible trouble signal to a U.L.-certified central receiving station and to the Fire Control Center if the Fire Control Center is required by other sections of this chapter upon interruption or failure of the audio path including amplifiers, speaker wiring, switches and electrical contacts, and shall detect opens, shorts and grounds, and any other malfunction which might impair the transmission of voice alarms. 
c.  The alarm shall be designed to be heard clearly by all occupants within the building or designated portion of the building as is required for the public address system. Such alarm will be subject to field audibility tests. 
d.  This system shall be capable of Fire Department intercommunication with units selected from the Fire Control Center or other designated location. 
2.  Public Address System. The public address system shall be a one-way system providing communication from the Fire Control Center or other designated location to the following locations: 
a.  Elevators, elevator lobbies, corridors and stairways. Speakers in corridors shall be located not more than 200 feet apart, and shall be subject to field audibility tests prior to approval; 
b.  In every room exceeding 1,000 square feet in area; 
c.  In every room exceeding 50 occupant load; 
d.  In each dwelling unit or hotel guest room. 
3.  Fire Department System. A sound-powered telephone system capable of communication between all floors and with the Fire Control Center or other designated location shall be provided. All exterior phone jacks shall be designed to communicate with the Fire Control Center, or other designated locations, and all other areas of the building. An acceptable number of hand-held phone sets as determined by the Fire Department shall be made available and stored at the Fire Control Center and/or other locations as specified by the Fire Chief. Sound-powered phone equipment, including communications panel, phone sets and location of phone jacks, are subject to Fire Department approval. Phone jacks shall be located as follows: 
a.  At every floor level at each hose cabinet; 
b.  At every exterior location where a stair shaft exists to a public way; 
c.  At the exterior of each stair shaft penthouse located on the roof; 
d.  In every elevator; 
e.  At every elevator lobby; 
f.  In every mechanical control center; 
g.  In every air handling equipment room; 
h.  In every elevator machinery room; 
i.  At the emergency heliport or other approved roof locations; 
j.  And other locations as deemed necessary by the Fire Chief and Building Official. 
C.  The sounding of a fire alarm signal in any given area or floor shall not prohibit voice communication to other areas or floors. 
D.  The voice alarm and public address system may be combined. Combination systems shall be designed to permit voice transmission to override the fire alarm signal, but shall not discontinue the fire alarm signals except as provided at the Fire Control Center or other designated locations. 
E.  The alarm and communication systems shall be designed and installed so that interruption of any single speaker shall not cause a loss of any other speakers in the circuit. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.306)  
10.28.200 - Smoke detection. 
A.  Every high-rise building shall be protected with an approved, electrically supervised, automatic fire detection system having detectors which will respond to visible or invisible products of combustion in the following locations: 
1.  In every mechanical equipment room; 
2.  In every heating, air conditioning or ventilation duct system as follows: 
a.  In the main circulating air duct on the downstream side of the filters and so located as to operate in case of smoke in the air stream, or such devices may be installed in each room or space served by a return air duct, 
b.  At every opening through any assembly having fire-resistive rating of two hours or more; 
3.  In every elevator lobby. 
B.  The actuation of any smoke detector shall: 
1.  Operate the voice alarm system, and place into operation all equipment necessary to prevent the recirculation of smoke; 
2.  Transmit an alarm directly to a U.L.-certified central receiving station and to the Fire Control Center if the Fire Control Center is required by other sections of this chapter, and shall be on a separate zone. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.307)  
10.28.210 - Smoke control. 
A.  Every high-rise building shall have mechanical ventilation for the removal of the products of combustion provided in every story and it shall consist of mechanical air handling equipment designed to accomplish smoke removal. Under fire conditions, the return and exhaust air shall be moved directly to the outside without recirculation to other sections of the building. The air-handling system shall provide a minimum of one exhaust air change each 10 minutes for the largest single room; 
B.  Additional ventilation for the removal of the products of combustion shall be provided in every story and shall consist of one of the following: 
1.  Panels or windows in the exterior wall, which can be opened from the inside and from the Fire Control Center or other approved locations, shall be provided at the rate of at least 20 square feet per 50 linear feet of exterior wall in each story and distributed around the perimeter at not more than 50 foot intervals. The openable panels shall be tempered glass. Such panels shall be clearly identified as required by the Fire Department; 
2.  Any other engineered design which will produce equivalent results as certified for approval to the Fire Chief by a registered Fire Protection Engineer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.308)  
10.28.220 - Exits. 
Exits in all high-rise buildings shall comply with the requirements of the California Building Code and the following: 
A.  All stairway doors which are to be locked from the stairway side shall have the capability of being unlocked simultaneously without unlatching upon a signal from the Fire Control Center or other approved locations. 
B.  Smoke-proof enclosures may be eliminated if all enclosed stairways are pressurized pursuant to the requirements of the California Building Code. 
C.  A telephone or other two-way communications system connected to the Fire Control Center shall be provided at not less than every fifth floor in each stairway. 
(Ord. 07-900 § 3 (part): Ord. 02-824 § 3 (part); Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.309) 
(Ord. No. 10-919, § 4, 1-3-11; Ord. No. 13-939, § 4, 1-6-14; Ord. No. 17-964, § 7, 2-21-17)  
10.28.230 - Elevators. 
Elevators and elevator lobbies in all high-rise buildings shall comply with the California Building Code and the following: 
A.  Except for the main entrance level, all elevators on all floors shall open into elevator lobbies which are separated from the remainder of the building as is required for corridor construction in Section 3305(g) and (h) of the California Fire Code. 
B.  Each elevator lobby shall be provided with an approved smoke detector located on the lobby ceiling. When the detector is activated, elevator doors shall not open and all cars serving that lobby are to return to the main floor and be under manual control only. If the main floor detector or a transfer floor detector is activated, all cars serving the main floor or transfer floor shall return to a location approved by the Fire Department and be under manual control only. The smoke detector is to operate before the optical density reaches 0.03 per foot. 
C.  On every floor except the main entrance level, the elevator lobby shall be provided with self-closing 20 minute minimum-rated fire doors to form a vestibule. Such doors shall close automatically when the smoke detector in the lobby is activated. Both sides of the doors shall have signs reading, "IN FIRE EMERGENCY, DO NOT USE ELEVATOR—USE EXIT STAIRS" in two-inch-high three-fourths-inch-wide stroke letters and a map of the floor showing the locations where the person is and the path to the closest exit stairs. 
D.  A permanent sign shall be installed in each elevator cab adjacent to the floor status indicator and at each elevator call station on each floor reading, "IN FIRE EMERGENCY, DO NOT USE ELEVATOR—USE EXIT STAIRS" in one-half-inch-high, one-eighth-inch-wide stroke letters or similar verbiage approved by the Fire Chief and Building Official. 
E.  Elevator hoist ways shall not be vented through an elevator machine room. Cable slots entering the machine room shall be sleeved beneath the machine room floor and extend to not less than 12 inches below the shaft vent to inhibit the passage of smoke into the machine room. 
F.  At least one elevator car in each bank serving all floors shall have a minimum inside car platform of four feet three inches deep, by six feet nine inches wide, with a minimum clear opening width of 42 inches, unless otherwise designed and approved to provide equivalent utility to accommodate an ambulance stretcher having a minimum size of 22 inches by 78 inches, in its horizontal position. This elevator shall be identified. 
(Ord. 07-900 § 3 (part); Ord. 02-824 § 3 (part); Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.310)  
10.28.240 - Standby and emergency power and lighting. 
A.  Every high-rise building shall be provided with a standby power system as follows: 
1.  An on-site standby power generation system consisting of one or more generators. In the event of failure of the normal source of electric service, the standby power generation system shall provide an alternate source of electrical energy to serve at least the designated power loads set forth in a subsection (A)(2) of this section; 
2.  The power load requirements for sizing the standby power generation system shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
a.  Exit signs and exit illumination as required by the California Building Code, 
b.  Elevator car lighting circuits, 
c.  Fire alarm system, 
d.  Fire detection system, 
e.  Sprinkler alarm system, 
f.  Electric-driven fire pumps, 
g.  Voice communication systems, 
h.  Mechanical ventilation and air handling equipment required by this section, 
i.  Elevators assigned for Fire Department use, 
j.  All public assembly areas shall have lighting in accordance with exit illumination as required in the California Building Code, 
k.  All parking garages shall have lighting in accordance with exit illumination as required in the California Building Code, 
l.  Lighting circuits supplying elevator lobbies, the Fire Control Center, and the generator room; 
3.  The standby power generation system shall be equipped with suitable means for automatically starting the generator set(s) upon failure of the normal electrical service, and shall provide for the automatic transfer and operation of electrical systems and equipment specified above, at full power within 60 seconds of such normal service failure; 
4.  On-site fuel supplies for prime movers of stand-by power generator sets shall be sufficient for at least six hours at full demand operation. Where fire pumps are required, an eight hour fuel supply shall be provided. 
B.  Every high-rise building shall be provided with emergency electrical systems as follows: 
1.  Electrical systems and equipment specified in this section are classed as emergency systems: 
a.  Exit signs and exit illumination as required by the California Building Code; 
b.  Elevator car lighting circuits; 
c.  Fire alarm system; 
d.  Fire detection system; 
e.  Sprinkler alarm system. 
2.  The emergency power supply system shall be so designed that upon failure of the normal electrical service, the emergency electrical systems and equipment specified above, shall be automatically transferred without power interruption. Such emergency power supply may be separate from the standby power specified above. 
C.  When the standby power generation system reaches full operating capacity, the emergency electrical systems and equipment shall be transferred thereto. 
(Ord. 07-900 § 3 (part); Ord. 02-824 § 3 (part); Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.311)  
10.28.250 - Seismic considerations. 
A.  Every high-rise building shall have the anchorage of the following mechanical and electrical equipment designed and installed in accordance with the California Building Code for lateral force based on ASCE 7 unless data substantiating a lesser value is furnished. 
1.  Elevator drive and suspension systems. 
2.  Standby power and lighting facilities. 
3.  Fire pumps, automatic fire extinguishing systems, and other fire protection equipment. 
4.  Air handling equipment regulated by this chapter. 
B.  Verification of such conformance shall be substantiated by a licensed structural engineer. 
(Ord. 07-900 § 3 (part); Ord. 02-824 § 3 (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.312) 
(Ord. No. 10-919, § 4, 1-3-11; Ord. No. 13-939, § 4, 1-6-14; Ord. No. 17-964, § 7, 2-21-17)  
10.28.260 - Spandrel protection. 
Every high-rise building shall have spandrel protection provided by one of the following: 
A.  Openings in exterior walls, where such openings are within five feet of each other horizontally on vertically adjacent floors, shall be protected by approved flame barriers either extending 30 inches beyond the exterior wall in the plane of the floor or by approved vertical panels not less than three feet in height above the floor; 
B.  Decrease the spacing of sprinkler heads on the perimeter, or in any locations where spandrels would be required, to that as specified for extra hazard occupancies in NFPA 13; 
C.  Alternate spandrel fire protection may be considered subject to approval of the Fire Chief and Building Official when designed and submitted by a Fire Protection Engineer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.313)  
10.28.270 - Fire fighting provisions. 
A.  Every high-rise building shall have each floor of the building provided with Fire Department cabinets. The cabinets shall be as close as possible to each exit into corridors, stairway shafts, and in every elevator lobby, and shall be clearly marked. The cabinet shall be locked to provide accessibility only to the Fire Department and on-site fire brigade. The cabinet and all equipment specified in this section shall conform to Fire Department standards. Operation of doors to Fire Department cabinets shall activate signals in a UL.-certified central receiving station and in the Fire Control Center if the Fire Control Center is required by other sections of this chapter. Contents of the cabinet shall be: 
1.  One two and one-half-inch to one and one-half inch gated wye connected to the standpipe; 
2.  200 feet of one and one-half-inch 400-pound test, fire hose line; 100 feet preconnected to the gated wye, 100 feet rolled. 
B.  On the roof level, Fire Department cabinets as described in subsection A of this section shall be located to provide fire hose lines within 30 feet of all areas of the roof. 
C.  There must be one crash cart of Fire Department tools. The crash cart, when fully equipped, shall fit into the elevators, shall be designed to Fire Department standards, and shall contain the following standard fire control and rescue provisions: 
1.  Halligan tool; 
2.  Pry bar; 
3.  Pick-head ax; 
4.  Four sprinkler shutoffs; 
5.  Telescoping pole with which to apply sprinkler shutoffs; 
6.  Twelve rubber door holders; 
7.  Six marking pens for search and rescue; 
8.  100 feet to two and one-half-inch 400 pound-test, fire hose line, per Fire Department specifications; 
9.  Four 100-foot lifelines per Fire Department specifications; 
10.  Keys to Fire Department cabinets described in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  All appurtenances required by the above sections shall be tested and inspected in accordance with the applicable NFPA standard or nationally recognized good practice as specified by the Montclair Fire Department. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.314)  
10.28.280 - Automatic sprinkler systems. 
Every high-rise building in excess of 75 feet, as specified in Section 10.28.160(B) shall also conform to the following additional automatic sprinkler system requirements: 
A.  A minimum of two fire pumps independently driven shall be provided, each sized for the sprinkler demand and for an additional minimum 500 gallons per minute for Fire Department standpipe operations. One of the pumps shall be electrically driven and the other pump shall be diesel fuel operated. 
B.  In addition to the main water supply, a secondary onsite supply of water equal to the hydraulically calculated sprinkler design demand, plus 100 gallons per minute additional for the total standpipe system, shall be provided. This supply shall be automatically available if the principal supply falls, and shall have a duration of 30 minutes. The onsite supply of water as indicated above shall be maintained in a separate system from the public domestic water system, and shall conform to all applicable cross-connection requirements of the City Engineer's Office. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.315) 
(Ord. No. 10-919, § 4, 1-3-11; Ord. No. 13-939, § 4, 1-6-14; Ord. No. 17-964, § 7, 2-21-17)  
10.28.290 - Fire command center. 
A.  Every high-rise building in excess of 75 feet, as specified in Section 10.28.160(B), shall be provided with a fire command center located near or adjacent to the main entrance to the building or at any location approved by the Fire Marshal and Building Official. The fire command center shall be directly accessible from the outside of the building, consistent with standards developed by the Fire Marshal. 
B.  The fire command center shall be designed to accommodate the functional control and command personnel required to conduct an emergency activity. There shall be a minimum net floor area of 200 square feet with minimum dimension of one foot. This floor area shall not be encumbered upon by any walls, equipment, or other appurtenances not necessary to the function of the room. 
C.  The fire command center shall be separated from the remainder of the building by not less than a one-hour fire barrier, or minimum construction as required by the California Building Code, with all openings protected by assemblies having a fire-resistive rating of not less than 90 minutes or minimum construction as required by the California Building Code. 
D.  The fire command center shall be used to house the following equipment: 
1.  Voice communication control equipment including equipment necessary to the function of the control unit and its display and status panels. 
2.  Fire alarm and fire detection control equipment including equipment necessary to the function of the control unit and its display and status panels. 
3.  Status indicators and controls for elevators. 
4.  Air handling system status indicators and control switches. 
5.  Controls for unlocking stairway doors and status board indicating whether such doors are locked or unlocked. 
6.  Sprinkler valve supervision and water flow detector display panels. 
7.  Alarm, water flow, and trouble signals shall be annunciated by means of an audible signal and a visual display, which indicates the building, floor, zone, or other designated area from which the alarm, water flow, or trouble signal originated. 
8.  Standby power status display and controls. 
9.  A telephone connected to the public telephone system adjacent to the Fire Department communication systems. This telephone to be for express use of the Fire Department. Telephones for building occupant use shall be separate. 
10.  Intercom to exterior of fire command center to allow for verbal communication without opening the door. 
11.  Supervision indicator of the Fire Department's cabinets. 
12.  Three certified copies of the building floor plans, mechanical plans, and electrical plans. 
13.  Three copies of the Fire Department pre-plans. 
14.  Other fire protection equipment and system controls, such as the following: 
a.  Water tank level indicators. 
b.  Fire pump controls and status indicators. 
c.  Fire level indicator on auxiliary generators and fire pumps. 
15.  Any other similar equipment, controls, or status indicators as deemed necessary by the Fire Marshal and Building Official. 
E.  Any equipment that is a status indicator shall be in the form of a graphic annunciator. The graphic annunciator shall be a line diagram of the building with the lights and activation switches in proper perspective on the diagram. The graphic annunciator shall be further keyed to the required building floor plans per floor and location on the floor. 
F.  As well as the graphic annunciator, an alpha-numeric printout of all status indications or switch activations, along with the date and time of alarm or activation, shall be provided. This printout shall also be coded to provide the location of the activation on the building floor plans per floor and location of the floor. 
G.  The fire command center shall not be used for the housing of any boiler, heating unit, generator, or storage. 
(Ord. No. 10-919, § 4, 1-3-11; Ord. No. 13-939, § 4, 1-6-14; Ord. No. 17-964, § 7, 2-21-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-919, § 4, adopted January 3, 2011, repealed the former § 10.28.290, and enacted a new § 10.28.290 as set out herein. The former § 10.28.290 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code § 4-3.316; Ord. No. 99-790 and Ord. No. 99-791.  
10.28.300 - Emergency helicopter landing facility. 
Each high-rise building, in excess of 75 feet, as specified in Section 10.28.160(B) shall incorporate an emergency helicopter landing facility located on the roof of the building in an area approved by the Fire Department in accordance to Section 412.7 of the California Building Code and the following: 
A.  A landing glide slope angle determined by a ratio of eight feet horizontal distance for every one foot of vertical clearance required. Two such approaches shall be available at least 90 degrees removed from each other. 
B.  A clear, unobstructed landing and takeoff area with a minimum dimension of 100 feet by 100 feet and a reinforced touchdown area having a minimum dimension of 50 feet by 50 feet. 
C.  If the roof has no parapet wall, a substantial fence or safety net shall be provided around the perimeter of the roof in such a manner that it will not restrict or reduce the required landing and takeoff area. 
D.  A wind-indicating device shall be provided. 
E.  The roof top shall be marked by an emergency marker as required by the Fire Marshal. 
F.  The roof top shall be marked with the numerical street address of the building with the numbers facing the street frontage corresponding to the address. The size of the numbers is to be three feet high and one foot wide. 
(Ord. No. 10-919, § 4, 1-3-11; Ord. No. 13-939, § 4, 1-6-14; Ord. No. 17-964, § 7, 2-21-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-919, § 4, adopted January 3, 2011, repealed the former § 10.28.300, and enacted a new § 10.28.300 as set out herein. The former § 10.28.300 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code § 4-3.317; Ord. No. 99-790 and Ord. No. 99-791.  
10.28.310 - Plan review and update. 
The copies of the certified as-built plans, mechanical plans, electrical plans, and the Fire Department pre-plans, as specified in Section 10.28.290(D)(12) and (13), shall be updated any time revisions, additions or deletions to the building are made. The responsibility for these updates will be on the building owner unless the owner and occupant have otherwise agreed between themselves, in which event the occupant shall comply. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.318)  
10.28.320 - Appellate procedures. 
A.  Whenever there are practical difficulties in strict application of these provisions, the Fire Chief and Building Official may modify the provisions upon application, in writing, by the owner, lessee, developer or his or her authorized representative, provided that the spirit and intent of the provisions shall be complied with and the public safety secured. Particulars of any such modification or deviation from these provisions, when granted or allowed, shall be rendered by a written decision of the Fire Chief and Building Official and entered upon the record of the City with a signed copy furnished to the appellant. 
B.  The Fire Chief and Building Official, with notice to the appellant, may approve any alternate material or method, provided that they find that the proposed design, use or operation satisfactorily complies with the intent of these provisions and that the materials, methods of work performed, or operations to be employed are, for the purpose intended, at least equivalent to that prescribed by these provisions in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
C.  The Fire Chief and Building Official may require tests as proof of compliance with the intent of these provisions or alternates to these provisions to be made by an approved agency at the expense of the person or persons requesting approval of alternate methods, materials or operations. 
D.  If technical expertise is unavailable within the Fire or Building Departments because of new technology, products, process, facilities, materials and uses attending design, operation or use of a building or premises subject to the provisions contained, in this chapter, the Fire Chief and Building Official may require the appellant or his or her authorized representative to provide, without charge to the City, a technical opinion and report prepared by a qualified engineer, specialist, laboratory or fire safety specialty organization acceptable to the Fire Chief, Building Official, and the appellant, to thoroughly analyze the fire safety properties of such design, operations, or use in prescription, approval and adoption of the necessary recommended changes. 
E.  There shall be, and is, created a Board of Appeals. In the event that the Fire Chief and Building Official deny an appeal after consideration of all provisions of this section, the appellant may further appeal to it the Board of Appeals as a final authority on the issues. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon pertinent matters. The Fire Chief and Building Official shall be ex officio members, one of which shall act as Secretary of the Board. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the City Council and shall hold office at their pleasure. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the Fire Chief and Building Official, with a duplicate copy to the appellant, and may recommend to the City Council such new legislation as is consistent therewith. 
F.  The appellant may appeal any action of the Board of Appeals to the City Council. Such appeal shall be pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); Ord. 99-790 (part): prior code § 4-3.319)  
Chapter 10.30 - GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE 
 
10.30.010 - Adoption. 
Except as provided in this chapter, the California Green Standards Code, 2016 Edition, as published by the California Building Standards Commission, shall be and become the Green Building Standards Code of the City of Montclair, regulating and controlling the planning, design, operation, use and occupancy of every newly constructed building or structure in the City. The California Green Building Standards Code shall be on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 10-918, § 5, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 13-938, § 5, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 17-964, § 8, 2-21-17)  
10.30.020 - Green Building Standards Code amendments. 
The 2016 Edition of the California Green Building Standards Code is hereby adopted with no amendments. 
(Ord. No. 10-918, § 5, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 13-938, § 4, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 17-964, § 8, 2-21-17)  
Chapter 10.32 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-964, § 9, adopted February 21, 2017, repealed the former Chapter 10.32, § 10.32.010, and enacted a new Chapter 10.32 as set out herein. The former Chapter 10.32 pertained to the housing code and derived from prior code § 8-7.01; Ord. No. 99-789; Ord. No. 99-791 and Ord. No. 02-825. 
 
10.32.010 - Adoption. 
Except as provided in this chapter of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478.is referenced to and, by such reference, incorporated in this chapter and adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Montclair, except as certain portions are hereinafter specifically amended. One copy of the Property Maintenance Code certified by the City Clerk of the City of Montclair shall be filled and kept in the Building Division for use and examination by the public. 
The 2015 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby adopted with no amendments. 
(Ord. No. 17-964, § 9, 2-21-17)  
Chapter 10.36 - MECHANICAL CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-918, § 6, adopted November 15, 2010, repealed the former Chapter, §§ 10.36.010 and 10.36.020, and enacted a new Chapter 10.36 as set out herein. The former Chapter 10.36 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 07-899. 
 
10.36.010 - Adoption. 
Except as provided in this chapter, the California Mechanical Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), shall be and become the Mechanical Code of the City of Montclair, regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation, and maintenance of heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances. The California Mechanical Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 10-918, § 6, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 13-938, § 6, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 17-964, § 10, 2-21-17)  
10.36.020 - Mechanical Code amendments. 
The 2016 Edition of the California Mechanical Code is hereby adopted with no amendments. 
(Ord. No. 10-918, § 6, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 13-938, § 6, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 17-964, § 10, 2-21-17)  
Chapter 10.40 - PLUMBING CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-918, § 6, adopted November 15, 2010, repealed the former Chapter 10.40, §§ 10.40.010 and 10.40.020, and enacted a new Chapter 10.40 as set out herein. The former Chapter 10.40 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 07-899. 
 
10.40.010 - Adoption. 
Except as provided in this chapter, the California Plumbing Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAMPO) shall be and become the Plumbing Code of the City of Montclair, regulating erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance, or use of plumbing systems within the City. The California Plumbing Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 10-918, § 7, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 13-938, § 7, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 17-964, § 11, 2-21-17)  
10.40.020 - Plumbing Code amendments. 
The 2016 Edition of the California Plumbing Code is hereby adopted with no amendments. 
(Ord. No. 10-918, § 7, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 13-938, § 7, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 17-964, § 11, 2-21-17)  
Chapter 10.42 - RESIDENTIAL CODE 
 
10.42.010 - Adoption. 
Except as provided in this chapter, the California Residential Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 International Residential Code, as published by the California Building Standards Commission, shall be and become the Residential Building Code of the City of Montclair, regulating construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every detached one- and two-family dwelling and townhouse not more than three stories above grade in height with a separate means of egress and structures accessory thereto in the City. The California Residential Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 10-918, § 8, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 13-938, § 8, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 17-964, § 12, 2-21-17)  
10.42.020 - Residential Code amendments. 
The following portions and sections of Chapter 1, "Scope and Application, Division I, California Administration," and Division II, "Administration," are hereby amended as follows: 
1.8.4 Permits, Fees, Applications and Inspections. Section 1.8.4 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
1.8.8 Appeals Board. Section 1.8.8 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
1.8.9 Unsafe Buildings or Structures. Section 1.8.9 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
Section R105, "Permits," is hereby amended as follows: 
Item 1 under "Building" is hereby amended as follows: 
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet or measures over eight (8) feet in height to the highest point of the roof. 
Item 2 under "Building" is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
Item 3 under "Building" is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
3. Retaining walls that are not over three feet in height as measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II, or IIIA liquids. 
Item 7 under "Building" is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
7. Prefabricated swimming pools that are capable of containing water to a depth of not more than 12 inches. 
Section R109, "Inspection," is hereby adopted and amended by adding the following subsections: 
R109.0.1 Workmanship. It is the intention of the City that all construction carried on under the review of the Building Division is of good quality. The Building Official shall be empowered to enforce the installation of work that is straight, level, plumb, square, etc., as the situation requires. All work shall be well fit and of a durable nature. Paint in all cases shall not be below normal standard for the use applied. The proper grading of walks, drives and yards shall be required when being installed with the work requiring a building permit. A minimum thickness of 3 1/2 inches for flat concrete work and 2 inches for asphalt paving shall be required. All exterior flat concrete work shall include such breaks for expansion as deemed necessary by the Building Official. 
Subsection R109.1.4, "Frame and masonry inspection," is hereby amended by adding the following language: 
The structure shall have lath paper completely installed at the time of framing inspection. 
Subsection R109.1.5, "Other inspections," is hereby amended by adding the following language: 
A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. This Section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of the technical codes but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection. Reinspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or deviation from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file an application therefore in writing upon a form furnished for that purpose and pay the reinspection fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by this jurisdiction. In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, additional inspection of the work will not be performed until the required fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 10-918, § 8, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 13-938, § 9, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 17-964, § 13, 2-21-17)  
Chapter 10.46 - ABANDONED AND VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE 
Sections: 
 
10.46.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Abandoned and Vacant Property Registration and Maintenance Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 08-906, § 2, 1-5-09)  
10.46.020 - Purpose and scope. 
It is the purpose and intent of the Montclair City Council, through the adoption of this chapter, to establish an abandoned and/or vacant property registration program as a means to protect residential neighborhoods and commercial areas from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and/or security of abandoned and/or vacant properties. 
(Ord. No. 08-906, § 2, 1-5-09)  
10.46.030 - Recordation of transfer of loan/deed of trust. 
Within 10 calendar days following the purchase or transfer of a loan or deed of trust secured by real property, the new beneficiary and trustee shall record with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office an assignment of rents or similar document that lists the name of the person purchasing or acquiring the loan or deed of trust and the mailing address and telephone number of the new beneficiary and trustee responsible for receiving payment associated with the loan or deed of trust. This requirement shall not apply to the sale or transfer of a property when such sale or transfer does not include the sale or transfer of any loan or deed of trust associated with such property. 
(Ord. No. 08-906, § 2, 1-5-09)  
10.46.040 - Registration—Fees. 
A.  Any beneficiary and trustee who hold a deed of trust on real property located within the City of Montclair shall, prior to recording a notice of default, perform an inspection of said real property. If the property is found to be abandoned or shows evidence of vacancy (as these terms are defined by this chapter), the beneficiary and trustee shall register the real property with the City, on City-approved forms, within ten (10) calendar days of the inspection and pay an annual registration fee as may be set by City Council resolution; such fee to accompany the registration form. Any such fee shall be valid for one year and shall be subject to renewal on each subsequent anniversary date. 
B.  If the property is occupied at the time of the initial inspection but remains in default, it shall be inspected by the beneficiary and trustee every subsequent calendar month until: 
1.  The trustor or other party remedies the default. 
2.  The foreclosure is completed and ownership is transferred to a new owner who is not the former beneficiary or trustee. 
3.  The real property is found to be vacant or shows signs of vacancy, at which time the beneficiary and trustee shall register the real property with the City within 10 calendar days of said inspection. 
C.  The beneficiary and trustee shall register with the City any real property which becomes vacant or shows evidence of vacancy after a foreclosure where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any property that becomes vacant or shows evidence of vacancy after being transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. Registration shall be filed on City-approved forms within 10 calendar days of the inspection demonstrating the vacancy or the evidence of vacancy. 
D.  The registration forms shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  Name and street/office address (not a post office box) and, if different, the mailing addresses of the beneficiary and trustee. 
2.  A direct contact name and telephone number for the person handling the deed of trust and/or foreclosure. 
3.  The name, street address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a local property management company responsible for the security, maintenance, and/or marketing of the real property. 
4.  A Statement of Intent that provides the following information: 
a.  The expected period of vacancy. 
b.  A detailed plan for the regular maintenance of the real property during the period of vacancy. 
c.  A timetable for the lawful reoccupancy of the real property or for the rehabilitation or demolition of the structures thereon. 
E.  Persons required to register real property pursuant to this chapter shall keep such property registered and shall comply with all security and maintenance requirements of this chapter for the entire time such property remains vacant or shows evidence of vacancy. Persons required to register real property pursuant to this chapter shall also report any change of information contained in the registration within 10 calendar days of the change. 
F.  When real property subject to registration pursuant to this chapter becomes occupied or title is transferred to another responsible party, the beneficiary and trustee or prior responsible party shall notify the City Manager (or designee thereof) in writing within 10 calendar days of the property's occupancy or the transfer of title. 
G.  In such instance where title to an abandoned or vacant real property has been transferred to another responsible party, the responsible party shall reregister the real property with the City on City-approved forms within 10 calendar days of the transfer. Reregistration forms shall contain, at a minimum, all of the information required by Section 10.46.050(D). A reregistration fee as may be set by City Council resolution shall accompany the reregistration form. 
(Ord. No. 08-906, § 2, 1-5-09)  
10.46.050 - Inspection and registration of previously abandoned real property. 
Any beneficiary and trustee who holds a deed of trust on real property located with the City of Montclair, which property is distressed (as defined by this chapter) on the effective date of this chapter, shall, within 60 days of adoption hereof, perform an inspection of the real property that is the security of the deed of trust. If the real property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, the beneficiary and trustee shall register the real property with the City on City-approved forms, within 10 calendar days of the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 08-906, § 2, 1-5-09)  
10.46.060 - Property maintenance requirements. 
Real property subject to the registration requirements of this chapter shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and healthful condition at all times. The following conditions do not constitute to a neat, clean, and healthful condition and shall be explicitly prohibited: 
A.  Buildings or structures with graffiti, tagging, or other markings or graffiti, tagging, or other markings that have not been completely removed or painted over with a color matching the exterior of the remaining portion of the building or structure. 
B.  Accumulations of lumber; junk; trash; debris; construction material; household furniture; appliances; clothing; or discarded, unused, or abandoned personal property on exterior portions of the real property. 
C.  Accumulations of newspapers, circulars, fliers, notices, or other printed material that give the appearance that the property is vacant (except those required by federal, state, or local law). 
D.  Vegetation that is overgrown, dead, decaying, or otherwise that is not adequately trimmed, pruned, cut, fertilized, watered, or replaced. 
E.  Swimming pools, spas, or other bodies of water that are not maintained in such a manner as to be free and clear of pollutants or debris or that are maintained in such a manner as to be likely to harbor mosquitoes, insects, or vector including, but not limited to, water that is clouded or green; water containing bacterial growth, algae, insect larvae, insect remains, or animal remains; or swimming pools that are not secured and/or maintained in accordance with Chapter 10.48 of this Code. 
F.  Accessible property or accessible structures not secured as required by Section 10.46.070 of this chapter. 
Nothing contained within this chapter relieves a responsible party from complying with any other obligation set forth in any applicable "Conditions, Covenants, and Restrictions" and/or Homeowners' Association rules and regulations or with any other provisions of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-906, § 2, 1-5-09)  
10.46.070 - Security requirements. 
A.  Real properties that are subject to registration pursuant to this chapter (and buildings or structures thereon) shall be secured within 72 hours of becoming abandoned, vacant, or showing evidence of vacancy in a manner to prevent access by unauthorized persons including, but not limited to, the closure, locking, and/or boarding of windows, doors, gates, or other openings of such a size that it may allow a child to access the interior of the real property and/or buildings or structures located thereon (including garage structures or detached accessory structures). 
1.  No window, door, or other opening shall be boarded without prior written approval of the Fire Chief (or his designee); and when such approval has been granted, the boarding of any window, door, or other opening shall be completed to a minimum of the current United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and local securing standards at the time the boarding is completed or required and shall be consistent with the requirements of this chapter. 
a.  The factors that shall be considered in determining whether the boarding of windows, doors, or other openings include, but are not limited to, the following: 
i.  Whether the window, door, or other opening is visible to the public vantage. 
ii.  The difficulty of adequately securing the window, door, or other opening in another manner so as to prevent unauthorized entry. 
iii.  The length of time the real property has been abandoned or vacant. 
iv.  The length of time the real property is expected to remain abandoned or vacant (as indicated in any statement of intent on file with the City). 
B.  Responsible parties for any real property subject to registration pursuant to this chapter shall submit a "letter of agency" (or other similarly entitled authorization) to the Montclair Police Department every 30 calendar days and post "No Trespassing" signs as required and approved by the City so that the Montclair Police Department is authorized to remove and/or arrest all unauthorized persons from the property. 
(Ord. No. 08-906, § 2, 1-5-09)  
10.46.080 - Local property management required. 
A.  Responsible parties for any property subject to registration pursuant to this chapter shall retain the services of a local property management company that shall be responsible for the security, maintenance, and marketing of the real property. The retention of a local property management company shall not relieve other responsible parties of their obligations, duties, or responsibilities. Responsible parties shall provide in writing the name and telephone number of the local property management company to adjoining neighbors in case of emergency or other issues that arise in connection with the subject property. 
B.  Responsible parties shall cause the onsite inspection of any real property subject to registration pursuant to this chapter to be inspected on a weekly basis and shall submit a written inspection report to the Montclair City Manager (or designee thereof) on or before the 10th day of each calendar month for which the real property remains vacant. The written report shall consist of, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  The address of the real property being inspected. 
2.  The dates of inspection. 
3.  A description of any unlawful conditions observed. 
4.  The actions taken or proposed to be taken by the responsible party to abate the unlawful conditions. 
C.  Responsible parties shall cause the abatement of any unlawful condition existing on real property subject to registration pursuant to this chapter within 48 hours of observing or of being notified of the unlawful condition. Nothing in this chapter relieves any responsible party of the need to obtain approvals, permits, and/or licenses as otherwise required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-906, § 2, 1-5-09)  
10.46.090 - Additional requirements—Appeal. 
A.  In addition to the specific maintenance and security requirements provided in this chapter, the Montclair Community Development Director, the Montclair Police Chief, and/or the Montclair Fire Chief (or designees thereof) shall have the authority to require responsible parties for real property subject to registration pursuant to this chapter to implement additional maintenance and security measures in order to effectuate the purpose of this chapter including, but not limited to, the installation of security lighting, increasing the frequency of onsite inspections, employment of an onsite security guard, and/or posting of additional signage at the subject property. 
B.  In accordance with the requirements, procedures, and provisions of Section 1.08.010 of this Code, any responsible party may request a hearing before the Montclair City Manager (or designee thereof) in order to challenge or appeal the imposition of any additional maintenance and/or security requirements pursuant to this section. Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 1.08 of this Code, nothing contained within this chapter authorizes a hearing or appeal to the Planning Commission or the City Council; and the decision of the City Manager (or designee thereof) following a timely appeal shall be final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 08-906, § 2, 1-5-09)  
10.46.100 - Reoccupancy of abandoned or vacant property—Certificate of Code Compliance. 
No person shall cause, permit, or suffer the reoccupancy of any real property (or building or structure thereon) that has been subject to registration pursuant to this chapter in excess of 180 calendar days without having first obtained a "Certificate of Code Compliance" as issued by the City Manager (or designee thereof). A "Certificate of Code Compliance" shall not be issued until such time as the following conditions are met: 
A.  All charges, fees, and/or costs imposed pursuant to this chapter or other applicable provisions of this Code have been tendered-in-full to the City. 
B.  City officials have conducted an onsite inspection of the real property (including all structures located thereon). 
C.  All unlawful conditions existing at the subject property have been fully corrected and abated with all requisite approvals, permits, and/or inspections. 
(Ord. No. 08-906, § 2, 1-5-09)  
10.46.110 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, any person who causes, permits, or suffers a violation of any provision of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any obligation or requirement of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor violation punishable in accordance with Section 1.12.010 of this Code. 
B.  Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this chapter, or of any law or regulation referenced herein, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. 
C.  This chapter does not exclusively regulate the use, maintenance, and security of real and/or personal property within the City; and the remedies provided in this chapter are in addition to other remedies and penalties authorized by this Code or by the laws of the State of California or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 08-906, § 2, 1-5-09)  
Chapter 10.48 - SWIMMING POOLS 
Sections: 
 
10.48.010 - Swimming pools defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, "swimming pool" means an artificial pool or tank capable of holding water to a depth in excess of 12 inches, of whatever size, diameter or material, designed or adapted primarily for swimming or aquatic play or sports. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-10.01)  
10.48.020 - Fencing required. 
Every person in possession of land within the City, either as an owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which land or in which land is situated a swimming pool, shall at all times maintain on the lot or premises upon which such pool is located, and completely surrounding such pool, a fence or other solid structure designed to prevent children and others from inadvertently wandering into the swimming pool. Such fence or other solid structure shall be not less than 5 feet in height with no openings, ladders, or other means for access over the fence or structure (other than by doors or gates) except as follows: 
A.  For a fence or other solid structure having chief covering members constructed in a vertical direction, there shall be no openings in a horizontal direction of more than 4 inches; and 
B.  For a fence or other solid structure having their covering members constructed in a horizontal direction, there shall be no openings in a vertical direction of more than 4 inches. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-10.02)  
10.48.030 - Gates and doors. 
All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device not less than 4 feet, six 6 inches from the ground, designed to keep, and capable of keeping, such door or gate securely closed at all times to prevent a small child from opening such door or gate; provided, however, the door of any dwelling occupied by human beings and forming any part of the enclosure required by the provisions of this chapter need not be so equipped. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-10.03)  
10.48.040 - Emptying upon abandonment or vacation of premises. 
A.  No person in the possession or control of any swimming pool on any land within the City, as either owner, lessee, tenant, purchaser under contract, trustee, mortgagee or beneficiary of the land upon which such swimming pool is located, shall abandon or vacate the premises upon which such swimming pool is located or is accessory or appurtenant, or cause or permit such premises to be abandoned or vacated, without first having either: 
1.  Emptied all the water from such swimming pool and left the swimming pool empty; or 
2.  Completely covered the swimming pool with a pool cover or protective device designed to prevent persons from having access to the pool and provide a professional pool cleaning service, including sweeping, filter changing, proper chemical balance of the water, and any other item necessary to provide a clean and safe pool. 
B.  No owner of any swimming pool on any land within the City, upon learning that the premises upon which such swimming pool is located or is accessory or appurtenant has been abandoned or vacated by the person in possession or control of such swimming pool, shall fail, within 48 hours after so learning or so being advised by the Code Enforcement Division, to either: 
1.  Empty all water from such swimming pool and leave the pool empty until such premises are again occupied by a person in the possession and control of such swimming pool; or 
2.  Completely cover such swimming pool with a pool cover or protective device designed to prevent persons from having access to the pool and provide a professional pool cleaning service, including sweeping, filter changing, proper chemical balance of the water, and any other item necessary to provide a clean and safe pool. 
C.  "Abandon" and "abandoned," as used in this section, shall mean the leaving of premises without an actual, apparent and manifest intention to return thereto within a reasonable and foreseeable time unless definite provisions have been made in writing prior to leaving the premises to have them actually occupied within 30 days after such leaving by some other person who will be in the possession and control of such swimming pool. 
D.  "Vacate" and "vacated," as used in this section, shall mean the leaving of premises with the intent to return, and actually returning to such premises within a period of 30 days or less, or such additional period not exceeding an aggregate of 60 days from the date of leaving as may be granted by the City for good cause, such as an extended vacation emergency, etc., unless during such period of absence some other person actually occupies such premises and is in the possession and control of such swimming pool. 
E.  Every person who violates or fails to comply with any of the terms, provisions or requirements of this section shall thereby have agreed and consented and conclusively be deemed to have agreed and consented: 
1.  That the City may enter upon the premises and empty all water from such pool or cause the same to be done or that the City may enter upon the premises to provide the necessary pool cover or protective device designed to prevent persons from having access to the pool, as well as to provide regular pool maintenance service if it is determined that all the surrounding security systems meet Code provisions; and 
2.  To reimburse the City on demand for the actual costs of emptying such pool, covering such pool, maintaining such pool, or causing the same to be done, and that the City may collect such costs from any person by civil action or any other lawful means selected by or available to the City, including where applicable, the means provided by Title 5, Division 1, Part 1, Chapter 1, Article 9 (beginning at Section 50230) of the Government Code of the State. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-10.04)  
10.48.050 - Enforcement of provisions. 
The public officials of the City, including the police and building officials are charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, and it is herewith specifically provided that the Building Official and his or her authorized deputies shall have the authority to enter upon any premises in the City to investigate the existence of a swimming pool and to determine whether or not there has been compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-10.05)  
Chapter 10.52 - TEMPORARY STRUCTURES 
Sections: 
 
10.52.010 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to erect, cause to be erected, or maintain any temporary structure for a circus, carnival, exhibition, or other place of amusement or for any religious, educational or recreational purposes or for any other public assemblages whatsoever within the City without first having made application for and received permission to do so in accordance with the conditions and limitations set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8-11.01)  
10.52.020 - Permit application. 
A.  The applicant for such a permit shall file an application in writing with the Director of Community Development at least 60 days prior to such erection or use, which application shall be accompanied by a set of building plans, in duplicate, drawn to approximate scale, which shall indicate clearly: 
1.  The type of construction; 
2.  The seating arrangements; 
3.  The aisles; 
4.  The structural details and calculations of the seats and supports; 
5.  The location of all electrical wiring; 
6.  The location of all exits; 
7.  The location of all fire equipment within the structure and the specifications of such equipment; and 
8.  The location, insofar as feasible, of adjacent structures and obstructions which might hinder the free egress of persons from the exits. 
B.  Such application shall further specify: 
1.  Whether any open flame is intended to be used within the structure and, if so, what safety precautions shall be taken; 
2.  The name of the person, firm or corporation which shall use the structure; 
3.  The location of the principal place of business of such person, firm or corporation; 
4.  The names and addresses of the officers of such firm or corporation; 
5.  The length of time the structure is intended to be used for the purposes applied for; 
6.  The hours of the day or night during which such structure is intended to be used as a place of assembly; 
7.  A Certificate of Flame Resistance as required by the Office of the State Fire Marshal; 
8.  What provisions have been made for sanitary facilities for persons using the premises on which such structure is to be erected or is maintained; and 
9.  Such other relevant information as the Director of Community Development may require. 
C.  Such application and plans shall be submitted to the Fire Chief at least 10 days prior to the date of the opening of any such structure, and the Fire Chief shall be notified at least 48 hours prior to the erection of such structure so that an inspection may be made during reasonable daylight hours. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-11.02)  
10.52.030 - Permit issuance. 
If the Director of Community Development finds that there has been or will be compliance with the application provisions of this chapter, the Director of Community Development may issue a permit to erect or maintain said structure conditional upon such reasonable limitations and requirements as may be deemed necessary for the safety of persons or property. If the Director of Community Development finds that there has not been compliance with the application provisions or that inadequate provisions have been or made or will be made by the applicant for the protection of persons or property, he/she shall deny the issuance of the requested permit and return all fund deposited for such permit to the applicant. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 8-11.03)  
10.52.040 - Casualty loss permits. 
A.  Findings Prerequisite to Issuance. Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this Code, a permit for a temporary structure to be used as a business establishment may be obtained upon proper application to the Director of Community Development when the following five conditions have been met: 
1.  That the applicant's regularly established place of business has been substantially destroyed by fire, flood, windstorm, earthquake, or other casualty rendering the applicant's building at least temporarily unusable for the previous use; 
2.  That a temporary structure is reasonable and necessary for the maintenance of such business; 
3.  That the applicant, in good faith, intends to reconstruct the damaged premises within a reasonable time; 
4.  That the denial of such a permit will work a substantial hardship on the applicant; and 
5.  That the granting of such a permit will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is located. 
B.  Application. The application for such a permit shall contain, so far as applicable, all the information and requirements specified in this chapter. 
C.  Term. No permit issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for a period in excess of 60 days, except that the permit may be extended for an additional 30-day period upon application to the Director of Community Development prior to the expiration of the original permit period. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 8-11.12)  
10.52.050 - Fees. 
The applicant shall pay to the City a fee in the amount of Two Hundred (200) dollars per day for each day of construction, maintenance or existence of such temporary structure. Such fee shall not be applied to temporary structures for which permits are issued pursuant to Section 10.52.040 of this chapter entitled "Casualty loss permits." 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-11.04)  
10.52.060 - Insurance. 
The applicant shall furnish evidence that a public liability insurance policy in the amount of One Million (1,000,000) Dollars, combined single limit, shall be in force and effect at the time such structure is to be occupied as a place of assembly by the public. The City of Montclair shall also be specified as a named insured on the policy of insurance required in this section. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 8-11.05)  
10.52.070 - Bond. 
The applicant shall deposit with the City Treasurer a cash bond in the amount of Five Thousand (5000) Dollars, conditioned upon saving harmless the City from any and all liabilities or causes of action which might arise by virtue of the granting of a permit to the applicant and conditioned further that no damage will be done to the streets, sewers, trees, or adjoining property and that no dirt, paper, litter, or other debris will be permitted to remain upon the streets or upon any private property by such applicant. Such cash bond shall be returned to the applicant upon certification by the Chief of Police that there has been compliance with all the conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-11.06)  
10.52.080 - Deposit for police officers and fire equipment. 
If the Director of Community Development shall determine that the attendance of police officers or fire equipment at the location of the structure during its use is necessary for the safety of persons and property, the Director of Community Development shall require that the applicant deposit with the Director of Community Development a sum equal to the reasonable value of the use of such officers or equipment in order to reimburse the City for such expense. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-11.07)  
10.52.090 - Safety standards. 
The Fire Chief shall determine if the applicant has made provision for: 
A.  Adequate aisles, seats, platforms and poles; 
B.  Sufficient, well marked, and properly lighted exits; 
C.  Sufficient first aid and fire appliances to be distributed throughout the structure with operating personnel familiar with the operation of such equipment available and assigned during the use of such structure as a place of assembly; 
D.  Sufficient "No Smoking" signs visible at all times; 
E.  Proper safeguarding of any use of open flames. The Fire Chief may determine that the use of open flames is prohibited; 
F.  Such special fire equipment to attend at such structure during its use as a place of public assembly as the Fire Chief may decide is necessary for proper fire protection; 
G.  The attendance of such special police officers and fire personnel as the Fire Chief may deem necessary for the control of persons in the assembly to prevent overcrowding, obstruction of aisles and exits, and such other controls as may be necessary to render the occupation of such structure by the public safe; and 
H.  The tent and canvas parts of the structure and all combustible decorative materials, including curtains, acoustic materials, streamers, cloth, cotton batting, straw, vines, leaves, trees and moss, to be rendered fireproof. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-11.08)  
10.52.100 - Inspection of premises. 
Upon completion of such structure, it shall not be used as a place of assembly until the Fire Chief and Police Chief, or their authorized agents, have inspected the entire premises. 
(Prior code § 8-11.09)  
10.52.110 - Revocation of permit. 
If the Community Development Director and Police Chief or Fire Chief, or their duly authorized agents, find that such structure, or the premises on which it is located, is constructed or is being maintained in violation of any of the provisions of the permit or of this chapter, or that the structure or premises are being maintained otherwise in such a manner as to be a danger to the safety of persons or property, the permit issued may be revoked. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-11.10)  
10.52.120 - Appeals. 
Any person whose permit has been denied or revoked may, within 10 days after receipt of notice thereof, appeal in writing, filed with the City Clerk, to the City Council for a hearing thereon, and the decision of the City Council shall be final. If no appeal is made within 10 days, the action taken shall be final. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-11.11)  
Chapter 10.56 - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE 
Sections: 
 
10.56.010 - Adoption. 
That certain document in book form entitled "Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition," as prepared by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, is referenced to, and by such reference incorporated in this chapter and adopted as the Administrative Code of the City; except as certain portions are hereinafter specifically amended. One copy of the Uniform Administrative Code, certified by the City Clerk of the City, shall be filed and will be kept on file for use and examination by the public at the City of Montclair, 5111 Benito Street, Montclair, California. 
(Ord. 02-825 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-789 § 1 (part): prior code § 15-1.01)  
10.56.020 - Administrative Code amendments. 
The following portions and sections of the Administrative Code are amended as follows: 
Subsection 101.3, "Scope," is hereby amended by adding the following language: 
In order to properly maintain and safeguard healthful living conditions and comply with all provisions of the latest adopted codes, It is declared unlawful to use any streetcars, boxcars, house cars, motor bus bodies, or similar means of conveyance, or structures of similar nature of construction, for places of habitation, residence, or place of business in this City provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall prohibit the use of any house trailer or mobile home for places of abode or habitation in an approved mobile home park, provided such structures comply with all other conditions and requirements of this Code. 
Subsection 301.2.1, "Building permits," is hereby amended as follows: 
Item 2 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
Item 5 is amended to read as follows: 
Retaining walls that are not over three feet in height, measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II, or III-A liquids. 
Item 11 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
Subsection 304.1, "General," is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the Development Review Fee Schedule as established by resolution of the City Council of the City of Montclair. For buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical gas or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid in accordance with said fee schedule. 
Subsection 304.2, "Permit Fees," is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
Subsection 304.3, "Plan Review Fees," paragraph one, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
When submittal documents are required by Subsection 302.2, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submittal of documents for plan review. The plan review fee shall be established in the Development Review Fee Schedule as established by resolution of the City Council of the City of Montclair. 
Subsection 304.3, "Plan Review Fees," paragraph two, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
The plan review fees for electrical, mechanical and plumbing work shall be established in the Development Review Fee Schedule as established by resolution of the City Council of the City of Montclair. 
Subsection 304.3, "Plan Review Fees," paragraph three, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
When a plan for grading work is required to be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. Said grading plan review fees are established by resolution of the City Council of the City of Montclair. Separate plan review fees shall apply to retaining walls of major drainage structures as required elsewhere in this Code. 
Subsection 304.3, "Plan Review Fees," is hereby amended by adding the following language: 
When the City retains a private entity or person to perform plan review, the plan review fee shall be in an amount sufficient to defray the cost of such services, plus a 15 percent fee to cover the cost of administration, but in no case shall the plan review fee be less than the amount specified in this Section. 
Subsection 304.5.2, "Fee," is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
Whenever the same person or entity is found to have performed work for which a permit is required without first obtaining said permit four or more times, said investigation fee shall be ten times the fee amount set forth in the adopted Development Review Fee Schedule. 
Section 305, "Inspections," is hereby amended by adding the following subsection: 
305.9 Workmanship. It is the intention of the City that all construction carried on under the review of the Building Division be of good quality. The Building Official shall be empowered to enforce the installation of work which is straight, level, plumb, square, etc., as the situation requires. All work shall be well fit and of a durable nature. Paint in all cases shall not be below normal standard for the use applied. The proper grading of walks, drives and yards shall be required when being installed with the work requiring a building permit. A minimum thickness of 3½ inches for flat concrete work and 2 inches for asphalt paving shall be required. All exterior flat concrete work shall include such breaks for expansion as deemed necessary by the Building Official. 
Section 309, "Certificate of Occupancy," is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
Table 3-A, "Building Permit Fees," is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
Table 3-B, "Electrical Permit Fees," is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
Table 3-C, "Mechanical Permit Fees," is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
Table 3-D, "Plumbing Permit Fees," is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
Table 3-E, "Elevator Permit Fees," is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
Table 3-F, "Elevator Annual Certificates of Inspection Fees," is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. 06-889 § 3 (part); Ord. 02-825 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-789 § 1 (part): prior code § 15-1.02) 
(Ord. No. 13-938, § 10, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 17-964, § 14, 2-21-17)  
Title 11 - ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT  
Division I. - Administration  
Chapter 11.02 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
11.02.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this title: 
Accessory structure/building means structure that is subordinate to, smaller in floor area than, and detached from the primary structure of a residential property. Typical residential accessory structures include, but are not limited to, pool houses, storage buildings, patio covers, canopies, garages, carports, workshops, greenhouses (for noncommercial raising of plants), outdoor fire-places, light poles, gazebos, tree houses, and play structures. A cargo/shipping container is not considered an accessory structure in any residential district. 
Accessory living quarters means living quarters within an accessory building located on the same premises with the main building, such quarters having no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
Active recreational areas means the usable common open space which is developed with active facilities, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, recreational buildings, a clubhouse, or similar facilities. 
Alley means a public way permanently reserved as a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Alteration , when applied to historical preservation, means any exterior change in a building or structure. 
Amusement arcade or amusement game arcade means any establishment containing four or more amusement devices or an establishment with less than four amusement devices when such devices occupy more than 5 percent of the total floor area of the business. For the purpose of this title, a typical device and playing area requires 10 square feet. 
Amusement device , when applied to amusement game arcades, means any electronic or mechanical machine which provides amusement or entertainment, which may be operated or played upon the placing or depositing therein of any coin, check, slug, ball or any other article or device, or by paying therefor either in advance of or after use. This definition shall not include jukeboxes, telephone devices, or machines that sell merchandise. 
Antenna means any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, satellite dish antennas, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves, which system is external to or attached to the exterior of any building. "Antenna" shall include any device having active elements extending any direction, and any directional beam-type array having element(s) carried by and disposed from a generally horizontal boom which may be mounted upon or rotated through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the boom and antenna support, all of which elements are deemed to be a part of the antenna. 
Antenna height means the total maximum to which an antenna is capable of being raised and shall be measured from the highest point of the finished grade, on the same property adjacent to the structure. 
Antidrain check valve means a valve located under a sprinkler head to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from the lower elevation sprinkler heads when the system is off. 
Antique store means a store that sells antiques only or a store that sells antiques associated with the sales of other products. An antique shall be defined as an item which has an age of at least 100 years or shall be an item which has a value to a collector that is greater than its original sales value. 
Apartment house means the same as "dwelling, multiple." 
Applicant means as it relates to Chapter 11.60 herein, any person required to submit a Landscape Documentation Package. Applicant may include the property owner or an agent of the owner. 
Application rate means the depth of water applied to a given area, usually measured in inches per hour or gallons per hour. 
Applied water means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape area. 
Approval means the decision by a public agency which commits the agency to a definite course of action in regard to a project intended to be carried out by any person. Approval occurs when the public agency commits to allow a use and/or issue a permit, grant, license, or other entitlement. The exact date of approval of any project is a matter determined by each public agency according to its rules, regulations, and ordinances. 
Architectural feature , when applied to historical preservation, means the architectural elements reflecting style, design and components of all of the outer surfaces of a structure. 
Association means the organization of persons who own a lot, parcel, area, airspace, or right of exclusive occupancy in a unit of condominiums and may have interests in the control of common areas of such project. 
Attached means the physical sharing of a common wall between two enclosed, habitable structures. 
Attached accessory structure means an accessory building or structure shall be considered an integral part of the principal building if it is connected to the primary building including by a covered passageway. 
Automatic rain shutoff feature means a system capability which detects rainfall and automatically suspends the operation of the irrigation system during rain events. 
Automobile wrecking means the dismantling, wrecking, or salvage use of motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts. 
Backflow prevention device means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
Basement means a space wholly or partly underground and having one-half or more of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement, when designed for or occupied by a dwelling, business, or manufacturing use, shall be considered to be a "story." 
Billboard means any sign which advertises or displays in any manner information about any business, industry, service, product, event or pursuit not conducted on the premises on which the sign is erected or maintained. 
Block means a portion of any street lying between two intersecting streets. 
Boardinghouse means a building where meals are provided for compensation for at least three persons, but not more than 10 persons. "Boardinghouse" does not include not rest homes. 
Bona fide eating establishment means a business enterprise, operated as a restaurant, which is conducted, or is proposed to be conducted, in compliance with each of the following requirements: 
1.  A kitchen and a dining area that constitute permanent and identifiable portions of the business premises; 
2.  A printed menu which is provided to patrons for the purpose of ordering meals; 
3.  Not less than 51 percent of the gross annual income of the business enterprise is derived from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages; 
4.  At least one full-time cook is engaged by the business enterprise to prepare meals for patrons on the premises during the permissible hours of operation; 
5.  The business premises do not contain any drive-up or take-out windows; 
6.  Any bar or cocktail lounge operated by the business enterprise is separated from the dining area by a wall or other partition; 
7.  The business premises do not contain any pool tables, video games, or other coin-operated amusement devices. 
Botanical gardens and arboretums means public or private facilities for the demonstration and observation of the cultivation of flowers, fruits, vegetables, or ornamental plants. 
Building means a permanently located structure having a roof. All forms of vehicles are excluded. 
Building area means the sum in square feet of the ground areas occupied by all buildings and structures on a lot. 
Building height means the vertical distance measured from the average level of the finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the structure. 
Building line means a line parallel with a lot line or planned street line and distant therefrom by the depth of the required yard. 
Building permit means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscape. 
Building site means the ground area of a building or group of buildings, together with all required open spaces. 
Bungalow court means a group of three or more detached, one story, one- or two-family dwellings located upon a single lot, together with all required open spaces. "Bungalow court" does not include motels. 
Business or commerce means the purchase, sale, or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, substance or commodity for profit or livelihood, or the ownership or management of office buildings or office, recreational or amusement enterprises, or the maintenance and use of offices by professions and trades rendering services. 
California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS) means a program in the Office of Water Use Efficiency (OWUE), California Department of Water Resources (DWR) that manages a network of over 120 automated weather stations in the state of California. CIMIS was developed in 1982 by the DWR and the University of California at Davis to assist California's irrigators in managing their water resources efficiently. 
Carnival means a nonpermanent amusement location which has a combination of rides, games, food services, novelties, and games of skill which are not otherwise approved within this title. 
Carport means a permanently roofed accessory structure attached to the side of a dwelling and designed and used for the shelter or storage of vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main building. 
CC&R's means Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions of any condominium project, community, apartment house or any other planned residential development. 
Certified farmers' market means the occasional, seasonal, regular, or semiregular sales of food and farm produce such as fruits, vegetables, nuts, herbs, eggs, honey, flowers, and food products from livestock at an outdoor or indoor venue that is certified by the State of California and operated in accordance with Division 17, Chapter 10.5 (Section 47000 et seq.) of the State of California Food and Agricultural Code. 
Certified landscape irrigation auditor means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited educational institution or a professional trade organization. 
CFS means cubic feet per second. 
Child means a person who is under 18 years of age who is being provided care and supervision in a child day care facility, except where otherwise specified in the title. 
Child day care facility means a facility which provides nonmedical care to children under 18 years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activity of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a 24-hour-per-day basis. "Child day care facility" includes day care centers and family day care homes. 
Circus means a traveling show with, but not be limited to, acrobats, trained animals, and clowns. 
Club, when applied to zoning, means an association of persons for some common nonprofit purpose, operating under bylaws providing regular dues and procedures for election to membership, but not including "nightclub" groups organized primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Cluster housing project means a grouping of lots of no specific area requirements but combined with common areas to compute the lot area required for any particular zone as specified in this title, as distinguished from the multistory apartment-type of development. Residential structures on such lots need not cover the entire lot, and may have common walls. 
Commission means the Planning Commission of the City of Montclair. 
Common areas in office and industrial condominium developments means the entire office or industrial condominium development excepting all office or industrial condominium units therein granted or reserved to individual ownerships. 
Common areas in planned residential projects means the entire planned residential project excepting all units therein granted or reserved to individual ownerships. 
Common use , when applied to planned office and industrial condominium developments, means the uninfringed utilization of common areas by the owner of a condominium interest within a condominium development. 
Community apartment project means a project in which an undivided interest in the land and common area is coupled with the right to the exclusive occupancy or ownership of a designated apartment therein. 
Community Development Director means the person responsible for directing the activities of the Community Development Department including the implementation of planning, zoning, and related codes and policies. 
Conditioned space shall be defined as an area or occupied room that is being heated or cooled for human habitation. 
Condominium means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. 
Such estate may, with respect to the duration of an enjoinment, be either: 
1.  An estate of inheritance or perpetual estate; 
2.  An estate for life; or 
3.  An estate for years. 
Control valve means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. It may also mean all of the sprinklers or emitters in a line controlled by the valve. 
Controller means an automatic timing device used to control valves or heads to operate an irrigation system. A weather-based controller is a controller that uses evapotranspiration or weather data. A self-adjusting irrigation controller is a controller that uses sensor data (i.e., soil moisture sensor). 
Convenience Market, Neighborhood . Neighborhood convenience market means a retail facility of 8,000 square feet or less which provides a limited variety of food, sundries, and off-sale liquor for day-to-day shopping convenience located within 300 feet of neighboring residential zones. 
Conversion factor (0.62) means a number that converts the maximum applied water allowance from acre-inches per acre per year, to gallons per square foot per year. The conversion factor is calculated as follows: 
(325,851 gallons/43,560 SF)/12 inches = 0.62 
Where: 325,851 gallons = one acre foot 
43,560 square feet = one acre 
12 inches = one foot 
To convert gallons per year to 100 CF per year, divide gallons per year by 748 (748 gallons equals 100 CF). 
Cooperative apartment means an improved real property owned or leased by a cooperative housing corporation or by any other corporation, partnership, trust or association, if all or substantially all of the shareholders of such corporation, or partners of such partnership, or beneficiaries of such trust, or members of such association, receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the apartment house, which right of occupancy is transferable only concurrently with the transfer of the stock, partnership interest, beneficial interest, or membership held by the person having such right of occupancy. For all purposes of this Code, a cooperative apartment will be subject to the same restrictions and conditions as condominiums and community apartments. 
Cooperative apartment project means the entire parcel of real property, including all structures thereon, on which a cooperative apartment is to be constructed or an existing improved real property is to be converted to a cooperative apartment. 
Cultivated landscape area means planted areas that are frequently maintained by mowing, irrigating, pruning, fertilizing, etc. 
Day-care center and day-care facility means a private or nonprofit child day-care center/facility, including nursery services, preschools, and extended day-care facilities, which provide care, protection and supervision of 12 or more children for periods of less than 24 hours per day. Such center/facility is for the care of healthy children ages 2 to 12 years old. This classification does not include family day-care homes. 
Demolition , when applied to historical preservation, means the act or process of destroying an historic landmark, or a major portion of an historic landmark, including natural features, trees, agricultural areas, as well as exterior architectural features. 
Design review means design review is the local government practice of examining public and private projects for their aesthetic, architectural, or urban design quality and compatibility with nearby development. Design review focuses on the appearance of new construction, site planning, and such concerns as landscaping, signage, and other aesthetic issues. Design review typically involves reviewing development projects for their consistency with a community's adopted standards or criteria addressing community character and aesthetic quality. 
Designated parking spaces for trucks or trailers shall consist of a minimum area of 12.5 feet wide and 60 feet long, with a 65-foot backup space. Designated parking for tractor-only spaces shall consist of a minimum area of 12.5 feet wide and 30 feet long, with a 40-foot backup space. 
Designation , when applied to historical preservation, means the act of selecting, in accordance with the criteria in this chapter, an historic landmark for official City status by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
Detached means the physical separation of 10 feet or greater between the primary and the proposed second unit structures. 
Developer means a landowner or owner's agent responsible for the development of land. This definition does not include homeowners or landlords of single-family homes. 
Development means the uses to which land will be put; the buildings and structures to be constructed on the land, and all alteration of the land and other construction associated with these uses, buildings, and structures. 
Driveway means a hard-surfaced vehicle access, parking area or parking apron on private property improved by means of asphalt, concrete, cement, brick or block which is generally flat in contour and is substantially impervious. It shall not include pervious alternatives including, but not limited to, gravel, loose stone, or slag. 
Duplex means the same as "dwelling, two-family." 
Dwelling means a building, or portion thereof, designed for or occupied exclusively for residential purposes, including one-family, two-family, and multifamily dwellings, but not including hotels, boardinghouses, and lodging houses. 
Dwelling unit means two or more rooms in a dwelling or apartment hotel designed for or occupied by one family for living or sleeping purposes and having only one kitchen. 
Dwelling, Multiple . Multiple dwelling means a building, or portion thereof, designed for or occupied by three or more families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling, One-Family . One-family dwelling means a detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family, including guests and servants employed on the premises, and having only one kitchen. 
Dwelling, Two-Family . Two-family dwelling means a building under one roof designed for or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other. 
Ecological restoration project means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
Educational institutions means schools, colleges, or universities supported wholly or in part by public funds, and other colleges, universities, or other schools providing general academic instruction, as determined by the State Board of Education. 
Emitter means drip irrigation fittings that deliver water slowly from the irrigation system to the soil. 
Established landscape means the point in which plants in the landscape area have developed roots into the soil adjacent to the root ball. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. 
Establishment period means the first year after installing plant material in the landscape area, or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. 
Estimated annual applied water use means the portion of the estimated annual total water use that is derived from applied water. The estimated annual applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. 
Estimated total water use means the annual total amount of water estimated to be needed to keep the plants in the landscaped area healthy. It is based upon such factors as the local evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscaped area, the types of plants, and the efficiency of the irrigation system. 
ET adjustment factor means a factor of 0.7, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water to be applied to the landscape area. A combined plant mix with a statewide average 0.5 is the basis of the plant factor portion of this calculation. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of the ET adjustment factor is 0.71. 
ETo (reference evapotranspiration) means a standard measurement of environmental parameters that affect the water use of plants. ETo is given in inches per day, month, or year, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall cool-season grass that is well watered. 
Evapotranspiration means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil surfaces and transpired by plants during a specific time. The reference evapotranspiration rates (in inches) for the City of Montclair are as follows: _____ 
Jan 	Feb 	Mar 	Apr 	May 	Jun 	Jul 	Aug 	Sep 	Oct 	Nov 	Dec 	Annual ETo 
2.1 	2.9 	3.9 	4.5 	5.7 	6.5 	7.3 	7.1 	5.9 	4.2 	2.6 	2.0 	54.6 
 
_____ 
Exterior building wall means any wall or element of a wall, or any member or group of members, which defines the exterior boundaries or courts of a building. 
Facade easement , when applied to historical preservation, means an easement for public protection of the facade of a landmark in order to assure its continued preservation and maintenance. Said easement shall be granted in the form of a deed and shall, in effect, make the City the owner of the facade. Unless otherwise agreed by both parties, maintenance of said facade shall be the responsibility of the landmark owner, but no alterations or changes of any kind to the facade shall be permitted without City approval. 
Family means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood or marriage or a group of not more than five persons, excluding servants, who are not related by blood or marriage living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. 
Family, Foster . Foster-family means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood or marriage and up to five children cared for as foster children or up to four mentally retarded or deficient persons, provided in such case the total number of persons living in a dwelling unit does not exceed eight persons, and further subject to the provisions of Chapter 11.52. 
Family day-care home means a home which regularly provides care, protection and supervision for 14 or fewer children, in the provider's own home, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away, subject to the following: 
1.  Large family day-care home means a home that provides family day-care to seven to 12 children, including children who reside in the home. Further, a large family day-care home may provide care for more than 12 children and up to and including 14 children if all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  At least two of the children are at least six years of age; 
b.  No more than three infants are cared for during any time when more than 12 children are being cared for; 
c.  The licensee notifies parents that the facility is caring for two additional school-age children and that there may be up to 13 or 14 children in the home at one time; 
d.  The licensee obtains written consent of the property owner when the family day-care home is operated on property that is leased or rented. 
2.  Small family day-care home means a home that provides family day-care to six or fewer children, including children who reside in the home. Further, a small family day-care home may provide care for more than six and up to eight children without an additional adult attendant, if all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  At least two of the children are at least six years of age; 
b.  No more than two infants are cared for during any time when more than six children are being cared for; 
c.  The licensee notifies parents that the facility is caring for two additional school-age children and that there may be up to seven or eight children in the home at one time; 
d.  The licensee obtains written consent of the property owner when the family day-care home is operated on property that is leased or rented. 
Flow rate means the rate at which water flows through pipes and valves, usually in GPM or CFS. 
Floor Area, Gross. Gross floor area means the area of the primary structure or residence, including the area of attached garages and solid roof covered patios. 
Freeway means a main highway in respect to which the owners of abutting lands have no right to easement or access to or from their abutting lands, or in respect to which such owners have only limited or restricted easement or access, and which is declared to be such in compliance with the California Streets and Highways Code. 
Frontage means the length of a lot along a street or other principal public thoroughfare, but not including such length along an alley or railroad. 
Front-yard area means the area from the front property line to the primary residence, including the required front yard setback. 
Garage, Private . Private garage means a completely enclosed accessory building or a completely enclosed accessory portion of the main building designed or used for the shelter or storage of vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main building. 
GPM means gallons per minute. 
Garage, Public . Public garage means a building other than a private garage used for the care, repair, or equipping of automobiles or where such vehicles are kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
Gross acre means that number of acres which includes the total lot area plus that area dedicated or to be dedicated for public cross-through street purposes. In utilizing a dedicated area for the computation of gross acres, the extremities of such area shall not go beyond the center lines of those dedicated rights-of-way adjacent to the lot. 
Ground cover means plants, other than turf grass, normally reaching an average maximum height of not more than two feet at maturity. 
Guest house means living quarters within an accessory building located on the same premises with the main building for the use of temporary guests of the occupants of the premises and having no kitchen and not being rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
Hardscape or hardscaping means nonliving and inanimate and/or durable elements of a landscaping plan, including but not limited to pavement, masonry work or woodwork. Decorative hardscape elements include appropriately sized fountains or boulders, river rock, cobbles, crushed rock, gravel, organic mulches, walks, decorative pavers, and artificial turf that complement living plant materials and enhance the appearance of the property and structures built thereon, and serve as an integral part of an overall landscape concept. Pools and other water features are considered part of the landscaped area and not considered hardscapes for purposes of Chapter 11.60 herein. 
Hardship , when applied to historical preservation, means a finding of extreme financial privation or adversity which allows granting of an alteration certificate for changes to a designated landmark that otherwise would not be granted by the Historic Preservation Commission or City Council on appeal. 
Hazardous waste means a waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may either: 
1.  Cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness; 
2.  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. Unless expressly provided otherwise, the term "hazardous waste" shall be understood to also include "extremely hazardous waste" (Health and Safety Code, Section 25117). 
Hazardous waste facility means any structure or other appurtenances and improvements on the land and all contiguous land used for treatment, transfer, storage, resource recovery, disposal or recycling of hazardous waste (California Health and Safety Code, Section 25117.1). 
Hazardous waste facility project means a project under-taken for the purpose of siting and constructing a new hazardous waste facility that will require a hazardous waste facilities permit issued pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 25200 or for the purpose of significantly expanding or modifying an existing hazardous waste facility that is being used or operated under a permit issued pursuant to Section 25200 or a grant of interim status pursuant to Section 25200.5. Unless expressly provided otherwise, "hazardous waste facility project" includes a "specified hazardous waste facility project." 
Home occupation means any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for dwelling purposes and which use does not change the character thereof and does not adversely affect the uses permitted in the zone of which it is a part. Home occupation uses shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 11.58 of this Code. 
Homeowner means a homeowner, for purposes of Chapter 11.60 herein, is a person who owns the subject property and occupies the dwelling thereon. This definition excludes speculative homes, which are not owner-occupied dwellings and that are subject to the requirements applicable to developer-installed residential landscape projects. This definition also excludes rental units regardless of number of units on a property. 
Homeowner installed landscape means any landscaping either installed by the homeowner or by a contractor, person, or persons hired by the homeowner. 
Hospital means an institution for the diagnosis, care, and treatment of human illness. 
Hotel means the building designed for, or occupied as, the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without means, in which building there are six or more guest rooms and in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite. Jails, hospitals, asylums, sanitariums, orphanages, prisons, detention homes, or similar buildings where human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint are specifically not included in the definition of "hotel." 
Hydrozone means a portion of the landscape area with plants having similar watering needs and which is served by a valve or set of valves with the same watering schedule. 
Impervious surface means a surface composed of any material which impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into the soil. Such surfaces include all concrete, asphalt and gravel surfaces. These include, but are not be limited to, streets and parking areas, sidewalks, patios, and structures which cover the land. 
Industrial condominium development means a structure or structures proposed for construction comprising a project in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right to the exclusive occupancy of a designated industrial or manufacturing space and accompanying facilities. 
Industrial condominium unit means the element of an industrial condominium development which is not owned in common with the owners of other condominium interests in the development plus a proportionate share of all common areas. 
Infant , when applied to children's day care facilities, means a person under three years of age who is being provided care and supervision in a children's day care facility. 
Infiltration rate means the rate of water entry into the soil, expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (inches per hour). 
Inoperative activity means a business or activity that has ceased operation at any given location for a continuous period of at least 60 days. 
Invasive species means nonindigenous species that adversely affect the habitats they invade economically, environmentally or ecologically. Invasive species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. "Noxious weeds" means any weed designated by the Weed Control Regulations in the Weed Control Act and identified on a Regional District noxious weed control list. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database. 
IPH means inches per hour. 
Irrigation audit means the evaluation of an irrigation system's performance and efficiency as conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. 
Irrigation efficiency means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used, divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum irrigation efficiency for purposes of Chapter 11.60 is 0.71. Greater irrigation efficiency can be expected from well designed and maintained systems. 
Irrigation system means a permanent artificial watering system designed to transport and distribute water to plants. 
Kitchen means any room used for, intended for, or designed to be used for cooking or the preparation of food. 
Land disposal facility means a hazardous waste facility where hazardous waste is disposed in, on, under, or to the land. 
Land use decision means a discretionary decision of a local agency concerning a hazardous waste facility project, including the issuance of a land use permit or a conditional use permit, the granting of a variance, the subdivision of property, and the modification of existing property lines pursuant to Title 7 (commencing with Section 65000) of the Government Code. 
Landmark , when applied to historic preservation, means any building, structure or property which has special historic, cultural, architectural or community value and which has been designated as an historic building and is shown to merit preservation, restoration and/or protection. 
Landscape architect means a person licensed to practice landscape architecture in the State of California pursuant to Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 5615) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code. 
Landscape area means the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, artificial turf, other pervious or nonpervious hardscapes, and other nonirrigated areas designated for nondevelopment (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation). 
Landscape Concept Plan means the portion of a Landscape Documentation Package that includes a design statement for the project, irrigation notes, planting notes, the plant palette, meeting the water conservation goals, design standards, and specifications contained in Chapter 11.60 herein. 
Landscape construction drawings means the portion of a Landscape Documentation Package that includes the irrigation plan, plant and soils plan, water management plan, and conforms with the requirements of Chapter 11.60 herein. 
Landscape Documentation Package means the complete packet of documents required under Section 11.60.120 to be submitted to the local agency documentation packages include the Landscape Concept Plan and landscape construction drawings. 
Landscape water audit means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. Audits include, but are not limited to, inspection, system tune-up, system test for distribution uniformity, verification of minimal overspray or runoff that causes overland flow and preparation of an irrigation schedule. 
Landscaped area means unpaved areas which are improved by means of lawn or other ground cover, shrubs and trees, and which may include hard-surfaced areas and/or material such as decorative rock and bark. Such improved areas shall not exceed 20 percent, of the total landscaped area and are intended to be a complementary aspect of a landscape design. 
Landscaping means any combination of living plant materials (such as trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, or turf) and nonliving material (such as artificial turf, rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, walls, fences, or decorative paving materials). Parking, storage areas, or vehicular ways are not considered landscaping. 
Local agency means a local agency is the entity responsible for the approval of a permit, plan check, and design review for a project. The City of Montclair is the local agency responsible for adopting and implementing the requirements in this title. 
Local water purveyor means any entity including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service. 
Loading space , when applied to zoning, means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and which loading space abuts upon a street, alley, or other appropriate means of access. 
Lodging house means a building with not more than five guest rooms where, for compensation, lodging is provided for three persons, but not more than 10 persons. 
Lot means: 
1.  A parcel of land abutting on one or more public streets with a separate and distinct number or other designation shown on a plat or record of survey recorded in the Office of the County Recorder; or 
2.  A parcel of real property abutting at least one public street and shown on the records of the County Assessor as held under separate ownership from adjacent property prior to May 15, 1958. 
Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. 
Lot Line, Front . Front lot line means, in the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street and, in the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street, except in those cases where the latest tract deed restrictions specify another line as the front lot line. 
Lot coverage means the sum of the footprint area of the primary and all accessory structures on a lot. 
Lot Line, Rear . Rear lot line means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a depth of not less than 10 feet. 
Lot Line, Side . Side lot line means any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at the building line. 
Lot, Corner. Corner lot means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets, having an angle of intersection of not more than 135 degrees and a width not greater than 75 feet. 
Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. 
Lot, Interior. Interior lot means a lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot, Key. Key lot means the first lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot not separated by an alley. 
Lot, Reversed Corner. Reversed corner lot means a corner lot, the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front line of the lot upon which it rears. 
Lot, Through. Through lot means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
Low-head drainage means drainage from a sprinkler that is caused by water flowing through an irrigation system from a higher level of elevation. 
Main building means a building within which is conducted the principal use permitted on the lot as provided in this title. 
Major accessory structure means any accessory building or structure with a footprint greater than 120 square feet in area, and/or greater than eight feet in height. Major accessory buildings or structures shall not be connected to utilities without necessary permits. 
Manufactured home means a dwelling unit constructed wholly or partially off-site that is certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and pursuant to Section 18551 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) means for design purposes, the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscape area as specified in Section 11.60.150 herein (calculation of the maximum applied water allowance). The maximum applied water allowance is based upon the reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. 
Minor accessory structure means an accessory building or structure with a footprint of 120 square feet or less and which is eight feet or less in height. Minor accessory buildings or structures shall not be connected to utilities without necessary permits. 
Mobile home means a structure transportable in one or more sections designed and equipped to contain not more than two dwelling units to be used with or without a foundation system. "Mobile home" does not include a recreational vehicle or factory-built housing. 
Modular home means factory-built housing as defined in this chapter. 
Modular unit means factory-built housing as defined in this chapter. 
Motel means a group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or dwelling units with garages attached or parking spaces conveniently located to each unit, all for the temporary use of automobile tourists or transients, and shall include auto courts or motor lodges. 
Mulch means any organic material such as leaves, or bark, or inorganic material such as pebbles, stones, gravel, decorative sand or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation. 
Net acre means the number of acres within the development site bounded by the property lines. 
Nonconditioned space shall be defined to include, but not limited to, open decks, patios and breezeways and nonconditioned shops, garages or storage areas. 
Nonconforming building , when applied to zoning means a building, or portion thereof lawfully existing on May 15, 1958, which was designed, erected, or structurally altered for a use which does not conform to the regulations of the zone in which it is located, or which does not comply with all the height and area regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
Nonconforming use , when applied to zoning, means a building or land lawfully occupied on May 15, 1958, which use does not conform with the regulations of the zone in which it is situated. 
Off-sale beer and wine establishment as an incidental use means an establishment that is making application for or has obtained a retail liquor license (Type 20) from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises in original sealed containers. Such establishments shall be limited to an aggregate display area for alcoholic beverages of four square feet or less and 10 cubic feet or less within the public area of the demised tenant space or building. Said display(s) shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from all storefront windows of the establishment. Because of the strictly incidental nature of alcoholic beverage sales in such establishments, any business identification signs or temporary promotional signs for such establishments shall not include words, descriptions, inferences, logos, graphics, or the like indicating that the business engages in the incidental off-premises sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Off-sale liquor establishment means any establishment which is making application for or which has obtained a retail liquor license from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises in original, sealed containers. Such retail liquor licenses include Type 20 - Off-sale beer and wine; and Type 21 - Off-sale general. 
Office condominium development means a structure or structures proposed for construction comprising a project in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right to the exclusive occupancy of a designated interior office space and accompanying facilities. 
Office condominium unit means the element of an office condominium development which is not owned in common with the owners of other condominium interests in the development plus a proportionate share of all common areas. 
On-sale liquor establishment means any establishment wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, served, or given away for consumption on premises licensed, or proposed to be licensed, by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. Such retail liquor licenses include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Type 40—On-sale beer; 
2.  Type 41—On-sale beer and wine eating establishments; 
3.  Type 42—On-sale beer and wine public premises—no minors; 
4.  Type 47—On-sale general eating establishments—beer, wine, and distilled spirits; 
5.  Type 48—On-sale general public premises—beer, wine, distilled spirits—no minors. 
Open patio or trellis structure means an accessory structure having a roof constructed of lattice or other roof material that allows light and air to pass through a minimum of 50 percent of the roof surface. Additionally, the sides of an open structure consist only of support posts and decorative or functional elements, such as braces and railings, such that light and air can pass through a minimum of 75 percent of each side. Open patio structures include, but are not limited to, trellises, trellis-like patio covers, and other shade structures. 
Open space means the land areas which are not occupied by buildings, structures, streets, open visitor parking spaces or alleys, excepting, however, approved landscaped features and active recreational facilities when developed in accordance with the provisions of the Code. 
Operating pressure means the pressure at which a system of sprinklers is designed to operate, usually indicated at the base of a sprinkler. 
Ordinary maintenance , when applied to historic preservation, means any work for which a maintenance and repair building permit is not required by law, where the purpose and effect of such work is to correct any deterioration of or damage to a structure or any part thereof and to restore the same to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration or damage. 
Orientation , when applied to zoning, means the direction in which a dwelling unit opens upon the outside for the purpose of providing views or access to outside areas, such as recreation areas, gardens and/or patios. "Orientation" can be generally recognized by the use of large glass panels. The orientation of a dwelling unit may be classified as either "primary" or "secondary." Primary orientation shall be considered as the orientation that relates to an active area in the dwelling unit, such as living rooms, family rooms, kitchens, or any other area that has a function of providing space for family activities. Secondary orientation shall be considered as the orientation that relates to a passive area in the dwelling unit, such as bedrooms, bathrooms, and any other area that has the basic function of providing space for restful or private activities. Secondary orientation is usually directed into enclosed or screened private outdoor areas. It shall also be possible to have more than one primary or secondary orientation in a single dwelling unit. 
Outdoor advertising display means any card, paper, cloth, metal, wooden, painted, or other display or device of any kind or character placed for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, rock, fence, building, window structure or thing. 
Outdoor advertising structure means a structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes upon which any outdoor advertising display may be placed. 
Outdoor living space means the functional area outside the dwelling unit that provides for outdoor activities, either private or communal in nature. It shall be a space that may provide for activities which may be quite passive to those which may be athletically oriented. 
Outside storage areas means any space not within the primary structure which is used for the keeping of any goods or materials and which is not fully enclosed by solid walls and a roof. 
Overspray means irrigation that is delivered beyond the landscape area, wetting pavement, walkways, structures, or other nonlandscaped areas. 
Parking Area, Public. Public parking area means an open area other than a street, alley or place used for the temporary parking of automobiles which is available for public use, whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation for clients or customers. 
Parking Space, Automobile. Automobile parking space means a space within a building or public parking area for the temporary parking or storage of one automobile, exclusive of streets, alleys, driveways, aisles, and the area of ingress or egress, and consisting of an area not less than 9 feet wide and 20 feet long, and having access at all times to a public street or alley. 
Parking Space, Truck, Tractor and/or Trailer. Truck, tractor and/or trailer parking space means a space in a public parking area for the temporary parking or storage of trucks, including tractor and trailer or tractor only, exclusive of streets, alleys, driveways, aisles and areas of ingress and egress. 
Parkway means that area of land located between the back of the street curb and the property line including any sidewalk or landscaping area located therein. 
Patio means a private outdoor living space attached to and having direct access from a single dwelling unit. A patio may be enclosed on all sides with a screening device to ensure privacy, but at no time shall it have a roof in conjunction with such screening device. 
Pavement means an area improved by the laying or covering with a material such as asphalt, concrete, cement, layed brick or block, forming a substantially flat, hard, and level surface. 
Pervious surface means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil. 
Planned residential development means a structure or structures proposed for construction, deviating from the requirements of the particular zone in which it is proposed to be located, and consisting of: 
1.  Individual family living units under individual ownerships developed as row houses, a condominium, community apartments or as cluster housing; or 
2.  A project in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right to the exclusive occupancy of a designated apartment thereon, such as a community apartment project; or 
3.  Other comparable facilities. 
Plant materials means all living plant species consisting of trees, shrubs, annuals, perennials, vines, groundcovers, ornamental and turf grasses that will thrive in the City's climate. 
Planting plan means plan submitted with the construction drawings indicating a list and quantity of plants. 
Potable water means water meant for human consumption that is treated to legal standards for human consumption. 
Pressure regulator means a device used in sprinkler systems for radius and high pressure control. 
Primary dwelling unit means a principal, permitted single-family dwelling. 
Promotional outdoor sales means a time-specified outdoor sale event held by a commercial or retail business located on the same lot, such as sidewalk or parking lot sales. 
Provider means a person who operates a child day care facility and is licensed by the State Department of Social Services. 
PSI means pounds per square inch. 
Public utility means any entity coming under the authority and jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the State. 
Recycled water means treated wastewater of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses, such as landscape irrigation and water features. Because it is suitable for a direct beneficial use or a controlled use that would not otherwise occur, it is considered a valuable resource. This water is not intended for human consumption. 
Regular maintenance means regular maintenance shall include, proper pruning, staking, mowing and aerating of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants and mulch when necessary, and watering in accordance with required watering schedule. Also included is the routine inspection, adjustment, and repair of the irrigation system and its components, conducting water audits, prescribing the amount of water applied per landscaped acre, aerating and dethatching turf areas, replenishing mulch, fertilizing, and pruning and weeding in all landscape areas. 
Rehabilitated landscapes means any relandscaping associated with a project that requires a building permit and meets the requirements of Section 11.60.030. 
Rest home means a building where lodging, meals, nursing care, dietary care, or other personal services are rendered to one or more convalescents, invalids, or aged persons for compensation, but excluding cases of contagious or communicable diseases and surgery or primary treatments such as are customarily provided in sanitariums and hospitals. 
Rooming house means a building with not more than five guest rooms where, for compensation, lodging is provided for 3 persons, but not more than 10 persons. 
Runoff means water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape area to which it is applied and flows from the area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate), for an excessive time period, or when there is a steep slope. 
Sanitarium means a health station, retreat, or other place where patients, other than mental or alcoholic patients, are kept and where medical or surgical treatment is given. 
Satellite dish antenna means any apparatus capable of receiving or transmitting communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. 
School, Elementary and High. Elementary school and high school means an institution of learning which offers instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools by the Education Code of the State. 
Seasonal outdoor sales , when applied to zoning, means the sale of only seasonal crops which are solely grown and sold on the same lot. Seasonal outdoor sales shall also apply to the sale of Christmas trees and pumpkins during their seasons. 
Second dwelling unit means an attached or detached residential dwelling unit that provides complete and independent living facilities for one or more persons. It includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, bathing, and sanitation on the same parcel as a primary dwelling unit. 
Secretary , when applied to historic preservation, means the secretary of the Planning Commission who shall act as the Secretary of the Historic Preservation Commission. 
Service station means an area or structure where motor vehicle fuel is sold. 
Service station: Dispensing only means a service station which provides fueling only with no other services, accessory sales, or miscellaneous sales. 
Service station: Full service means a service station which provides for the sale of motor vehicle fuel and the sale and installation of accessories. No repair work shall be done, except the exchange of parts and maintenance requiring no open flame, welding, or the use of highly flammable liquids. All service and repair work shall be completed in one working day. Permitted services shall include greasing, oiling, tire repair, battery servicing, air-conditioning service, approved steam cleaning, ignition service, and general automotive repair. Services and maintenance excluded shall include painting, body work, and heavy duty engine overhauling. 
Service station: Mixed use means a service station which has a use other than defined in this chapter. 
Signs: 
1.  Advertising structure means a structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes upon which any poster, bill, printing, painting, or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed for advertising purposes. 
2.  Animated sign means a sign designed to attract attention through movement or the semblance of movement of the whole or any part, including but not limited to signs which swing, twirl, move back and forth or up and down; or signs which change color or shades of color; or any other method or device which suggests movement, but not including flags, banners, or time and temperature signs. 
3.  Announcement or bulletin board sign means a sign permanent in character designed to accept changeable copy, handbills, posters, and matters of a similar nature. 
4.  Area of sign means the area of a sign which includes the entire area within any type of perimeter or border which may enclose the outer limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character. The area of the sign having no such perimeter or border shall be computed by enclosing the entire area within parallelograms, triangles, or circles of the smallest size sufficient to cover the entire area of the sign and computing the area of these parallelograms, triangles, or circles. The area computed shall be the maximum portion or portions which may be viewed from any one direction. 
5.  Balloon, Hot or Cold Air. Hot or cold air balloon means an inflated structure, over 36 inches in diameter in any direction, made of vinyl, fabric, cloth or other lightweight materials held up by means of helium or other form of hot or cold air or gas, attached to any structure or building on the ground with the purpose of gaining attention from passersby. 
6.  Banner, flag or balloon means any cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar material used for temporary advertising purposes, with or without copy, attached or pinned onto or from any structure, staff, pole, line, framing, vehicle, or other object. 
7.  Billboard means an off-premises freestanding sign with changing advertising copy. 
8.  Canopy sign means either (a) any sign placed on or supported entirely by a rigid or nonrigid shelter or other structure projecting out from any exterior wall or portion of a building or other structure; or (b) any sign attached to or suspended under any rigid or nonrigid portion or support of a building or other structure, including but not limited to a breezeway, pedestrian passageway, porch or veranda. 
9.  Center identification sign means a freestanding or monument sign which identifies or directs attention to a shopping center, business park or office complex. 
10.  Changeable copy means copy for temporary use which is changed at periodic intervals and which may be utilized on freestanding wall, bulletin board, or announcement signs. 
11.  Construction sign means a temporary, on-premises sign which states the names of those individuals, businesses or organizations connected with the construction of a project such as architects, engineers, contractors, developers, owners, or financial institutions, the name of the project, major future tenants, general leasing information and emergency telephone numbers. 
12.  Copy means any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs or other symbolic representations incorporated into a sign. 
13.  Directional sign means a sign which contains any of the following words: "entrance," "enter," "exit," "in," "out," "one-way," or other words which contain nonflashing arrows or other characters indicating traffic direction. 
14.  Directory sign means a sign on which the names and locations of occupants or the use of a building is given. 
15.  Erect means to build, construct, attach, hand place, suspend, or affix to or upon any surface. 
16.  Electronic message centers (EMCs) are programmable digital signs or message boards that utilize computer-generated messages, text and/or images, or some other electronic means of changing copy. 
17.  Face of building means the area of a building elevation, front, rear or side, in which a business is located. 
18.  Flashing sign means a lighted sign which in whole or in part disappears and reappears at periodic intervals, changes in intensity or creates the illusion of motion in any manner, or is intermittently on and off and is placed so it will attract attention. 
19.  Freestanding sign means a sign which is permanently supported by one or more uprights, braces, poles, or other similar structural components when utilizing earth, rock, the ground, or a foundation set in the ground as a primary supportive base. 
20.  Grand opening means the promotional activity used by an established businesses within 60 days after occupancy to inform the public of their location and contribution to the community. "Grand opening" does not mean an annual or occasional promotion of retail sales or change of ownership, management or business name. 
21.  Height of sign means the vertical distance from the uppermost point of the sign to the ground immediately below such point or to the level of the upper surface of the nearest curb of a street or alley, whichever measurement permits the greater elevation of the sign. 
22.  Inflatable sign means the form of any characters, animals or shapes over 36 inches in diameter in any direction, made of vinyl, fabric, cloth or other lightweight materials, held up by means of helium or other form of hot or cold air or gas, attached to any structure or building on the ground, regardless of height, with the purpose of gaining attention from passersby. 
23.  Interior sign means a sign located inside a building that is not easily visible from the public street. 
24.  Logo means a visual symbol, such as a trademark of an established business, product or organization which may be all or part of a sign. 
25.  Maintenance of signs means the regular upkeep of a sign, sign structure, and related components including any landscaped planter around the sign. Signs and related components shall be kept in good repair and working condition; free from missing, broken or damaged sign panels and generally free from unauthorized sign graphics, including graffiti. 
26.  Master Sign Program means an adopted master plan providing coordinated signing for a contiguous group of businesses in a multitenant center or complex using one or more common design elements such as colors, material lettering, sign type or style, or illumination. 
27.  Reserved. 
28.  Menu board sign means any wall or monument sign displaying a list of items available at a drive-through business for the purpose of taking drive-through orders. 
29.  Monument sign means a low-profile freestanding sign of less than 8 feet in height, incorporating the design and building materials accenting the architectural theme of a building on the same property and is erected upon or supported solely by a landscaped planter, pedestal base, or similar ground structure. 
30.  Nameplate means a sign naming the occupant of the premises, the business entity and/or address, generally of no more than 4 square feet. 
31.  Neon sign means any glass tube lighting in which a gas and phosphorus are used in combination to create a colored sign. 
32.  Nonconforming sign means a sign that was legal at the time it was erected but does not now comply with the provisions of this Code. This definition does not include any sign that has been erected or maintained in violation of any safety or health provisions of this Code, or that otherwise constitutes a danger to public health or safety. 
33.  Off-site sign means a sign which in any manner advertises or directs attention to businesses, services, goods, persons or events at some location other than that upon which the sign is located. 
34.  Painted sign means a sign painted directly on the exterior surface of a building or structure except on the vertical face or valance of an awning or canopy. 
35.  Pedestrian traffic sign means a sign subject to the size limitation listed in this title which is other than the main business identification sign and which is oriented to pedestrian traffic for the purpose of providing directions to and identification of certain uses or buildings. Such sign shall not include any advertising information. 
36.  Political sign means any sign, advertising structure, or display which communicates any message or idea identifying, supporting, opposing, promoting or conveying a position upon any proposition or issue connected with any local, State or national election, or relating to any candidate for public office. 
37.  Portable sign means a sign not designed to be attached to a building or anchored to the ground, including "A" boards, sandwich signs, fence signs and trailer signs. 
38.  Poster sign means a sign attached to the ground in a manner approved by the Building Official, which sign may be visible from adjacent streets or highways. 
39.  Projecting sign means a sign other than a wall sign that is suspended from or supported by a building or wall and which projects more than 12 inches from the building or wall. 
40.  Real estate sign means a sign and sign structures relating to the sale, lease, rental or other disposition of the real property or subdivision and which is temporary in nature. Such sign is classified as an "on-site" real estate sign when located within the real property or subdivision it advertises, and is classified as an "off-site" sign when not so located. 
41.  Revolving sign means a sign, of which all or a portion may rotate either on an intermittent or constant basis. 
42.  Roof sign means a sign erected, constructed, or placed upon or over a roof or parapet wall of a building, and which is wholly or partly supported by such building. 
43.  Sign means a device, fixture, surface or structure of any kind or character, made of any material whatsoever, displaying letters, words, texts, illustrations, symbols, forms, patterns, colors, textures, shadows or lights, or any other illustrative or graphic display designated, constructed or placed on the ground, on a building canopy, wall, post or structure of any kind, in a window, or on any other object for the purpose of advertising, identifying or calling visual attention to any place, structure, firm, enterprise, profession, business, service, product, commodity, person or activity, whether located on the site, in any structure on the site, or in any other location. The term "placed" includes constructed, erected, posted, painted, printed, tacked, nailed, glued, stuck, sculpted, carved, or otherwise fastened affixed, or made visible in any manner whatsoever. 
44.  Sign Code means the adopted Uniform Sign Code of the City of Montclair. 
45.  Sign structure means the support, uprights, bracing, guy rods, cables and framework of a sign or outdoor display. 
Site plan means a plan, prepared to scale, showing all of the uses proposed for a specific property. The plan shall show all buildings, structures, signs, the off-street parking layout, loading spaces, points of ingress and egress, walls, fences, and any additional information which may be necessary to clearly define the intended use of the property. 
Small animal clinic means a place where small household pets are given grooming and hospital and medical treatment. Such treatment shall not include boarding, training, breeding, or other nonmedical services. 
SMART irrigation controller means weather-based or soil moisture-based irrigation controller that monitors and uses information about the environmental conditions at a specific location and landscape to automatically adjust water schedules. 
Soil amendments means any material added to a soil to improve its physical properties, such as water retention, permeability, water infiltration, and drainage. 
Soil Management Plan means a plan submitted with the construction drawings indicating results from soil tests and recommended soil amendments. 
Soil test means a test done by a soil test lab that indicates, at a minimum, soil texture, water holding capacity, pH, and soluble salts. 
Soil type means the classification of soil based on the percentage of its composition of sand, silt, and clay. 
Space, Habitable. Habitable space means a room or rooms meeting the minimum requirements of the California Building Code and that is intended for sleeping, living, cooking or dining purposes, excluding enclosed places (e.g., closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, service rooms, connecting corridors, laundries, unfinished attics, foyers, storage spaces, cellars, utility rooms, garages, and similar spaces). 
Special event sign means a temporary sign which advertises special events and activities such as grand openings, charitable and seasonal events, as well as events pertaining to any civic, patriotic, religious, cultural, community or political events taking place on a specific date or dates. 
Special landscape area means landscape areas dedicated to edible plants or irrigated with recycled water, water features filled with recycled water, cemeteries, and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, and golf courses. 
Specified hazardous waste facility means an off-site facility which serves more than one producer of hazardous waste. 
Specified hazardous waste facility project means a project undertaken for the purpose of siting and constructing a new specified hazardous waste facility or for the purpose of significantly expanding or modifying an existing specified hazardous waste facility that is being used or operated under a permit issued pursuant to Section 25200 or a grant of interim status pursuant to Section 25200.5. 
Sprinkler head means a device which delivers water through a nozzle. 
Stable, Private. Private stable means a detached accessory building for the keeping of horses owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
Stable, Public. Public stable means a stable other than a private stable. 
Static water pressure means water main pressure available from the water purveyor (Monte Vista Water District). 
Station means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operates simultaneously. 
Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any one floor and that next above it, but if there shall be no floor above it, the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. 
Street means a public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street line means the boundary line between the street and abutting property. 
Street, Side. Side street means that street bounding a corner lot and which extends in the same general direction as the line determining the depth of the lot. 
Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, floor joists or roof joists, girders or rafters, or changes in roof or exterior lines. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, but not including fences or walls used as fences 42 inches or less in height. 
Structure, Primary. Primary structure means a structure that houses the primary legal use on a property or lot. It shall not apply to accessory structures (e.g., garages, pool houses, sheds, etc.). 
Sunset Western Climate Zone System means the climate zone system designed and published by Sunset Magazine for its Western Garden Book. The Sunset System is designed to account for such factors as precipitation, summer heat, and plant performance in assigning zone designations. For the purposes of Chapter 11.60 herein, the City of Montclair is located in Zones 18 and 19. 
Synthetic turf means an artificial product manufactured from synthetic materials that effectively simulate the appearance of live turf, grass, sod, or lawn. The use of indoor or outdoor plastic or nylon carpeting as a replacement of synthetic turf or natural turf shall be prohibited. 
Temporary sign means a sign erected for a temporary purpose and for a generally short period of time with the main objective of attracting attention to an activity. 
Temporary special event means a temporary outdoor celebration, ceremony, reception, function, or festival, involving a gathering of people which occurs only periodically that is conducted pursuant to Chapter 11.68 of the Montclair Municipal Code or that is conducted by a neighborhood, City, or school on public property, or by a church, or civic group on privately owned property where all other appropriate permits are obtained, if applicable, such as encroachment permits, County Health Department permits, and/or a California seller's permit with the sales tax number issued by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration to the vendor. The temporary event shall be limited to no more than three consecutive days. 
Townhouse means an arrangement of single-family dwellings, joined by common walls on not more than two sides, with the uppermost story being a portion of the same dwelling located directly beneath at the grade of the first floor level, and having exclusive individual ownership and occupant rights of each dwelling unit, including but not limited to the land area directly beneath such dwelling. 
Tree topping means topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the natural canopy and disfigure the tree. Crown reduction by a qualified arborist may be substituted, where appropriate. 
Turf means a surface layer of earth containing mowed grass or grass-like plant with its roots, planted as sod, seed, or hydroseed. Common cool-season turfs include annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, perennial ryegrass, red fescue, and tall fescue. Common warm-season turfs include Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustine grass, Zoysia grass, Carex pansa, and Buffalo grass. 
Unit , when applied to zoning, means the element of a planned residential project which is not owned in common with the owners of other condominiums in the project. 
Usable common open space means the open space which is suitably located and improved for common recreational purposes, active or passive, and accessible to each lot or dwelling within a development through a system of public or private walkways. 
Usable open space means the land areas meeting the qualifications and definitions of either usable common open space or usable private open space. 
Usable private open space means the open space which is designed and maintained for the sole and exclusive use of the occupants of not more than one dwelling and may include covered patio areas. 
Use means the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either is or may be occupied or maintained. 
Valve means a device used to control the flow of water in an irrigation system. 
Vegetation, Native. Native vegetation means any plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to all or part of the southern region of the State of California. Plant species that have been introduced by man are not native vegetation. 
Vehicle or mobile sign means any sign or advertising devices mounted, attached, affixed, or painted upon any surface of a motor vehicle, trailer, or similar conveyance, except for a sign or sign graphics decoratively painted directly upon or permanently affixed to the body of said vehicle, which is intentionally parked on or adjacent to any property with the sole purpose of attracting attention to a product sold or an activity or business located on the property. 
Walkway means a space through which an element of a pedestrian circulation system passes, such as sidewalks or paths. A walkway shall include the sidewalk, patch, etc., and the adjacent landscaped area. The space may be defined by the walls of buildings, fences, plant materials, or any combination of these features. 
Wall sign means a sign which is in any manner affixed to any exterior wall of a building or structure, the exposed face of which is in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall and which projects not more than 12 inches from the building or structure wall. 
Water-conserving landscape design means a landscape design developed to conserve water. 
Water efficiency means the planned management of water to prevent waste, overuse, and exploitation of the resource. Water efficiency planning incorporates the analysis of costs and uses of water; specification of water-saving solutions, installation of water-saving measures, and verification of savings to maximize the cost-effective use of water resources. Water-efficient irrigation and landscaping measures include use of water-efficient irrigation systems, irrigation control systems, low-flow sprinkler heads, water-efficient scheduling practices, and drought-resistant plant materials. 
Water feature means any object that utilizes water for nonirrigation, decorative purposes. Fountains, streams, man-made ponds, man-made lakes, and swimming pools are considered water features. 
Water Management Plan means a plan submitted with the construction drawings as part of the Landscape Documentation Package. 
Water Quality Management Plan (WQMP) means a guideline for project-specific post construction Best Management Practices and to address management of urban runoff quantity and quality to protect receiving waters. 
Water schedules means schedules of irrigation times through a given year. 
Window area means an area computed by calculating each window pane or panel. The area shall be separate for each building face, and for each window. A group of window panes or panels may be considered one window if they are adjoining on the building face and are less than 6 inches apart. 
Window sign means a sign or decoration painted, attached, glued, or otherwise affixed to a window or located within 3 three feet of the interior side of the window or otherwise easily visible from the exterior of the building. 
WUCOLS means a publication (Water Use Classification of Landscape Species) by the University of California Cooperative Extension, the Department of Water Resources, and the Bureau of Reclamation (2000). The purpose and intended use is to provide guidance to landscape professionals when selecting plant material and when estimating the amount of water used by plants. It also serves as a guide to assist in developing irrigation schedules for existing landscapes. 
Yard means an open space, other than a court, on a lot unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided. 
Yard sale means any event, other than a sales activity operated in conjunction with a regularly licensed commercial or retail operation, which is advertised by any means whatsoever as a place or location to which members of the public, at any time, may purchase identifiable or tangible personal property. Also included in this definition are garage sales, patio sales, rummage sales, or any other similar sales. 
Yard, Front. Front yard means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line or planned street line and a line parallel thereto on the lot. 
Yard, Rear. Rear yard means a yard contiguous to the rear line of a lot and extending from side lot line to side lot line. On a corner lot, the rear yard shall extend from the interior side lot line to the side yard on the street side. 
Yard, Side. Side yard means a yard between the main building or accessory building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard, or front lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear yard or rear lot line. The width of the side yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of the side lot line toward the main or accessory building. 
(Ord. 07-891 § 3 (part); Ord. 01-809 § 1; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code §§ 9-3.205, 9-4.201—9-4.279, 9-4.902, 9-4.2005, 9-6.303, 9-6.702, 9-6.902, 9-7.201, 9-10.103) 
(Ord. No. 08-905, § 2A, 1-5-09; Ord. No. 10-913, § 3, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 10-916, § 1, 10-18-10; Ord. No. 13-933, § 1, 6-17-13; Ord. No. 14-942, § 1, 5-19-14; Ord. No. 14-945, § 1, 9-2-14; Ord. No. 16-957, § 1, 10-17-16; Ord. No. 17-968, § 1, 9-18-17; Ord. No. 18-978-U, § 4, 12-17-18)  
Chapter 11.04 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
11.04.010 - Permit required. 
Before commencing any work pertaining to the erection, construction, moving, conversion or alteration of any building, or any addition to any building, a permit shall be secured from the Building Division by any owner or his/her agent for such work, and it shall be unlawful to commence any work until and unless such permit shall have been obtained. No such building shall be occupied or used unless a certificate of occupancy and a license for such use, where required, are first obtained from the department or person vested with the duty or authority to issue the same. 
Each application for a building permit shall be made on a printed form to be furnished by the Building Division and shall contain, in addition to any other information required, accurate information and dimensions as to the size and location of the lot, the size and location of the buildings on the lot, the dimensions of all yards and open spaces, and such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this title. When approval of site plans by the Planning Commission is required, the approved site plan shall be stamped and signed by the Secretary of the Planning Commission and shall be filed with the application for a building permit. Where complete and accurate information is not readily available from existing records, the Department of Community Development may require the applicant to furnish a survey of the lot prepared by a licensed surveyor. A record of the original of such applications shall be kept in the Building Division. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.2201)  
11.04.020 - Compliance. 
All departments, officials, and public employees vested with the duty or authority to issue permits, licenses, or certificates of occupancy, where required by law, shall conform to the provisions of this title. No such permit, license, or certificate for building uses or purposes, where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this title, shall be issued. Any such permit, license, or certificate, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this title, shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.2202)  
11.04.030 - Certificates of occupancy. 
A.  For Buildings. No building erected, moved, enlarged or altered shall be occupied, used, or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Inspector. Such certificate shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued only after such building enlargement or alteration has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this title and when the proposed use conforms thereto. Further, no excavation for a building shall be started before an application has been made for a building permit. 
B.  For Nonconforming Uses. Any nonconforming use to a building may be continued but shall not be changed unless a certificate of occupancy for the new use shall have been issued by the Building Inspector after finding out that such use conforms with the provisions of this title or is a more restrictive use. 
C.  For Land. A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for before any vacant land is used or before an existing use of vacant land is changed, and the Community Development Director shall issue such certificate within 10 days after such application is filed provided such use is in conformity with the provisions of this title and provided, further, that no certificate of occupancy shall be required where the land is to be used for tilling the soil and growing therein farm, garden or orchard products. 
D.  Statement. The certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all laws and with the provisions of this title. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the Planning Division, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.2203)  
11.04.040 - Building Inspector. 
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce the provisions of this title pertaining to the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration of, or addition to any building. 
(Prior code § 9-4.2204)  
11.04.050 - Code enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Division and all officers or the City otherwise charged with the enforcement of the law to enforce the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.2205)  
11.04.060 - Planning Commission. 
In accordance with the provisions of the Planning Law of the State, the Planning Commission shall administer the regulations of this title and amendments thereto, act as a Board of Zoning Adjustment, hear and act upon all matters involving variances and conditional use permits, recommend with reference to the revocation of conditional use permits, hear and act upon suspensions or modifications of planned rights-of-way, hear and act on appeals from any action taken by an administrative official in the administration and/or enforcement of the provisions of this title, and perform such other duties as are requested by the City Council. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.2206)  
11.04.070 - Actions of administrative officials—Appeals. 
The Planning Commission may hear and decide appeals when it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this title pursuant to the following procedures: 
A.  Filing. Appeals to the Planning Commission may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer or department of the City affected by any decision of the administrative official. Such appeals shall be taken within 15 days by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and with the Secretary of the Commission, copies of a Notice of Appeal specifying the grounds. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Commission all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
B.  Stay of Proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Planning Commission, after the Notice of Appeal shall have been filed, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may be granted by the Planning Commission or by a court of record on application and notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and due cause shown. 
C.  Hearing Date—Notice. Upon the filing of the Notice of Appeal, the Secretary of the Commission shall set a date for one hearing thereon before the Commission. The date of the hearing shall be not less than 10 days, nor more than 40 days, from the date of filing such notice of appeal with the Secretary. Notification of the date of hearing shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the Notice of Appeal not less than five days prior to the hearing. 
D.  Hearing. At the time and place so fixed, the hearing shall be conducted before the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may for any reason, when it deems such action necessary or desirable, continue such hearing to a time and place certain. 
E.  Hearing—Decision. Each decision by the Planning Commission on an appeal shall be by resolution. The Planning Commission may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as should be made and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The Planning Commission shall make its findings and determination within 40 days from the date of completion of the hearing on such appeal and shall forthwith transmit copies thereof to the appellant, the officer from whom the appeal was taken, and to the City Clerk. Upon failure of the Commission to make a determination within the time limit specified, it shall lose jurisdiction, and the appellant may, within 15 days thereafter, file a request for a review of the appeal. 
F.  Review of Appeals. The action of the Planning Commission as to all matters set forth in Section 11.04.060 shall become final and effective 15 days after the date the written determination is made unless during that time a written request for a review of the appeal is filed with the City Clerk by any person aggrieved by the determination of the Planning Commission. Such review shall be accompanied by the required review fee as adopted by City Council resolution. The City Council, on its own motion, may request a review of any determination of the Planning Commission within 15 days of the Planning Commission decision or at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting, whichever occurs later. A fee shall not be required in the event of such City Council review. Such request for a review of the appeal, except on the City Council's own motion, shall be filed and shall state the grounds therefore and wherein the Commission erred or failed to conform to the requirements of this title. The City Clerk shall transmit one copy each of the request to the original appellant, the hearing officer from whom the appeal was taken, and to the Planning Commission. The request for review of the appeal shall continue to stay any proceedings already stayed in furtherance of the action appealed from. Upon receipt of the request for review of the appeal, Planning Division staff shall transmit to the City Council the original Notice of Appeal and copies of all other papers constituting the record upon which the action was taken, together with a written report stating why the appeal should or should not be granted. The review of the appeal by the City Council shall be based upon the record of the Planning Commission. In the event any new information or evidence is produced for consideration, the City Council shall refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. 
G.  Review of Appeals—Hearing—Decision. The City Council may, by resolution, affirm, reverse or modify in whole or in part any decision of the Planning Commission on an appeal, but before reversing or modifying any decision of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall set the matter for hearing. Notification of the date of hearing shall be mailed not less than five days prior to the hearing to the original appellant and to the person filing the request for a review of the appeal if he/she is not the original appellant. 
(Ord. 02-828 §§ I—III; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.2207)  
11.04.080 - Interpretation of provisions—Conflicts. 
The provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not intended by this title to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties. When the provisions of this title impose a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or require larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other laws, rules or regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this title shall control. 
(Prior code § 9-4.2208)  
11.04.090 - Enforcement remedies. 
The City Attorney, upon request by the City Council, shall institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this title, and he/she is authorized, in addition to any other remedy provided, to institute an action for an injunction to restrain or any other appropriate action or proceeding to enforce such provisions. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.2209)  
Chapter 11.06 - DEVELOPMENT-REVIEW PROCESS 
Sections: 
 
11.06.010 - Intent. 
The purpose and intent of development review preceding a Planning Commission hearing is to streamline the review process involved in properly coordinating the physical aspects of a proposed development. The goals and objectives of the development-review process shall include the following: 
A.  Reduce the amount of review time between project application and Planning Commission consideration by acquiring conditions from all responsible City departments in an expedient manner; 
B.  Minimize applicant's development costs by providing comprehensive recommendations on initial proposal; 
C.  Eliminate confusion and substantiate applicant's desire to proceed with project by providing applicant with a coordinated list of recommendations and conditions from all affected City departments; 
D.  Provide, when possible, alternatives to physical constraints affecting the feasibility of a project by making technical recommendations; 
E.  Encourage efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of land by considering proposals in relation to existing and/or proposed development surrounding them; 
F.  Encourage variety in the physical development pattern of the City by considering immediate project surroundings and, where feasible, introducing elements in contemporary development trends. 
(Prior code § 9-5.301)  
11.06.020 - Development-Review Committee. 
A.  The Council establishes a Development-Review Committee consisting of representatives from the following departments and/or departmental divisions: 
1.  Planning; 
2.  Building; 
3.  Engineering; 
4.  Housing; 
5.  Redevelopment; 
6.  Fire; 
7.  Police; 
8.  Other governmental agencies and civic organizations as appointed by the City Council from time to time. 
B.  The duties and responsibilities of the Development-Review Committee shall be to review preliminary development proposals, provide applicant with technical advice and serve as technical advisor to the Planning staff. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-5.302)  
11.06.030 - Development-Review Committee—Procedure. 
Upon receipt of a preliminary development proposal, the Development-Review Committee shall review the plan and produce a list of recommendations and conditions. Such list shall be forwarded to the applicant within 10 working days from the date of submittal deadline. The list of recommendations shall also be forwarded to the Planning Commission for its consideration as a condition of project approval. 
In a case where the recommendations of the Development-Review Committee have substantially altered a proposal, the applicant may be asked to resubmit new plans for further development review. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-5.304)  
11.06.040 - Appeals. 
The Development-Review Committee shall serve as an advisory body to the Planning Commission and Administrative Review Committee. Therefore, any determinations made by this Committee should not be deemed as final decisions. 
(Prior code § 9-5.305)  
Chapter 11.08 - PLANNING AND ENGINEERING SERVICE FEES 
Sections: 
 
11.08.010 - Schedule of fees required. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 11.08.020 of this chapter, any person, or his/her representative, filing for planning and engineering review and approval of any project or development proposal shall pay to the City, at the time of filing, a uniform fee as set forth in the fee schedule as may be adopted by the City Council from time to time by resolution based upon reimbursement to the City for reasonable costs of processing such applications. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-2.01)  
11.08.020 - Exceptions to provisions. 
The fees set forth in Section 11.08.010 of this chapter shall not be required for an application involving one of the following uses: 
A.  Public educational institutions; 
B.  Government facilities; 
C.  Public utility structures, buildings, and service facilities; and 
D.  Such uses as the Planning Commission may deem to be similar, not obnoxious, and equally as essential to serve the public welfare as the uses set forth in subsections A, B and C of this section. 
(Prior code § 9-2.02)  
11.08.030 - Schedule of appeal fees. 
Any person filing a motion for an appeal shall contemporaneously pay to the City Clerk an appeal fee equal to one-half the original application filing fee for a variance, conditional use permit, precise plan of design, or any other application fee required by the provisions of this title. No fee shall be required if an appeal is taken by the Council on its own motion. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-2.03)  
Chapter 11.10 - USES: NEW, EXISTING AND PROHIBITED[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: The title of Chapter 11.10 was amended by Ord. 07-891 § 3. 
 
11.10.010 - New construction and new uses. 
All new construction, buildings, improvements, alterations, enlargements or movements undertaken, and all new uses or occupancy of premises within the City, shall conform with the requirements, character and conditions as to use, height and area laid down for each of the several zones or districts as described in this title. No person shall install, construct, establish, move into, alter, enlarge or use, or cause or permit to be installed, constructed, established, moved into, altered, enlarged or used, any building, structure, improvement or use of premises located in any zone described in this title contrary to the provisions herein. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.301)  
11.10.020 - Existing uses. 
The lawfully existing use or uses of all buildings, improvements and premises on May 15, 1958, may be continued, although not conforming with the requirements for the zone or district in which they are located, as a nonconforming use if such existing use is not in violation of any other law. Any discontinuance of such a nonconforming use for a continuous period of six months shall be deemed to constitute abandonment of any nonconforming rights existing on May 15, 1958. Nonconforming uses involving no structures may be continued for two years from the time they become nonconforming. Nonconforming uses involving structures may be continued for 10 years after May 15, 1958, or for such longer time so that total life of the structure shall be 10 years from the date of construction for light incombustible frame or wood construction, 15 years from the date of construction for heavy timber or ordinary masonry construction and 20 years from the date of construction for fire-resistive construction. 
The alteration and reconstruction of nonconforming buildings or improvements shall be subject to the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Article 19 of this title provided nonconforming structures and uses shall not be increased in size or area nor put to less restricted uses under any conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.302)  
11.10.030 - Prohibited uses. 
A.  Unlawful Uses. Uses that are unlawful under federal or state law shall not be treated as permitted uses, and shall not be determined to be similar to any uses permitted pursuant to this title. 
(Ord. 07-891 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 15-955, § 3, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 17-968, § 2, 9-18-17)  
Chapter 11.11 - MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARIES, CULTIVATION AND PROCESSING, COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES, DELIVERY OF CANNABIS AND CANNABIS-RELATED PRODUCTS, AND OUTDOOR CULTIVATION OF CANNABIS 
 
11.11.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The City Council finds that the purpose and intent of this chapter is to prohibit medical cannabis dispensaries, medical cannabis cultivation, medical cannabis processing, commercial activities regarding non-medical cannabis and cannabis-related products, and to ban the delivery and outdoor commercial and residential cultivation of cannabis in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 17-968, § 3, 9-18-17)  
11.11.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. For purposes of Chapter 11.11, these definitions shall supersede any other definitions of the same terms elsewhere in this Code. 
Attending physician means an individual who possesses a license in good standing to practice medicine or osteopathy issued by the Medical Board of California or the Osteopathic Medical Board of California and who has taken responsibility for an aspect of the medical care, treatment, diagnosis, counseling, or referral of a patient and who has conducted a medical examination of that patient before recording in the patient's medical record the physician's assessment of whether the patient has a serious medical condition and whether the medical use of cannabis is appropriate. 
Cannabis or marijuana means all parts of the plant cannabis sativa linnaeus, cannabis indica, and/or cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seed thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Marijuana" or "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by Section 81000 of the Food and Agricultural Code or Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Cannabis-related products means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible, ingestible, or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. 
Commercial cannabis activitiesincludes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, distribution, delivery, trade or sale of cannabis and cannabis-related products by any person, entity, commercial or business enterprise, whether for-profit or nonprofit. 
Delivery means the transfer of cannabis or cannabis-related products by an individual or entity originating outside of the City of Montclair to any other person or entity located within the City of Montclair. 
Fully enclosed and secure structure means a code compliant space within a building, greenhouse or other structure which has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, which is secure against unauthorized entry, provides complete visual screening, and which is accessible only through one or more locking doors. 
Identification card means a document issued by the California Department of Public Health that identifies a person authorized to engage in the medical use of cannabis and the person's designated primary caregiver, if any. 
Medical cannabis cultivation means any activity involving the growing, planting, harvesting, farming, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of medical cannabis. "Medical cannabis cultivation" shall not include cultivation, harvest, drying, or processing of not more than six living cannabis plants and possession of the cannabis produced by the plants. 
Medical cannabis dispensary means a facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, which provides, makes available, or distributes cannabis to a primary caregiver or qualified patient, or a person with an identification card issued in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5, et seq. For purposes of this Chapter, "medical cannabis dispensary" shall not include the following uses: (1) a clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; (2) a health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; (3) a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illnesses licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; (4) a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; or (5) a residential hospice or home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Medical cannabis processing means any method or activity used to prepare medical cannabis or its by-products for commercial retail and/or wholesale use, including but not limited to: Drying, cleaning, curing, packaging, and extraction of active ingredients to create cannabis-related products and concentrates. 
Outdoor cultivation means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure. 
Person with an identification card means an individual who is a qualified patient, who has applied for and received a valid identification card issued pursuant to Section 11362.7 of the Health and Safety Code. 
Primary caregiver means the individual, designated by a qualified patient or person with an identification card, who has consistently assumed responsibility for the housing, health, or safety of that patient. A primary caregiver shall be at least 18 years of age, unless the primary caregiver is the parent of a minor child who is a qualified patient or a person with an identification card or the primary caregiver is a person otherwise entitled to make medical decisions under state law pursuant to Section 69022, 7002, 7050 or 7120 of the Family Code. 
Qualified patient means a person who is entitled to the protections of Section 11362.5 of the Health and Safety Code, but who does not have an identification card issued by the California Department of Public Health. 
(Ord. No. 17-968, § 3, 9-18-17)  
11.11.030 - Commercial cannabis activities prohibited. 
A.  Commercial cannabis activities are prohibited in the City of Montclair. No use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement, license or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for commercial cannabis activities. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to own, manage, conduct, operate, or to be employed in or by, or as a landlord or land owner (or as such landlord or land owner's agent, property manager or similar person having control over real property on behalf of its owner) to allow or permit to exist, or be established, conducted, operated, owned or managed on or within real property owned or controlled by such person, any commercial cannabis activity or to participate as a landlord, lessor, land owner, employee, contractor, agent or volunteer, or in any other manner or capacity, in any commercial cannabis activity. Each day a violation of this provision of this chapter is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  Exceptions. Nothing in subsection A of this section shall be deemed to make unlawful those activities protected pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1 and Business and Professions Code Section 26033, as follows: (1) possession of not more than 28.5 grams of cannabis not in the form of concentrated cannabis or eight grams of cannabis in the form of concentrated cannabis, including contained in cannabis products, by a person 21 years of age or older or by a person with an identification card, qualified patient or primary caregiver within the meaning of Section 11362.7 of the Health and Safety Code and, excluding the qualified patient, is in possession of a valid identification card issued by the California Department of Public Health pursuant to Section 11362.7, Section 11362.71 and Section 11362.765 of the Health and Safety Code; (2) cultivation of not more than six living cannabis plants and possession of the cannabis produced by the plants within a private residence or a fully and enclosed structure that is accessory to and located on the grounds of the private residence if intended for personal use only; (3) smoking or ingesting cannabis or cannabis-related products on private residential property; (4) the transport of up to 28.5 grams of cannabis or 8 grams of concentrated cannabis or cannabis-related products by a person 21 years of age or older and obtained from a location outside the City of Montclair for transport to a private residence within the City for non-commercial use; and (5) the transport of up to eight ounces of dried cannabis or up to six cannabis plants or 12 immature cannabis plants obtained from a location outside the City of Montclair to a private residence within the City for non-commercial use by a person with an identification card, qualified patient or primary caregiver within the meaning of Section 11362.7 of the Health and Safety Code and, excluding a qualified patient, is in possession of a valid identification card issued by the California Department of Public Health pursuant to Section 11362.7, Section 11362.71 and Section 11362.765 of the Health and Safety Code; provided, however, pursuant to Section 11362.77(a)(b) of the Health and Safety Code, a person with an identification card, qualified patient or primary caregiver may possess an amount of cannabis consistent with the patient's needs if the person with an identification card, qualified patient or primary caregiver has an attending physician's recommendation that the quantity specified herein does not meet the person with an identification card or qualified patient's medical needs. 
(Ord. No. 17-968, § 3, 9-18-17)  
11.11.040 - Outdoor cultivation of cannabis prohibited. 
Outdoor cultivation of cannabis by any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel within any zoning district in the City is prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to own, manage, conduct, or operate, or as a landlord or land owner (or as such landlord or land owner's agent, property manager or similar person having control over real property on behalf of its owner) to allow or permit to exist, or be established, conducted, operated, owned or managed on or within real property owned or controlled by such person, the outdoor cultivation of cannabis or to participate as a landlord, lessor, land owner, employee, contractor, agent or volunteer, or in any other manner or capacity, in the outdoor cultivation of cannabis. Each day a violation of this provision of this chapter is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 17-968, § 3, 9-18-17)  
11.11.050 - Delivery of cannabis and cannabis-related products prohibited. 
Delivery of cannabis and/or cannabis-related products is prohibited within the City of Montclair. 
(Ord. No. 17-968, § 3, 9-18-17)  
11.11.060 - Medical cannabis dispensaries prohibited. 
Medical cannabis dispensaries, cooperatives, collectives, establishments or providers are prohibited in the City of Montclair. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to own, manage, conduct, operate or be employed in or by, or as a landlord or land owner (or as such landlord or land owner's agent, property manager or similar person having control over real property on behalf of its owner) to allow or permit to exist, or to be established, conducted, operated, owned or managed on or within any real property owned or controlled by such person, a medical cannabis dispensary, cooperative, collective, establishment and/or provider or to participate as a landlord, lessor, land owner, employee, contractor, agent or volunteer, or in any other manner or capacity, in any medical cannabis dispensary, cooperative, collective, establishment and/or provider. Each day a violation of this provision of this chapter is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 17-968, § 3, 9-18-17)  
11.11.070 - Medical cannabis cultivation and processing prohibited. 
A.  Medical cannabis cultivation or medical cannabis processing are prohibited in the City of Montclair, except where the City is preempted by federal or state law from enacting a prohibition on such activity. No use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement, license, or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for the activities of medical cannabis cultivation or medical cannabis processing, and no person shall otherwise establish or conduct such activities in the City, except where the City is preempted by federal or state law from enacting a prohibition on any such activity for which the use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement, license or permit is sought. 
B.  Exceptions. Nothing in subsection A of this section shall be deemed to prohibit or make unlawful those activities protected pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.77, as follows: A qualified patient or primary caregiver [as those terms are defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7] (1) may possess no more than eight ounces of dried cannabis per qualified patient; (2) may maintain no more than six mature or 12 immature cannabis plants per qualified patient; and (3) may possess an amount of cannabis consistent with the patient's needs if the qualified patient or primary caregiver has a physician's recommendation that the limitations set forth in California Health & Safety Code Section 11362.77(a) does not meet the qualified patient's medical needs. 
(Ord. No. 17-968, § 3, 9-18-17)  
11.11.080 - Medical cannabis dispensaries, medical cannabis cultivation or processing, commercial cannabis activities, delivery of cannabis, and outdoor cultivation declared public nuisances. 
The establishment, maintenance or operation of a medical cannabis dispensary, the cultivation or processing of medical cannabis, any commercial cannabis activity, the delivery of cannabis, and outdoor cultivation of cannabis in violation of this chapter within the City is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as such by all available means. 
(Ord. No. 17-968, § 3, 9-18-17)  
11.11.090 - Use or activity prohibited by state or federal law. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or authorize any use or activity which is otherwise prohibited by any state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 17-968, § 3, 9-18-17)  
11.11.100 - Applicability of other laws. 
Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the enforcement of other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 17-968, § 3, 9-18-17)  
Division II. - Zoning  
Chapter 11.12 - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES AND BOUNDARIES 
Sections: 
 
11.12.010 - Title. 
This division shall be known as the "Zoning Law of the City of Montclair." 
(Prior code § 9-4.101)  
11.12.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to encourage, classify, designate, regulate and restrict the highest and best locations and uses of buildings and structures, for residential, commercial, and industrial or other purposes, including the conservation of water, to regulate and limit the height, number of stories, and sizes of buildings and other structures erected or altered; to regulate and determine the size of yards and other open spaces; to regulate and limit the density of population; and, for such purposes, to divide the City into zones of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations and provide for their enforcement. Further, such regulations are deemed necessary in order to encourage the most appropriate use of land; to conserve and stabilize the value of property; to provide adequate open spaces for light and air; to prevent and fight fires; to prevent undue concentration of population; to lessen congestion on streets; to facilitate adequate provisions for community utilities, such as transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.102)  
11.12.030 - Zones established. 
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this title, the City is divided into several zones, known as follows: 
A—Estate Zone 
R-1—Single-Family Residential Zone 
R-2—Two-Family Residential Zone 
R-3—Residential Medium-High Density 
A-P—Administrative Professional Zone 
C-2—Restricted Commercial Zone 
C-3—General Commercial Zone 
MIP—Manufacturing Industrial Park Zone 
M-1—Limited Manufacturing Zone 
M-2—General Manufacturing Zone 
SL—Small-Lot, Detached Housing Overlay Zone 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.401)  
11.12.040 - Zoning map. 
The zones established by this chapter and the boundaries of such zones are shown upon a map which is made a part of this title and which is designated as the "Official Zoning Map." Such zoning map may, for convenience, be divided into parts, and each such part may, for purposes of more readily identifying areas within such zoning map, be subdivided into units, and each such part and unit may be separately used for purposes of amending the zoning map or for any official reference to the zoning map. Such map, and each such part and unit, and the notations, references, and other information shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this title as if the matters and information set forth by such map were fully all described in this title. 
(Prior code § 9-4.402)  
11.12.050 - Uncertainty of boundaries. 
If uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any zone shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Street, Alley, or Lot Lines. If the indicated zone boundaries are approximately street, alley, or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be the boundaries; otherwise such boundaries shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning map unless specifically indicated by dimensions. 
B.  Determination by Planning Commission. If there is uncertainty about a zone boundary, Planning Commission shall, by written decision, determine the location of the zone boundary. 
C.  Vacated Street or Alley. If a street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the zone boundary shall be changed to include such vacated or abandoned street or alley in the same zone as the adjoining property to which it reverts. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.403)  
Chapter 11.14 - ZONING FOR SPECIFIC AREAS 
Sections: 
 
11.14.010 - Prezoning annexed areas. 
Areas annexed to the City shall be classified in the same or nearest comparable zone classification in which such area was classified in the County at the time of annexation and which is consistent with the adopted General Plan until the City Council adopts different classifications in the manner provided for zone changes in Chapter 11.84 of this title. Prezoning shall be established by this chapter and the boundaries of such prezones are shown upon a map which is made a part of this title and which is designated as the "Official Prezone Map." Prezone designations may include any zone established by this title at such time any prezone is established. Procedures for establishment or changing of prezones shall be identical to those required for zones. 
(Ord. 05-870 § 1: Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.501)  
Chapter 11.16 - ZONES: A—ESTATE 
Sections: 
 
11.16.010 - Purpose. 
The A Estate Zone is intended to establish zoning regulations of property for the purpose of allowing animals, agriculture, and auxiliary buildings, in addition to those provided in the R-1 Zone. The A Zone shall be combined with the R-1 Zone, and all regulations of both zones shall be applicable to any such property. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 9-4.1751)  
11.16.020 - Establishment. 
During the proceedings for the change of the official zoning map, as set forth in Chapter 11.84 of this title, the Planning Commission may recommend an Estate Zone designation, and the City Council may make such designation. Prior to making a recommendation for such a zone change, the Planning Commission shall make the findings required by this section in addition to any other findings required elsewhere in this title for the recommendation of a zone change. The required findings shall be made in writing as part of the recommendation to the City Council. Prior to making such designation, the City Council shall also make the findings required by this section. The findings required prior to the recommendation and approval of such a zone change are as follows: 
A.  That the application for a zone change on property includes only R-1 Zoning and a minimum density of 20,000 square foot lots; 
B.  That the use of such property would not be inharmonious with the adopted General Plan; 
C.  That the area of the zone change is sufficient in size as to create a neighborhood of like zoning; and 
D.  That the area has been provided with proper circulation for the movement of horses and for the servicing of the estates. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1752)  
11.16.030 - Uses permitted. 
No building or structure or land in the A Zone shall be used, and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered, or enlarged in the A Zone, except for those uses which shall be subsequently adopted by resolution of the Planning Commission to provide for the estate development. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1753)  
11.16.040 - Uses permitted subject to a Precise Plan of Design (PPD). 
All uses permitted in the A Zone which are not permitted in the R-1 Zone shall be subject to the approval of a PPD submitted and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11.80 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1754)  
11.16.050 - Development standards. 
The Planning Commission shall establish by resolution development standards for the A Zone, including, but not limited to, setbacks. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 9-4.1755)  
11.16.060 - Performance standards. 
The Planning Commission shall establish by resolution performance standards for the A Zone, including, but not limited to, the number of animals allowed. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 9-4.1756)  
Chapter 11.18 - ZONES: R-1—SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
Sections: 
 
11.18.010 - Single-Family Residential Zone. 
The R-1 Single-Family Residential Zone is intended as a district of single-family homes with not more than one primary dwelling unit, a maximum of one second dwelling unit pursuant to Chapter 11.23 of this title, and detached accessory building(s) pursuant to Chapter 11.19 of this title, upon one lot. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any and every building and premises or land in the R-1 Zone shall be used for, or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained, and moved into or within such R-1 Zone exclusively and only in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-916, § 2, 10-18-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-916, § 2, adopted October 18, 2010, repealed the former § 11.18.010, and enacted a new Section 11.18.010 as set out herein. The former § 11.18.010 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 08-905, adopted January 5, 2009.  
11.18.020 - Uses expressly prohibited. 
The following uses shall be expressly prohibited in the R-1 Zone: 
A.  All uses not specifically listed in Section 18.030 of this chapter. 
B.  Motor homes, mobile homes, campers, and other similar recreational vehicles used as living space on a temporary or permanent basis. 
(Ord. No. 08-905, § 2C, 1-5-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-905, § 2B, adopted January 5, 2009, repealed the former § 11.18.020, and enacted a new Section 11.18.020 as set out herein. The former § 11.18.010 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code § 9-4.701.1; Ord. No. 99-791 and Ord. No. 06-871.  
11.18.030 - Uses permitted. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 Zone: 
A.  One single-family dwelling of a permanent character placed in a permanent location subject to development requirements prescribed in Sections 11.18.030 through 11.18.050 and Section 11.80.010; 
B.  Orchards, tree crops, field crops, truck gardening, berry and bush crops, flower gardening, nurseries, greenhouses or lath houses not exceeding 200 square feet in area on any lot, and other similar enterprises carried on in the general field of agriculture provided there are no retail sales from the premises; 
C.  The keeping of animal pets for noncommercial purposes as follows: 
1.  Not more than two weaned dogs, 
2.  Not more than two weaned cats, 
3.  Not more than four, or a combination of not more than four, domestic adult rabbits, guinea pigs, or chickens, and their immature offspring, provided such animals shall not be kept in violation of the provisions of Chapters 5.08 and 6.28 of this Code. Roosters and geese shall be expressly prohibited, 
4.  Canaries, parrots and other kindred birds usually or ordinarily kept as household pets at a ratio not to exceed one bird for each 500 square feet of lot area, and 
5.  Such other animals as the Planning Commission may permit pursuant to a revocable special permit after a recommendation by the Health Officer that the keeping of such animals will not be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the abutting property owners; provided, however, the Director of Community Development may grant an administrative adjustment pursuant to the provisions of Section 11.76.020(F) of this title; 
D.  Parks, playgrounds, a civic center, and community buildings owned and controlled by any public agency; 
E.  Churches, nonprofit libraries, museums, elementary, junior high, and high schools offering full curricula as required by State laws, colleges listed as institutions of higher learning by the United States Office of Education, and homes for the aged or for children as may be permitted after a public hearing in each case pursuant to a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this title; 
F.  The renting of rooms to not more than one roomer and/or the providing of table board to not more than one boarder in addition to members of the family occupying a single-family residence; 
G.  Home occupations (for which a home occupation permit has been issued); 
H.  Second dwelling units pursuant to Chapter 11.23 of this title and accessory buildings pursuant to Chapter 11.19 of this title or improvements incidental to any of the permitted uses in this chapter. No motor home, mobile home, tank, shipping container, trailer, business, or other vehicle or similar item shall be considered or permitted as accessory buildings. 
I.  Nameplates and signs as provided in Chapter 11.72 of this title; 
J.  Manufactured homes, provided that they shall be designed and built to have an appearance, scale and character similar to and in conformance with the predominant architectural style of homes in the immediate neighborhood and consistent with the provisions of this chapter applicable to conventionally-built single-family residences including, but not limited to: 
1.  Massing, 
2.  Foundations, 
3.  Roof pitch and roofing materials, 
4.  Fire sprinkler requirements, 
5.  Building materials, and 
6.  Window and architectural treatments; 
K.  Children's day-care facilities, day nurseries, and nursery schools in accordance with the provisions and requirements of Chapter 11.48 of this title; 
L.  Antennas, satellite dish antennas, or other similar accessory apparatus, as an accessory structure to a single-family residence, which is consistent with building height limits and other zoning provisions of this chapter and consistent with the provisions of Chapter 11.46 of this title. Antennas and similar apparatus not meeting the required zoning provisions may be approved by the Planning Commission, subject to a conditional use permit, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this title. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 2 (part); Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.702) 
(Ord. No. 08-905, § 2D, 1-5-09; Ord. No. 10-916, § 3, 10-18-10; Ord. No. 14-945, § 2, 9-2-14)  
11.18.040 - Property development standards. 
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-1 Zone; provided, however, if a lot has a width, depth or area less than that required by the provisions of this chapter and was held under separate ownership or was of official City record prior to June 2, 1988, such lot may be occupied by any use permitted in the R-1 Zone after a public hearing pursuant to a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this title. 
A.  Building Height Limits. The maximum building height shall be two stories and shall not exceed 35 feet. 
B.  Minimum Lot Width. Every lot shall have a minimum width at the front lot line of 60 feet for interior lots and 65 feet for corner lots and a minimum depth of 100 feet. When the minimum lot area per dwelling unit exceeds 15,000 square feet, every lot shall have a minimum width at the front lot line of 75 feet for interior lots and 80 feet for corner lots and a minimum depth of 150 feet. If a lot has less width or less area than required by the provisions of this chapter and was held under separate ownership or was of record on May 15, 1958, such lot or combination of such lots may be occupied by any use permitted in the R-1 Zone if the lot or combination of lots is not less than 50 feet in width at the building line. A lot or a combination of lots less than 50 feet in width at the building line, which lot was held under separate ownership or was of record on May 15, 1958, may be permitted to be occupied by any use permitted in the R-1 Zone after a public hearing pursuant to a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this title. Cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum length of 40 lineal feet measured along the front lot line. 
C.  Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit (except for lots held under separate ownership or of record on May 15, 1958; see subsection B of this section) shall be 7500 square feet. The Planning Commission may, pursuant to the zone-change procedures, establish a different minimum lot area for any R-1 Zone by establishing a suffix to the R-1 designation indicating the minimum lot area (i.e., 20,000, 30,000, etc.). No lot shall exceed the density provided for in the General Plan of the City. 
D.  Lot Coverage. The building area shall not cover more than 35 percent of the total area of any lot. 
E.  Yards. The following yards shall be established and maintained (see Section 11.38.060 of this Code for additional setbacks which may be required for planned rights-of-way): 
1.  A front yard having a depth not less than 25 feet; provided, however, no front yard need be deeper than the average of the depths of the front yards of the lots next thereto on either side, a vacant lot or a lot occupied by a building with a front yard of more than 25 feet being considered as having a front yard 25 feet deep; the Planning Commission may require within a subdivision a 30-foot setback on alternating lots and may require a 35-foot setback on limited access roads to provide for circular drives; 
2.  Side yards as follows: 
a.  Interior lots having vehicular access to an alley shall have side yards of not less than 5 feet in width, 
b.  Interior lots having no vehicular access to an alley shall have one side yard of not less than 12 feet in width and one side yard of not less than 5 feet in width, 
c.  Corner lots shall have side yards of not less than 5 feet in width adjacent to the interior side lot line and a 15-foot yard along the street side; 
3.  A rear yard having a depth of not less than 15 feet for a one-story building and 20 feet for a two-story building; provided further, the provisions of subsection F of this section shall also apply. 
F.  Outdoor Living Spaces. 
1.  Each lot shall contain a minimum of 1000 square feet of permanent, open, outdoor living space to the rear of the front yard setback line. Such outdoor living area may be provided in one or more spaces; provided, however, such spaces shall average not less than 20 feet and at their narrowest dimension shall be not less than 15 feet. 
2.  The gradient or slope of any required outdoor living space shall not exceed 5 percent in any direction. 
3.  Patios, including patio roofs, may be erected within the required outdoor living space provided such patios are open on at least two sides. Patios enclosed with walls, windows, screens or any other contrivance shall not be considered as open. Swimming, wading or fish pools may be constructed within the required outdoor living space. Patios and pools shall not occupy more than 60 percent of such space. 
4.  Vehicular driveways, when lying to the rear of the front yard setback line, shall not be calculated as part of the required outdoor living space. 
5.  Side and rear yards, as set forth in subsection E of this section, may be included in calculating the area and minimum dimensions of the required outdoor living space provided such side and rear yards are contiguous with, and an integral part of, such space. 
6.  Spaces with a dimension of less than 15 feet shall not be calculated when determining the required outdoor living space. 
G.  Parking. See Sections 11.66.010 and 11.66.030 of this title. 
H.  Roof-Mounted Equipment and Antennas. Roof-mounted equipment and antennas on new single-family dwellings, where a building permit is required per Section 11.46.030 of this Code, shall only be permitted, in conjunction with Precise Plan of Design approval, where it is demonstrated that such equipment is installed in a manner in harmony with the architectural design of the dwelling and surrounding neighborhood and in a location least visible from public view. Roof-mounted equipment and antenna installation is permitted on single-family development constructed prior to enactment of this chapter; however it shall also be installed in a manner in harmony with the architectural design of the dwelling and surrounding neighborhood. All such equipment installations, whether on new or existing development, shall meet applicable zoning provisions and the provisions of Chapter 11.46 of this title. Roof-mounted equipment and antennas installed prior to enactment of this title shall be deemed legally nonconforming and exempt from these provisions. Removal shall constitute cessation of use. 
I.  Landscaping Requirements. 
1.  New Residential Development. The following landscaping requirements shall apply to housing developed after June 2, 1988. 
a.  Area. The front and street corner side yards of each lot shall be fully landscaped by the developer, in accordance with these provisions, prior to dwelling occupancy. Other areas, such as slopes, may also require landscaping, subject to City review. 
b.  Trees. A minimum of one tree, minimum size of 15 gallons, shall be planted for every 500 square feet of front and street corner side yard areas. Required street trees shall be credited to this requirement. 
c.  Street Trees. At least one street tree per street frontage shall be planted in subdivisions, with tree spacing no greater than 35 feet on center. Such tree(s) shall be a minimum of 15 gallons in size. Location, species, and planting procedures shall be in accordance with the Street Tree Master Plan and City development standards. Street trees shall not be removed without prior City approval. 
d.  Shrubs. A minimum of one shrub shall be planted for each 150 square feet of front and street corner side yard areas. 
e.  Ground Cover. All planting areas shall be planted with live ground cover pursuant to City development standards. 
f.  Plant Materials; General. The number, size, spacing, and species of required plant materials may be increased, decreased, or otherwise changed by the Director of Community Development, or appointee, when it is determined that an alternate design will better meet the intent of this section. 
g.  Irrigation. All front and street corner side yard planting areas shall have 100 percent irrigation coverage by an automatic irrigation system. 
2.  All Residential Development. A minimum of 60 percent of the front and street corner side yard areas of each lot shall be retained as landscaped area. The remaining areas, not to exceed 40 percent of such total area, may include paved driveways, parking areas and aprons, walkways, and other hard surface areas. Exception to this requirement may be permitted, subject to approval of the Director of Community Development, in order to provide required access improvements such as circular driveways, or to accommodate reduced or irregular lots, such as cul-de-sacs. If a lot has less than 60 percent front yard landscaping prior to June 2, 1988, it shall be permitted so long as the existing landscaped area is not further reduced. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 2 (part); Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.703)  
11.18.050 - Special development standards. 
A.  Minimum Area of Dwelling Units. Single-family dwellings shall contain not less than: 
1.  For one-bedroom and two-bedroom (including den) units, 1300 square feet; 
2.  For units with three or more bedrooms 1400 square feet. Such space shall be exclusive of open porches, patios, carports and garages. 
B.  Minimum Room Sizes. A single-family dwelling shall have no habitable room, except kitchens, bathrooms and halls, which have an area of less than 110 square feet. 
C.  Minimum Room Pitch. Dwelling units utilizing typical gable, hip or shed roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 3 inches in 12 inches. 
D.  Minimum Eave Projection. Minimum eave projections shall in no case extend less than 18 inches. Additional extension may be required through Precise Plan of Design review in order to ensure energy conservation and/or compatibility with surrounding neighborhood. 
E.  Foundation Required. Units not constructed and/or installed on a concrete slab foundation shall have a continuous masonry foundation and/or enclosure. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.704)  
Chapter 11.19 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES 
Sections: 
 
11.19.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to: 
A.  Establish development standards that apply to accessory structures in single-family residential zoning districts. 
B.  Ensure accessory structures are consistent with the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
C.  Minimize the visual impact associated with the design of accessory structures. 
(Ord. No. 10-916, § 5, 10-18-10)  
11.19.020 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter shall apply to the construction of any accessory structure in single-family residential districts within the City as defined herein. 
B.  Except as provided elsewhere in this title, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, or replace any accessory use or structure without first complying with the development standards established herein and obtaining necessary construction and alteration permits as may be required by adopted codes listed in Title 10 of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
C.  Existing accessory structures that were legally constructed prior to the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived but which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter are deemed to be legal nonconforming and shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 11.78.060 of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
D.  The provisions of this chapter shall in no way validate any existing accessory structure constructed without City approval. Accessory structures erected without benefit of City approval and a building permit shall be removed upon notification or, if possible, modified to comply with the provisions of this chapter and any applicable requirements in the adopted codes listed in Title 10 of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-916, § 5, 10-18-10)  
11.19.030 - General requirements. 
Accessory buildings and structures, except walls and fences, in the R-1 Single-Family Residential Zone shall be subject to the following provisions: 
A.  An accessory structure may only be constructed on a lot containing a primary structure that is occupied by the appropriate use. 
B.  Accessory structures may only be used for purposes permitted in the district in which they are located. It shall be the responsibility of the Director to determine if a proposed accessory structure or use is appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to the principal permitted use. 
C.  No major accessory structure shall be allowed on a property that does not provide minimum required covered parking meeting the development standards of the underlying zoning district. 
D.  When an accessory structure is proposed on a property that is comprised of more than one lot or parcel, the parcels or lots in question shall be merged and recorded with the Office of the County Recorder. 
E.  No mobile home, tank, shipping container, trailer, bus, or other vehicle or similar item shall be utilized as an accessory building or storage structure in any single-family or multifamily residential zoning district. 
F.  Accessory buildings or structures containing machinery or other fixed equipment capable of creating noise audible outside of the structure shall comply with City noise standards as set forth in the Montclair Municipal Code. 
G.  Significant changes to the use of an accessory structure shall be subject to City review for compliance with the development standards contained in this Title and may be subject to construction and alteration permits as may be required by adopted codes listed in Title 10 of the Montclair Municipal Code. No accessory building shall be used as habitable space as defined in this Title, including, but not limited to, a dwelling unit, sleeping quarters, or a housekeeping unit or contain a kitchen unless permitted within an approved Second Dwelling Unit, subject to the provisions of Chapter 11.23 of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
H.  A bathroom may be allowed within an enclosed accessory structure if approved by the Community Development Director. 
I.  Accessory structures shall not be used for a commercial or industrial business, or home occupations. Other activities involving the use, manufacturing/processing, or storage of flammable, combustible, explosive, toxic, or other hazardous materials in quantities that are not normally associated with a household use as determined by the Montclair Fire Department shall be prohibited. 
J.  Accessory buildings or structures shall not be located in any utility or drainage easement. 
K.  Accessory structures shall be located and designed so as not to directly drain onto another property. 
L.  All accessory structures may be subject to the review and approval of the Montclair Fire Department including the requirement to install fire suppression (sprinkler) systems, monitoring, and/or alarms. 
M.  Before obtaining a building permit for a fully enclosed major accessory structure, the property owner shall file with the Office of the County Recorder a deed restriction, which has been approved by the City Attorney as to its form and content, containing a reference to the deed under which the property was acquired by the owner stating: 
1.  The permitted use(s) for which the accessory structures may be used. 
2.  That the accessory structures may not be converted to habitable space (i.e. a second dwelling unit pursuant to Chapter 11.23 herein and all other applicable ordinances and resolutions) without review and approval by the City, provided, however, that conversion to a similar use as determined by the Community Development Director shall not require execution and recordation of a new deed restriction. 
3.  The restrictions shall be binding upon any successors or assigns in ownership of the property, and lack of compliance may result in legal action against the owner. 
N.  Proposals for accessory structures shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Review and approval of all accessory structures shall be conducted administratively by City staff. Staff decisions may be appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to the criteria set forth in Chapter 1.08 of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
2.  Concurrently with the review, but prior to the approval of plans for all accessory structures, Planning Division staff shall schedule a multidepartmental inspection of the subject property to ensure that the submitted plans are accurate and contain no errors or omissions. At a minimum, staff from the Planning and Building Divisions and Code Enforcement Unit of the Fire Department shall participate in the site inspection, however, representatives from other City departments/divisions may participate in the inspection at the discretion of the City Planner. 
3.  Within 10 days of acceptance of a complete set of plans for a major accessory structure, the Community Development Director shall cause a courtesy notification of said proposal to be mailed to surrounding property owners who, in the Director's opinion, would be directly impacted by the proposed accessory structure. Said notification shall contain sufficient information regarding the general scope of the project and the days and times during which project plans may be reviewed by the public at the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 10-916, § 5, 10-18-10)  
11.19.040 - Accessory structures in multifamily districts. 
A.  No accessory structure shall be erected in a multifamily zoning district unless pursuant to a Precise Plan of Design (PPD). 
B.  For multifamily developments, all accessory structures including carports and garages, trash enclosures, common open space structures, etc., shall be subject to the approval of, or included as an element of a PPD. 
C.  Where a development standard in an underlying specific plan (SP) or planned unit development (PUD) project site addresses a specific accessory structure standard (e.g., height or setback), those standards shall take precedence over this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-916, § 5, 10-18-10)  
11.19.050 - Size and number of accessory structures allowed. 
The maximum size and number of accessory structures on any single-family residential lot shall be as follows: 
Maximum Allowable Size for Accessory Structures on R-1 (Single-Family Residential) Properties 
  
Lot Size 	  
Maximum Total Size 1 	  
Maximum Number 2 	  
Maximum Height 3 
Less than 6,000 square feet 	200 square feet 	1 	1 story or 15 feet 
6,001—9,000 square feet 	400 square feet 	2 	
9,001—12,000 square feet 	600 square feet 		
12,001—15,000 square feet 	800 square feet 		
15,001—18,000 square feet 	1,000 square feet 		
18,001—20,000 square feet 	1,200 square feet 		
Over 20,000 square feet 	1,400 square feet 		
1 Maximum cumulative floor area of all accessory structures on the property, including approved second units. Does not include attached accessory structures. 
2 In cases where the required garage is not part of the primary structure, it shall count as one of the two accessory buildings allowed, provided that the total floor area of the accessory buildings does not exceed the size limit or total lot coverage. 
3 For RV garages see Sections 11.19.070 and 11.19.110. 
 
(Ord. No. 10-916, § 5, 10-18-10)  
11.19.060 - Setbacks. 
Accessory buildings and structures shall comply with the following setback standards: 
Setbacks for Minor Accessory Structures (less than 120 square feet) 
Location 	Setback Requirement* 
Front Yard 	• No accessory structures allowed except for fences or walls pursuant to Section 11.38.050. 
Interior Side Yard 	• None for structures less than 6 feet in height behind a solid fence or wall and not visible to the street or adjacent properties. 
	• 3 feet minimum from side property line for structures greater than 6 feet but less than 8 feet in height. 
	• A 4-foot wide minimum unobstructed passageway to the rear yard shall be maintained at all times for access and onsite circulation. 
Street Side Yard 	• No accessory structures allowed except for fences or walls pursuant to Section 11.38.050. 
Rear Yard 	• None for structures less than 6 feet in height behind a solid fence or wall and not visible to the street or adjacent properties. 
	• 3 feet for structures up to 8 feet in height. 
* Setbacks for all structures shall be measured from property line. 
 
  
Setbacks for Major Accessory Structures (120 square feet or greater) 
Location 	Setback Requirement** 
Front Yard 	• No major accessory structures allowed except for fences or walls pursuant to Section 11.38.050. 
	• No swimming pools, spas, or hot tubs shall be allowed. 
	• Required garage shall meet applicable setback requirements of the underlying district. A minimum of 20 feet is required in front of garage structures that directly face a public or private street. 
Interior Side Yard 	• 5 or 12 feet as required by the underlying zoning district. 
	A 4-foot wide minimum unobstructed passageway to the rear yard shall be maintained at all times for access and onsite circulation. 
Street Side Yard 	• 15 feet minimum. 
	• No accessory structures allowed except for fences or walls pursuant to Section 11.38.050. 
	• No swimming pools, spas, or hot tubs shall be allowed. 
	• Required garage shall meet applicable setback requirements of the underlying district. A minimum of 20 feet is required in front of garage structures that directly face a public or private street. 
Rear Yard 	• 5 feet minimum. 
Alley 	• 25 feet from the opposite side of the alley for required garages taking direct access from the alley. 
	• 5 feet minimum for all other major accessory structures. 
Equestrian Trails 	• 5 feet minimum as measured from fence line designating nearest side of equestrian trail easement in interior side or rear yards. 
Through Lots 	• Accessory buildings may be placed in the apparent rear yard that is enclosed with a solid wall or fence and behind the required front yard setback of the opposite street. 
** Setbacks for all structures shall be measured from property line except as noted. Eaves, cornices, and canopies shall not extend beyond 2 feet into the required setback. 
 
(Ord. No. 10-916, § 5, 10-18-10)  
11.19.070 - Height. 
A.  All accessory structures shall be limited to one story and a maximum height of 15 feet, or the height of the primary structure, whichever is less. A rooftop designed so that it may be used as a deck shall be considered a second story for the purposes of this chapter and shall not be permitted. 
B.  For recreational vehicle (RV) garages, building height may exceed the stated height limit provided that overall height of the structure is the minimum necessary to achieve necessary clearances and allow a roof pitch that complements the roof pitch of the primary structure on the property. In no case shall the maximum height of the portion of the accessory structure intended for accommodating an RV exceed 20 feet in height. 
C.  Accessory structures designed with exterior walls exceeding 10 feet in height shall contain architectural design elements as described in Section 11.19.100(B) herein. 
(Ord. No. 10-916, § 5, 10-18-10)  
11.19.080 - Building separation. 
A.  Major accessory buildings or structures shall be separated from the primary structure and any other major accessory building or structure by a minimum distance of 10 feet, as measured from nearest exterior vertical wall or post surface. 
B.  No accessory structure shall be attached to a property line fence or wall. 
(Ord. No. 10-916, § 5, 10-18-10)  
11.19.090 - Lot coverage. 
A.  The sum total of all accessory structures (except in-ground pools) shall not occupy more than 35 percent of the rear yard of a property. 
B.  All accessory buildings or structures shall be counted toward the overall total lot coverage limit allowed by the underlying zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 10-916, § 5, 10-18-10)  
11.19.100 - Design. 
Plans for an accessory structure shall be reviewed for conformity with the following guidelines: 
A.  Roofing and siding materials shall match as closely as possible the predominant materials on the principal dwelling. Alternate materials may be approved if the Director finds that the alternate roofing and siding materials effectively complement the character and appearance of the primary structure on the property. 
B.  A single, large, dominant building mass shall be avoided. When large accessory structures are proposed, the overall mass of the structure should be broken up through the change in wall planes, setbacks, projecting and recessed elements, and similar design techniques. Roofline offsets shall be provided to lend an architectural interest and variety to the massing of a building and to relieve the effect of a single long roof. 
C.  The color(s) shall reflect, or be complementary to, the color scheme of the primary structure or dwelling 
D.  Trim detailing including, but not limited to, fascia, window trim, and door trim shall reflect and be complementary to the trim detailing of the principal dwelling. 
E.  Any lighting affixed to an accessory structure shall be designed or shielded so as to not cause glare upon neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 10-916, § 5, 10-18-10)  
11.19.110 - Additional standards for recreational vehicle garages. 
Recreational vehicles (RVs) may be parked and stored within a completely or partially enclosed garage structure. Such structures shall be subject to the additional development criteria provided in the following standards: 
A.  The RV garage shall be located in the rear yard meeting all applicable setback requirements. 
B.  An RV garage structure shall be designed to minimize volume and mass and comply with the general design standards for large accessory structures contained in this chapter. Rooflines shall be varied to reduce the scale of structures and add visual interest. 
C.  RVs shall not be covered solely by means of a carport structure. A carport for an RV may be considered when it is a part of, and appropriately integrated into, the overall design of a large accessory structure meeting the intent of the design standards for large accessory structures. 
D.  An RV garage structure shall not be placed on the property in any manner that blocks or obstructs direct vehicular access to required covered parking for the property. 
E.  Garages that are visible to the street shall have an automatic garage door opener and a decorative garage door design (e.g., "carriage style" garage doors) in keeping with the architectural style of the main house. 
F.  Temporary or permanent connections to an existing septic tank or the City's sanitary sewer system designed for the express purpose of conveying waste from RV septic holding tanks to a private sewer system or the public sewer shall be prohibited. Further, waste from RV septic holding tanks shall not be conveyed to a private sewer system or the public sewer system through toilets or other approved plumbing fixtures within an approved accessory structure, main dwelling unit, or second dwelling unit. RV septic holding tanks shall be evacuated only at a licensed dump station designed to accept such waste. 
(Ord. No. 10-916, § 5, 10-18-10)  
11.19.120 - Maintenance. 
All accessory structures shall be maintained in good repair in conformance with the property maintenance standards of the Montclair Municipal Code at all times. 
(Ord. No. 10-916, § 5, 10-18-10)  
Chapter 11.20 - ZONES: R-2—TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
Sections: 
 
11.20.010 - Two-Family Residential Zone. 
The R-2 Two-Family Residential Zone is for a residential district of single-family and two-family dwellings, with either one or two single-family dwellings on the same lot or one duplex per lot. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any and every building and premises or land in the R-2 Zone shall be used for, or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained and moved into or within such R-2 Zone exclusively and only in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.801)  
11.20.020 - Uses permitted. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2 Zone: 
A.  Any use permitted in the R-l Zone; 
B.  Duplex dwellings of a permanent character placed in a permanent location and of not less than the following minimum floor area per dwelling unit, exclusive of open porches and garages: 
1.  For one-bedroom units, 950 square feet, 
2.  For two-bedroom units, 1200 square feet, 
3.  For three-bedroom units, 1400 square feet, and 
4.  For four-bedroom units, 1450 square feet; 
C.  Two single-family dwellings of a permanent character placed in permanent locations on the same lot. There shall be a minimum of 1300 square feet for each one- or two-bedroom unit and 1400 square feet for units with three or more bedrooms, exclusive of open porches and garages; 
D.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above uses; and 
E.  Name plates and signs as provided in Chapter 11.72 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.802)  
11.20.030 - Building height limits. 
The maximum building height shall be two and one-half stories and shall not exceed 35 feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 11.38.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.803)  
11.20.040 - Minimum lot size. 
Every interior lot shall have a minimum width at the building line of 60 feet; every corner lot shall have a minimum width of 65 feet. Such lots shall have a minimum depth of 100 feet and a minimum area of 7500 square feet, provided, however, if a lot has less width or less area than required by the provisions of this title and was held under separate ownership or was of official City record on June 2, 1988, such lot or a combination of such lots may be occupied by any use permitted in the R-1 Zone if the lot or combination of lots is not less than 50 feet in width at the building line. A lot or combination of lots less than 50 feet in width at the building line, which lot or combination of lots was held under separate ownership or was of official City record on June 2, 1988, may be permitted to be occupied by any use permitted in the R-1 Zone subject to a CUP. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.804)  
11.20.050 - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
The minimum lot area per dwelling unit (except for lots held under separate ownership or of official City record on June 2, 1988; see Section 11.20.040 of this chapter) shall be 3750 square feet. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.805)  
11.20.060 - Lot coverage. 
The building area shall not cover more than 40 percent of the total area of any lot. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.806)  
11.20.070 - Yards. 
The following yards shall be established and maintained (see Section 11.38.060 of this title for additional setbacks which may be required for planned rights-of-way): 
A.  A front yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet; provided, however, no front yard need be deeper than the average of the depths of the front yards of the lots next thereto on either side, a vacant lot or a lot occupied by a building with a front yard of more than 25 feet being considered as having a front yard 25 feet deep; 
B.  Side yards as follows: 
1.  Interior lots having vehicular access to an alley shall have side yards of not less than 5 feet in width, 
2.  Interior lots having no vehicular access to an alley shall have one side yard of not less than 12 feet in width and one side yard of not less than 5 feet in width, and 
3.  Corner lots shall have side yards of not less than 5 feet in width adjacent to interior side lot lines and not less than 15 feet adjacent to street side lot lines; and 
C.  A rear yard having a depth of not less than 10 feet for a one-story building and 15 feet for a two-story building provided, further, that the provisions of Section 11.20.080 of this chapter shall also apply; 
D.  Landscaping requirements shall be met per Section 11.18.040(I). 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.807)  
11.20.080 - Outdoor living spaces. 
A.  Each lot shall contain a minimum of 800 square feet of permanent, open, outdoor living space for each dwelling unit to the rear of the front yard setback line. Such outdoor living area may be provided in one or more spaces; provided, however, such spaces shall not be less than 15 feet at their narrowest dimension. 
B.  The gradient or slope of any required outdoor living space shall not exceed 5 percent in any direction. 
C.  Patios, including patio roofs, may be erected within the required outdoor living space provided such patios are open on at least two (2) sides. Patios enclosed with walls, windows, screens, or any other contrivance shall not be considered as open. Swimming, wading or fish pools may be constructed within the required outdoor living space. Patios and pools shall not occupy more than 60 percent of such space. 
D.  Vehicular driveways, when lying to the rear of the front yard setback line, shall not be calculated as part of the required outdoor living space. 
E.  Side and rear yards, as described in Section 11.20.070 of this chapter, may be included in calculating the area and minimum dimensions of the required outdoor living space provided such side and rear yards are contiguous with, and an integral part of, such space. 
F.  Spaces with a dimension of less than 15 feet shall not be calculated when determining the required outdoor living space. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.808)  
11.20.090 - Distance between dwellings. 
The minimum distance between single-story dwellings, neither one of which has an entrance opening upon the intervening space, shall not be less than 10 feet, and the minimum distance in all other cases shall be not less than 20 feet. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.809)  
11.20.100 - Parking. 
See Sections 11.66.010 and 11.66.030 of this title. 
(Prior code § 9-4.810)  
Chapter 11.22 - ZONES: R-3—RESIDENTIAL MEDIUM-HIGH DENSITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-935, § 1, adopted July 7, 2014, repealed the former Chapter 11.22, §§ 11.22.010—11.22.070, and enacted a new Chapter 11.22 as set out herein. The former Chapter 11.22 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code §§ 9-4.901, 9-4.903—9-4.905; Ord. No. 99-791 and Ord. No. 08-905, adopted January 5, 2009. 
 
11.22.010 - Findings and intent. 
A.  The City Council finds that multifamily developments are different in so many respects from other types and forms of development as to require a specialized set of regulations. 
B.  The intent of this Chapter is to set forth standards, procedures and guidelines that will promote desirable living environments; allow for a diverse range of housing types to appeal to the widest range of residents possible; require high quality architecture, thoughtful site planning, and sufficient amenities; and ensure the preservation of privacy, convenience, health, safety and well-being of residents. 
(Ord. No. 13-935, § 1, 7-7-14)  
11.22.020 - Uses permitted. 
Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any and every building, premises and/or land in the R-3 Zone shall be used for, or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained and moved into or within such R-3 Zone, exclusively and only in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter, and subject to the approval of a Precise Plan of Design submitted and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11.80 of this title. 
A.  The following shall be permitted as primary uses: 
1.  Apartments, condominiums, townhomes, and planned residential developments, subject to the provisions set forth in this chapter; 
2.  Mobile home parks; subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 11.62 of this title; 
3.  Residential care facilities for six or fewer persons; 
4.  Senior citizen housing. 
B.  The following shall be permitted as accessory uses: 
1.  Those uses permitted in Sections 11.18.030(D), (F), and (H) of this Title; 
2.  Signs, subject to the provisions of Chapter 11.72 of this title; 
3.  Parking lots; 
4.  Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 11.58 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 13-935, § 1, 7-7-14)  
11.22.030 - Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit. 
The following uses may be permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this title: 
A.  Those uses permitted in Section 11.18.030(A), (E), and (K) and Section 11.20.020(B) of this title; 
B.  Convalescent centers, skilled nursing facilities and assisted living facilities. 
(Ord. No. 13-935, § 1, 7-7-14)  
11.22.040 - Property development standards. 
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-3 Zone; provided, however, where a lot has a width, depth, or area less than that required by the provisions of this title and was held under separate ownership or was of official City record prior to June 30, 1984, such lot may be occupied by any use permitted in the R-3 Zone. 
A.  Lot Area. The net lot area shall be a minimum of one acre (43,560 square feet). 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Width. The width of the lot shall be a minimum of 175 feet at the front lot line. However, if lots are located at the end of a cul-de-sac or another location that results in a wedge-shaped lot, the minimum width at the front building line shall be not less than 125 feet, provided the average width of the lot is not less than 175 feet. 
2.  Depth. The depth of the lot shall be a minimum of 200 feet. 
C.  Maximum Dwelling Unit Density. The maximum dwelling unit densities stated in this subsection are not automatically by-right; projects shall also be required to meet all applicable development standards contained in this title. 
1.  The maximum dwelling unit density for courtyard, garden, rowhouse or stacked dwelling multifamily developments on parcels with a net area of less than five acres shall be 20 units per acre. 
2.  The maximum dwelling unit density for courtyard, garden, rowhouse, or stacked dwelling multifamily developments on parcels with a net area between 5.00 and 9.99 acres shall be 25 units per acre. 
3.  The maximum dwelling unit density for courtyard, garden, rowhouse or stacked dwelling multifamily developments on parcels with a net area of 10 acres or greater shall be 30 units per acre. 
D.  Building Height. The maximum building height shall be 50 feet with a maximum of four floors, except that any portion of a building within 200 feet of the boundary of any R-1 Zone shall be limited to 38 feet and a maximum of three floors, and any portion of a building within 75 feet of the boundary of any R-1 Zone shall be limited to 28 feet and a maximum of two floors. "Building height" as defined herein means the vertical distance from the average contact ground level of the building to the highest point of the parapet wall of a flat roof or the mean height level between the eaves and ridges for a gable or hip roof. 
E.  Building design. 
1.  Structures having dwelling units attached side-by-side shall have an offset or articulation in the front building line of at least four feet for every two dwelling units within such structure. Similar architectural enhancement alternatives may be approved subject to a Precise Plan of Design approved by the Planning Commission. 
2.  Structures having dwelling units attached side-by-side or stacked above one another shall provide at least one-third of the total number of units within such development as a flat or one-story unit. 
F.  Lot Coverage. Buildings and structures shall not cover more of a lot than would be permitted when satisfying all yard, open space, parking and access requirements. 
G.  Minimum Floor Area of Dwelling Units. Multifamily dwelling units shall contain the following minimum floor areas: 
1.  For studio or one-bedroom units, 800 square feet. 
2.  For two-bedroom units, 950 square feet. 
3.  For three-bedroom units, 1,200 square feet. 
4.  For four-bedroom units, 1,400 square feet. 
Said floor areas shall be exclusive of patios, balconies, carports and garages. 
H.  Minimum Room Sizes. The minimum size of rooms shall comply with the currently adopted California Building Code, except that all bedrooms shall have a minimum area of 110 square feet and a minimum dimension of nine feet. 
I.  Yards and Setbacks. Developments in the R-3 Zone shall have and maintain the following minimum yards and setbacks (see Sections 11.38.050 and 11.38.060 of this title for additional requirements). Building setbacks shall be measured from the front property line. 
1.  Front Yards. 
a.  For buildings with three stories or less, a 25-foot minimum front-yard setback shall be required. 
b.  For buildings with four stories, a 35-foot minimum front-yard setback shall be required. 
c.  Notwithstanding the required front-yard setbacks indicated herein, covered or uncovered porches and balconies that are open on three sides may encroach up to seven feet into the required front-yard setback. 
d.  The Planning Commission may require greater setbacks pursuant to a Precise Plan of Design because of the dimensions or bulk of a building, its relationship to the adjacent street(s) and/or to ensure compatibility with contiguous land uses. 
e.  No portion of the required front-yard setback area shall be used for parking. Driveways of the minimum width necessary for vehicular access shall be permitted to traverse the front-yard setback area. 
2.  Street Side Yards. 
a.  For buildings with three stories or less, a 25-foot minimum street side-yard setback shall be required. 
b.  For buildings with four stories, a 35-foot minimum street side-yard setback shall be required. 
c.  Notwithstanding the required street side-yard setbacks indicated herein, covered or uncovered porches and balconies that are open on three sides may encroach up to seven feet into the required street side-yard setback. 
d.  The Planning Commission may require greater setbacks pursuant to a Precise Plan of Design because of the dimensions or bulk of a building, its relationship to the adjacent street(s) and/or to ensure compatibility with contiguous land uses. 
e.  No portion of the required street side-yard setback area shall be used for parking. Driveways of the minimum width necessary for vehicular access shall be permitted to traverse the street side-yard setback area. 
3.  Interior Side Yards. 
a.  For buildings with three stories or less, a 10-foot minimum interior side-yard setback shall be required. 
b.  For buildings with four stories, a 15-foot minimum interior side-yard setback shall be required. 
c.  Open patios on the first floor shall be permitted to encroach a maximum of five feet into any required interior side-yard setback. Open patios above the first floor shall not be permitted to encroach into any required interior side-yard setbacks. 
d.  The Planning Commission may require greater setbacks pursuant to a Precise Plan of Design because of the dimensions or bulk of a building and/or to ensure compatibility with contiguous land uses. 
e.  Interior side-yard setback areas may be used for parking subject to approval of a Precise Plan of Design and provided that required fire lane access is maintained at all times. 
4.  Rear Yards. 
a.  For buildings with three stories or less, a 10-foot minimum rear-yard setback shall be required. 
b.  For buildings with four stories, a 15-foot minimum rear-yard setback shall be required. 
c.  Notwithstanding the required rear-yard setbacks indicated herein, covered or uncovered porches and balconies that are open on three sides may encroach up to seven feet into any required rear-yard setback. 
d.  The Planning Commission may require greater setbacks pursuant to a Precise Plan of Design because of the dimensions or bulk of a building and/or to ensure compatibility with contiguous land uses. 
e.  Rear-yard setback areas may be used for parking subject to approval of a Precise Plan of Design and provided that required fire lane access is maintained at all times. 
J.  Open Space. Each development shall provide outdoor open space for recreation and leisure activities within the development site in the following manner: 
1.  Common open/recreational space shall comprise not less than 35 percent of the net acreage. Public or private driveways, parking spaces or other areas designed for operational functions are not considered open space. Common open/recreational space improvements shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Developments of 20 units or less shall provide at least two of the following amenities: 
i.  Permanent barbecue facilities with at least two grills and two table/bench arrangements; 
ii.  Playground and/or tot lot with permanently-installed play equipment; 
iii.  Swimming pool or spa. 
b.  Developments of 21 to 40 units shall provide at least two of the amenities listed in subsection (J)(1)(a) of this section plus at least one of the following amenities: 
i.  Sports court (tennis, volleyball, basketball, etc.); 
ii.  Community building with at least one full kitchen and a minimum of two rooms for meetings, games, activities, etc. 
c.  Developments of 41 to 100 units shall provide at least one of each of the five amenities in subsections (J)(1)(a) and (b) of this section. 
d.  Developments of greater than 100 units shall provide at least one of each of the five amenities in subsections (J)(1)(a) and (b) of this Section plus at least two of the following: 
i.  A passive, open turf area (natural or synthetic), measuring at least 100 feet by 100 feet, for unstructured recreational activities; 
ii.  A fitness parcourse of at least one-quarter mile in length and a minimum of six activity stations; 
iii.  Other amenity(ies) to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development. 
e.  For projects of greater than 100 units, the Director of Community Development may require the developer to increase the size, number and/or capacity of one or more required amenities to adequately serve the number of residents in the development. 
2.  Private porches, patios and balconies attached to individual dwelling units may be included in the required outdoor open space calculation provided the minimum dimension is at least 10 feet and the minimum area is 150 square feet. 
3.  Swimming pools, spas, ponds, lakes, streams and other water features provided for the common use or enjoyment of all residents may be constructed as part of the required outdoor open space; however, such facilities shall not comprise more than 50 percent of the required outdoor open space. 
4.  The outdoor open spaces created pursuant to the provisions of this Title shall remain open and available for such use for the life of the development. 
K.  Private Open Space. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum private open space of 100 square feet with a minimum dimension of seven feet. Such private open space shall be in the form of porches, patios and/or balconies. 
L.  Landscaping. The design, installation and maintenance of all landscape and hardscape areas shall be subject to approval of a Precise Plan of Design and shall fully comply with Chapter 11.60 of this title. 
M.  Walls and Fences. The general development standards for walls and fences as provided in Sections 11.38.050(M), (N), and (O) of this title shall apply; provided, however, that the Planning Commission may require additional walls and fences if necessary to protect adjacent properties. 
N.  Vehicular Circulation. 
1.  Streets. Primary and secondary streets shall be designed to meet the following standards: 
a.  Traffic lanes no less than 10 feet in width and no more than 12 feet in width. 
b.  Where on-street parallel parking is provided, the parking lane shall be eight feet in width. Where 90-degree or angled parking is provided as part of the street design, parking stall dimensions shall be nine feet in width by 20 feet in length. A maximum two-foot overhang may be allowed into landscape areas or walkways with a dimension of six feet or greater. 
2.  Driveways Serving Only Garages. If a private driveway serves only garages, and the driveway is posted as a fire lane and/or to prohibit all other parking, the driveway may be constructed with a minimum width of 20 feet; provided, however, that if the driveway is double-loaded with garages on both sides, a minimum distance of 26 feet shall be provided as measured from building wall to building wall. 
3.  Access and On-Site Circulation. 
a.  Vehicular access to all developments shall be from a public street. 
b.  The design of all on-site vehicular circulation, including roadway widths, turning radii and turnarounds shall be subject to approval by the Fire Department. 
c.  There shall be a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet along all driveways and vehicular paths that provide access for emergency response vehicles. 
O.  Pedestrian Circulation. A pedestrian circulation system shall be incorporated into the residential development for the purpose of providing direct access to all dwelling units, trash enclosures, parking areas, recreation areas and outdoor open space. The circulation system shall include the following: 
1.  A public sidewalk shall be constructed adjacent to all public streets bordering the project site with a minimum width of five feet in accordance with City standards. 
2.  An on-site walkway system of pedestrian walks and paths that fully complies with all disabled-accessibility standards with respect to surface material, width, grades, ramps, curbs, railings and signage. 
P.  Parking Requirements. 
1.  Resident Parking. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with resident parking as indicated below. A minimum of one required parking space for each unit shall be within a carport or enclosed garage. Every effort shall be made to locate the required parking space(s) for each unit within 200 feet of the unit to which they are assigned. 
a.  Studio—One parking space. 
b.  One to two bedrooms—Two parking spaces. 
c.  Three or more bedrooms—Three parking spaces. 
2.  Guest Parking. On-site parking for guests shall be provided at a ratio of one parking space for every three units or fraction thereof, regardless of unit size. Guest parking shall be reasonably distributed throughout the development site. 
3.  Parking Space Dimensions. 
a.  Enclosed Garages. The minimum, clear inside dimensions of each parking space within an enclosed garage shall be 10 feet in width and 20 feet in length. Said clear inside dimensions shall not be encroached upon by water heaters, HVAC equipment, areas designated for a clothes washer and dryer, or stairs leading to habitable living space. 
b.  Carports. The minimum, clear dimensions of each parking space within a carport shall be nine feet in width by 20 feet in length; provided, however, that a two-foot overhang may be allowed into landscape areas or walkways with a dimension of six feet or greater. Where a structural support post occurs for a carport, an additional two feet in width shall be added to each parking space on either side of the structural member. 
c.  Uncovered Parking. The minimum dimensions of each uncovered parking space shall be nine feet by 20 feet in length; provided, however, that a two-foot overhang may be allowed into landscape areas or walkways with a dimension of six feet or greater. 
4.  Automatic garage door openers shall be shall be required for each enclosed garage. 
5.  Parking Lot Striping. Striping for uncovered parking spaces or those within carports shall be double-stripe or "hairpin" style, with the nine-foot dimension being measured to the center of the "hairpin." 
6.  Tandem Parking. Tandem parking shall only be permitted within enclosed garages and only when both spaces serve the same unit. 
7.  On-street parking on public streets shall not be used to satisfy any of the parking requirements contained herein. 
Q.  Signs. The general development standards for signs as set forth in Chapter 11.72 of this title shall apply, in addition to the following: 
1.  Permitted Signs. 
a.  Wall Signs. One illuminated or nonilluminated wall sign with the name of the development shall be permitted on each street frontage. Individual or script copy in durable materials is strongly encouraged. Externally illuminated signs shall be via wall-mounted fixtures that are complementary to the architecture of the development and do not create any nuisance light spill or glare to any of the residential units or the public right-of-way. Internally illuminated signs shall be limited to halo illumination only. 
b.  Address Signs. One illuminated or nonilluminated wall sign with the numerical address or numerical address and street name of the development shall be permitted on each building on each street frontage. Where a building also fronts on an internal private driveway or parking lot, additional numerical address(es) may be permitted to be displayed for safety and security purposes. Individual or script copy in durable materials is strongly encouraged. Externally illuminated signs shall be via wall-mounted fixtures that are complementary to the architecture of the development and do not create any nuisance light spill or glare to any of the residential units or the public right-of-way. Internally illuminated signs shall be limited to halo illumination only. Address and address/street name signs shall be a minimum of eight inches in height and a maximum of 10 inches in height. Where more than one address sign is attached to multiple frontages of a single building as described above, the design, size and color of each sign shall be identical. 
c.  Freestanding Monument Signs. One illuminated or nonilluminated freestanding monument sign shall be allowed for developments with a minimum of 150 feet of continuous frontage on the same street. 
i.  Height. Monument signs shall be limited to a maximum height of five feet as measured from the grade of the adjacent public sidewalk. 
ii.  Sign Area. The sign face of monument signs shall be limited to a maximum of 40 square feet in size, not including the optional, detachable sign rider described in subsection (c)(2) below. 
1.  Design and Illumination. Monument signs shall be of a high-quality architectural design and be constructed of durable materials. If illumination is desired, it shall be via at-grade, flush-mounted fixtures to minimize nuisance glare to the adjacent public right-of-way. As an alternative, above-grade fixtures may be used if it can be demonstrated that the light source will not be directly visible to the public right-of-way or neighboring properties. 
2.  Sign Copy. The purpose of monument signs is to identify the development by its name and address. No additional sign copy, such as phone numbers, website addresses or other forms of advertising, shall be permitted. A detachable rider to the sign containing sign copy, such as "Now Leasing," "Now Renting," "Vacancy," "No Vacancy," or the like, shall be permitted so long as its design is complementary to the main sign. Such sign riders shall be no greater than eight square feet in size. 
3.  Location. Monument signs shall be located within a fully landscaped area and set back a minimum of five feet from the back edge of the adjacent public sidewalk. In order to eliminate sight-distance obstructions, monument signs shall be located no less than 30 feet away from any vehicular driveway on the same side of the street, whether the driveway serves the subject development or an adjacent property. 
d.  Unit Signs. One illuminated or nonilluminated sign identifying the unit number, letter or designation, not to exceed one square foot in size, shall be required and maintained for each dwelling unit. 
e.  Directional Signs. One or more pedestrian and/or vehicular-oriented directional signs no larger than six square feet in size and four feet in height may be permitted within residential developments of two acres or greater, subject to administrative review and approval by the Director of Community Development. 
2.  Prohibited Signs. All signs not expressly permitted herein shall be prohibited, including those signs identified in Section 11.72.120 of this title. 
R.  Operational Standards. In order to provide adequate management, maintenance and oversight for multifamily developments, the following operational standards shall be required for projects constructed after July 1, 2014: 
1.  For developments of 30 units or less, an on-site manager having the authority to perform or contract for emergency and nonemergency maintenance and repairs shall reside full-time in one of the dwelling units on the subject property. 
2.  For developments of greater than 30 units, the following requirements shall apply: 
a.  A permanent rental/leasing/property management office shall be established and maintained on-site and staffed daily during regular business hours. 
b.  The property owner shall be required to contract with a professional property management company that is on-call 24 hours a day and shall be responsible for all landscape, common area and building maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 13-935, § 1, 7-7-14)  
11.22.050 - Other general development standards. 
A.  Trash Collection Areas. Each trash collection area shall be located within 200 feet of the farthest unit it is intended to serve. Such collection areas shall be designed and situated so as to minimize noise and visual intrusion on the subject property, adjacent properties, as well as to not create a fire hazard to nearby structures. Said trash collection areas shall be provided with a minimum illumination level of 500 lumens and designed to City standards to comply with stormwater runoff regulations. 
B.  Mail Collection Areas. Mail delivery service shall be provided within centrally located areas with easy accessibility from an internal driveway or parking area. Mail collection areas shall be located within a fully enclosed building, covered breezeway, or other similar area that is adequately protected from inclement weather, and shall be provided with a minimum illumination level of 500 lumens. 
C.  Utility Service and Television Service. All utility services to multifamily residential developments, including, but not limited to electrical, telephone, cable and satellite television, and broadband service shall be installed underground and within building walls. Should exterior antennas and/or satellite dishes be allowed, the project shall be designed to provide areas on each building for such equipment that are not visible to public rights-of-way or neighboring properties. 
D.  Laundry areas. Laundry areas with plumbing connections meeting minimum building code standards shall be provided for within each residential unit or within a direct-access, enclosed garage. If located within a garage, the necessary space for a washer and dryer shall not encroach into the required clear garage parking space dimensions specified in this chapter. 
E.  Lighting. Multifamily residential developments shall comply with the following standards and requirements regarding illumination: 
1.  Site Lighting. A professionally-prepared photometric analysis demonstrating that all parking areas, driveways, private streets, walkways, and other outdoor public spaces shall be illuminated to an adequate level for security and safety during all hours of darkness shall be required to be submitted for review and approval by the Community Development Department. 
2.  Garages. Fully enclosed garages shall be wired to include a fixture or fixtures that has/have the capacity to support light sources providing a minimum of illumination level of 1,500 lumens. Said illumination shall be in addition to any lighting that may be provided by the required automatic garage door opener. 
F.  Vehicular Storage. Outdoor areas for the storage of vehicles, trailers, watercraft, recreational vehicles and the like shall be prohibited unless specially designated areas for the exclusive storage of such vehicles are approved by the City as part of the final development plan and provided for in the homeowners association's Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs). If such areas are provided, they shall be enclosed and screened from view from neighboring properties and public rights-of-way by a decorative masonry wall, minimum seven feet six inches in height, compatible and integrated with the architectural design of the development. Such storage areas shall be landscaped and illuminated to minimum levels during all hours of darkness. A vehicle wash area and/or RV wastewater disposal station may be provided within an approved vehicular storage area, subject to review and approval by the Director of Community Development and Director of Public Works. 
(Ord. No. 13-935, § 1, 7-7-14)  
11.22.060 - Miscellaneous development standards. 
The following development standards shall be applicable to multifamily developments in addition to those required elsewhere in this chapter: 
A.  Grading: Notification of Completion and Written Certification Required. The permittee or his/her agent shall notify the Building Official when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, stormwater retention facilities and all erosion control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan and the required reports have been submitted, including written certification that the work completed is in accordance with the final approved grading plan. 
B.  Landscaping: Notification of Completion and Written Certification Required. The permittee or his/her agent shall notify the Director of Community Development when the final landscaping installation is ready for inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including installation of plant material and an automatic irrigation system, has been completed in accordance with the approved landscape plan, and the permittee has submitted written certification by a licensed professional that the work has been completed in accordance with the final approved landscape plan and all requirements of Chapter 11.60 of this title. 
C.  Energy Conservation. The project shall be designed to meet or exceed all state and local energy conservation standards in effect at the time of construction. 
D.  Fire Detection System. Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in all habitable spaces as required by state and local ordinances at the time of construction. 
E.  Fire Suppression System. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in all dwelling units, and in all covered or enclosed nonhabitable spaces, such as garages, carports and trash enclosures as required by local ordinance at the time of construction. 
F.  Sound Attenuation. Multifamily residential developments shall be designed to comply with state noise attenuation standards and local building requirements in effect at the time of construction. 
G.  Solar Energy Systems. The goals and objectives of the General Plan encourage and promote an enhanced residential park-like environment through the implementation of aesthetically pleasing development and design standards of this title. However, it is recognized that there is a need to encourage and promote awareness in the community of alternative means of conserving energy resources. It is further recognized that the use of solar energy can be a cost-effective means of water heating and space heating and cooling, but that the use of such systems may be inconsistent with the goals and objectives of the community and the aesthetic character of the City's residential neighborhoods. 
The Planning Commission, in granting approval of a solar energy system, may impose conditions that are necessary and desirable to carry out the purposes of this Chapter and that are consistent with the policies, principles, regulation, criteria and standards applied to other properties, uses and developments in similar circumstances. Further, in considering a solar energy system, the Planning Commission shall impose conditions in order to provide a balance between the goals and objectives of the community and the General Plan, and the recognize desire to allow solar energy systems as an alternative energy source. 
(Ord. No. 13-935, § 1, 7-7-14)  
11.22.070 - Common areas. 
A.  A development shall be approved subject to submission of a legal instrument setting forth a plan or manner of permanent care and maintenance of all building exteriors, open spaces, recreational areas, and other communal facilities. No such instrument shall be acceptable until approved by the Director of Community Development as to suitability for the proposed use and the City Attorney as to legal form and effect. 
B.  If the development's common areas are to be conveyed to a homeowners association, the developer shall file a declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs) to be submitted with the application for approval that will govern the association. The provisions shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The homeowners association shall be established no later than prior to the sale of the final dwelling unit. 
2.  Membership shall be mandatory for each buyer and all successive buyers. 
3.  The open space restrictions shall be permanent. 
4.  Provisions to restrict parking upon other than approved and developed parking spaces shall be written into the CC&Rs. 
5.  If the development is constructed in increments or phases that require one or more final maps, reciprocal CC&Rs and reciprocal management and maintenance agreements shall be established causing a merging of the phases as they are completed to embody a single homeowners association with common areas for the total development. 
(Ord. No. 13-935, § 1, 7-7-14)  
11.22.080 - Covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs). 
In order to ensure proper maintenance of all streets, parking areas, landscaping and other improvements within the common areas of a multifamily residential development, the following provisions shall be contained in the Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs). No such CC&Rs shall be acceptable until approved by the Director of Community Development as to the adequacy and suitability for the proposed use and maintenance of all common areas, and by the City Attorney as to legal form and effect. These provisions shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  The final CC&Rs, upon approval by the City, shall be recorded with the final map. 
B.  The City shall be made a party to the CC&Rs and further provide that the City shall approve any changes or amendments to the CC&Rs. 
C.  The City shall be granted the power to enforce all provisions of the CC&Rs, including, but not limited to, the maintenance of all streets, parking areas, landscaping and other improvements within the common areas of the development. 
D.  The City shall be granted the express power to enforce all laws and ordinances of the State of California and/or the City of Montclair on the private streets, alleys and parking areas within the project. Nothing within the CC&Rs shall be construed as imposing an obligation or requiring the City to enforce any provision of the CC&Rs. 
E.  The City shall be entitled to prior written notice of any proposed amendment to the CC&Rs. Such notice shall be given by mailing a copy of the precise language of the proposed amendment to the City, in care of the City Clerk, together with a letter of transmittal explaining the proposed change in general terms. The City shall have an opportunity to review and comment upon the proposed amendment for a period of not less than 45 days prior to the effective date of any such proposed amendment. 
F.  Right of Entry. The City, through its duly authorized agents or employees, shall have the right to enter upon the common areas for the following purposes: 
1.  Inspection, maintenance and repair of the landscaping and private street components of the common areas where such maintenance and repair is required; 
2.  Enforcement of local traffic and/or parking regulations. All privately-owned and maintained streets, alleys, driveways and parking areas shall be open for the use of the public for purposes of vehicle traffic and are so connected with highways and streets that provisions of the Vehicle Code of the State of California may be applied to them in their entirety. Whenever by this provision, or any other law of the City, parking is restricted or prohibited and signs are erected giving notice thereof, duly authorized representatives of the City of Montclair may cause the vehicles in violation thereof to be towed away and stored at the expense of the owner, operator or person to whom the vehicle is entitled to be released, and the vehicle shall not be released except upon payment of the towing and storage costs. In tow-away zones, the Public Works Department shall cause to be posted appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
G.  Reimbursement of City Expenditures by the Association. All costs and expenses incurred by the City arising out of its maintenance and repair of the common areas, as provided in subsection (F)(1) and (F)(2) of this section, shall be charged as an expense of the homeowners association and shall be paid within 30 days of receipt of an invoice for same. 
H.  Assessments and Lien Rights of the City. If City maintenance costs are not paid within 30 days from the date due, said unpaid costs and expenses shall become a special assessment against the property, and upon hearing and confirmation by the City Council, shall be collected in the same manner as real property taxes and shall be subject to the same penalties, procedures and sale in case of delinquency as is provided for real property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 13-935, § 1, 7-7-14)  
Chapter 11.23 - SECOND DWELLING UNITS 
Sections: 
 
11.23.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The intent of this chapter is to provide the framework for the creation of accessory second dwelling units in the City's single- and multiple-family residential districts in accordance with Government Code Section 65852.2. This chapter prescribes standards for such second dwelling units to minimize adverse impacts on the public health, safety, and general welfare from the establishment of second dwelling units. 
A.  The construction, establishment, alteration, enlargement, or modification of a second dwelling unit shall comply with the requirements of this chapter, other development standards in this Code applicable to the district in which the lot is located, and the City's adopted Building Code. 
B.  Existing second dwelling units that were legally constructed or initiated but which do not conform to this chapter are deemed nonconforming and shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 11.78.060 of the Montclair Municipal Code. The provisions of this chapter shall in no way validate any existing illegal second dwelling unit. An illegal second dwelling unit may be converted to a legal conforming second dwelling unit, provided that it can comply with the same standards and requirements for a new second dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 08-905, § 2F, 1-5-09)  
11.23.020 - Permitted locations. 
One accessory second dwelling unit may be allowed on property meeting the following criteria: 
A.  The subject site is a legal lot of record located within the "R-1," "R-1(SL)," "R-1(11)," or "R-1(20)" single-family residential districts. 
B.  The subject site is a legal lot of record located within the "R-2" or "R-3" multiple-family residential districts that meets the minimum lot area requirement for the R-2 and R-3 zones, respectively, and that said lot is developed with no more than one single family detached dwelling. 
C.  The subject site is not listed on a local, state, or National Register of Historic Places. 
D.  The property complies with minimum lot size and dimensions of the underlying zoning district. 
E.  The property is developed with a legally permitted single-family dwelling unit on a permanent foundation as the primary use of the property and has no guesthouse or other second dwelling unit. 
F.  The property and existing onsite development are in good physical condition and/or is in the process of resolving any property maintenance deficiencies prior to or in conjunction with a permit for a second dwelling unit. 
G.  Required parking for the existing dwelling unit and proposed second dwelling unit is provided. No second unit may be permitted on a lot where the required parking for the existing dwelling unit has not or cannot be met. 
(Ord. No. 08-905, § 2F, 1-5-09)  
11.23.030 - Design and development standards. 
A.  A second dwelling unit shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation separate from the primary dwelling unit on the same lot. 
B.  The main dwelling unit and second dwelling unit shall be constructed on a permanent foundation. Manufactured homes may be allowed if constructed to meet the standards of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and placed on a permanent foundation pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code as adopted pursuant to Title 10 of the Municipal Code and enforced at the time of application. 
C.  A maximum of one second dwelling unit shall be allowed per property. The second dwelling unit may be attached to the existing primary dwelling unit or detached from the existing primary dwelling on the same lot. If detached, the second dwelling unit shall be separated from the main dwelling unit by a minimum of 10 feet and shall meet the applicable setbacks of the underlying zoning district. 
D.  A detached second dwelling unit shall be limited to one story, not exceeding 15 feet in height or the height of the primary unit, whichever is less, and shall not be constructed over a detached garage or other accessory structure. Second dwelling units over attached garages may be allowed when the garage is at the rear of the main residence. 
E.  A second dwelling unit shall not contain more than two bedrooms. 
F.  The floor area of a second dwelling unit shall be a minimum of 400 square feet and a maximum of 700 square feet of conditioned space, exclusive of attached garages, porches, and attached unenclosed patio covers (with at least two sides completely open). The maximum floor area for an attached second dwelling unit shall be limited to a maximum of 30 percent of the gross floor area of the main residence, or 700 square feet, whichever is less. If the main dwelling unit is 1,350 square feet or less, the minimum size of an attached second unit shall be limited to 250 square feet based upon efficiency unit standards and minimum Building Code requirements. The gross floor area of the existing main dwelling unit shall be calculated as the size of the unit prior to the attached second unit addition/conversion. 
G.  Construction of a second dwelling unit shall conform to all required development standards of the zoning district in which the lot is located including, but not limited to, setbacks, lot coverage, and required open space requirements. 
H.  Detached second dwelling units shall be set back a minimum of five feet from interior side and rear property lines, 10 feet from other onsite structures, and no closer than 15 feet from a building on an adjacent lot. 
I.  The second dwelling unit shall be provided with an entrance separate from that of the main dwelling unit and pedestrian access shall be provided to the entrance from a public street or alley. The entrance to the second dwelling unit shall not be oriented to, or be directly visible to, the street or otherwise alter the single-family appearance of the property from the street. 
J.  The exterior design of the second dwelling unit shall be architecturally compatible with the architectural style of the primary dwelling unit. Architectural compatibility will be determined to exist where there is coordination of building colors and materials (e.g., stucco, siding, masonry material, etc.), roof shape, pitch, and material, door and window patterns, and other defined architectural details. 
K.  In addition to required onsite parking for the primary residence, there shall be at least one off-street parking space provided for each bedroom in the second dwelling unit. As governed by state law, this additional space may be a tandem space within a driveway or may be located in the front-yard setback immediately adjacent to the driveway, unless specific findings are made that parking in setback areas or tandem parking is not feasible based upon specific site or topographical or fire and life safety conditions. Parking space dimensions shall be nine feet wide by 20 feet long. Covered parking space(s) are preferred but not required. 
L.  Garage conversions for second dwelling units shall not be permitted, unless replacement covered parking is, or can be provided, onsite meeting all applicable current code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 08-905, § 2F, 1-5-09)  
11.23.040 - General requirements. 
A.  A second dwelling unit shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Building Code as adopted pursuant to Title 10 of the Municipal Code and enforced at the time of application. 
B.  A second dwelling unit shall not be metered separately from the primary dwelling unit for gas, electricity, and water. 
C.  All new utilities for a detached second dwelling unit shall be installed underground. 
D.  A second dwelling unit shall be constructed on a permanent foundation and connected to the public sewer where feasible as determined by the Community Development Director and City Engineer. 
E.  A second dwelling unit shall not be assigned a separate street address. 
F.  No additional driveway approaches from public streets shall be permitted for required parking spaces for second dwelling units. Access to an authorized parking space may be provided from an alley. 
G.  The primary and secondary dwelling units may not be sold separately and no subdivision of land or air rights shall be allowed. 
H.  Before obtaining a building permit for a second dwelling unit, the property owner shall file with the County Recorder a declaration or agreement of restrictions, which has been approved by the City Attorney as to its form and content, containing a reference to the deed under which the property was acquired by the owner stating that: 
1.  The second dwelling unit shall be considered legal only so long as either the primary residence or the second dwelling unit is occupied by the owner of the property. 
2.  The second dwelling cannot be sold separately. 
3.  The restrictions shall be binding upon any successors or assigns in ownership of the property, and lack of compliance may result in legal action against the property owner. 
4.  The owner shall be required to complete and submit to the City the annual verification described in Section 11.23.080 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-905, § 2F, 1-5-09)  
11.23.050 - Permit required. 
The establishment of a second dwelling unit pursuant to this chapter shall require approval of a second dwelling unit permit. Approval of a Second Dwelling Unit Permit pursuant to this chapter is a ministerial action not subject to discretionary review. 
The application for such permit shall be made on forms provided by the Department of Community Development together with any applicable fees. The application fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 08-905, § 2F, 1-5-09)  
11.23.060 - Revocation of permit. 
In addition to any other remedy provided by law, in the event a permitted second dwelling unit is maintained in violation of the standards of this chapter, standard conditions of approval, or of any other applicable requirements of the Montclair Municipal Code, the Community Development Director or his or her designee may, upon 10 days written notice to the property owner, conduct an administrative hearing to determine if the second dwelling unit permit may be revoked. The decision of the Community Development Director or his or her designee may be appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to Section 1.08.020 of the Montclair Municipal Code. If a permit for a second dwelling unit is revoked, then the use of the property shall revert to a single-family occupancy with the second dwelling unit being modified to remove improvements previously required to create an independent living dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 08-905, § 2F, 1-5-09)  
11.23.070 - Submittal requirements. 
The application package for a second dwelling unit permit shall be submitted to the Department of Community Development prior to the submittal of an application for building permit. The second dwelling unit permit application package shall include: 
A.  Site Plan (Drawn to Scale). Indicate the location and dimensioned setbacks of all existing and proposed structures on the project site and those structures located within 50 feet of the project site boundaries. Show original and finish grades, any easements, trails, and other notable physical features on and/or affecting the property. 
B.  Floor Plans. Each room shall be dimensioned and the resulting floor area calculation included. The use of each room shall be identified. The size and location of all windows and doors shall be clearly depicted. 
C.  Building Elevations. North, south, east, and west elevations that show all openings, exterior finishes, roof pitch, architectural details, materials, and colors for the proposed second dwelling unit. 
D.  Photographs of the site, Adjacent Properties, and the Primary Dwelling Unit on the Property. Label each photograph and reference to a separate site plan indicating the location and direction of the photograph. 
E.  Declaration of Deed Restriction. Completed as required, signed, and ready for recordation. 
(Ord. No. 08-905, § 2F, 1-5-09)  
11.23.080 - Annual verification. 
On January 1 of each calendar year, the owner(s) of record of each property with a valid second dwelling unit permit shall complete and submit a form provided by the City verifying that the subject property continues to be in compliance with the provisions of Section 11.23.040 of this chapter. More specifically, it shall be verified to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director or his or her designee that the property owner(s) of record continue(s) to reside in the primary residence or the second dwelling unit on the property. 
The application for such initial and annual verification shall be made on forms provided by the Department of Community Development together with any applicable fees. The application fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 08-905, § 2F, 1-5-09)  
Chapter 11.24 - ZONES: AP—ADMINISTRATIVE PROFESSIONAL 
Sections: 
 
11.24.010 - Administrative Professional Zone. 
The A-P Administrative Professional Zone is intended for administrative, professional, and medical offices and related services. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any and every building and premises or land in the A-P Zone shall be used for, or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained, and moved into or within such A-P Zone exclusively and only in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1001)  
11.24.020 - Uses permitted. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the A-P Zone provided that site plans are approved by the Planning Commission and provided, further, that no dwelling or other structure designed or intended for residential use shall be converted to or used for nonresidential uses: 
A.  Transportation, communications, and utilities: 
1.  Bus company offices (excluding terminals), 
2.  Utility offices, 
3.  Radio broadcasting studios (excluding towers), 
4.  Television broadcasting studios (excluding towers), 
5.  Recording and sound studios, 
6.  Travel arranging services (travel agencies), and 
7.  Transportation ticket services (including all modes of transportation, when not located within one of the transportation terminals); 
B.  Retail trades: 
1.  Optical goods (including eyeglasses, binoculars, and the like); 
C.  Services: 
1.  Banking services, 
2.  Bank-related functions (including check cashing agencies, currency exchanges, clearinghouses, and safe deposit companies), 
3.  Savings and loan associations, 
4.  Business, and personal credit services (including credit unions, mortgage and finance companies, acceptance corporations, bond and mortgage companies, import-export banks, and the like), 
5.  Security brokers, dealers, and flotation services (including bond dealers and brokers and the like), 
6.  Commodity contracts brokers and dealers services, 
7.  Security and commodity exchanges, 
8.  Security and commodity allied services (including exchange clearinghouses and investment advisory services), 
9.  Insurance carriers (mutual stock, crop, livestock surety, bail bonding, funeral, marine, pension funds, title insurance, and the like), 
10.  Insurance agents, brokers and services (including adjusters and the like), 
11.  Real estate operators and lessors, 
12.  Real estate agents, brokers, and management services, 
13.  Title abstracting and escrow services, 
14.  Real estate subdividing and developing services, 
15.  Real estate operative builders (offices only), 
16.  Combinations of real estate, insurance, loan and law services, 
17.  Real estate appraisers, 
18.  Other real estate and related services, NEC, 
19.  Holding and investment services, 
20.  Portrait photography, 
21.  Commercial photography, 
22.  Advertising services (including public relations services and layout and advertising copy preparation), 
23.  Consumer and mercantile credit reporting services, 
24.  Collection agencies, independent services on a contract basis, 
25.  Addressing and mailing services, 
26.  Blueprinting and photocopying; 
27.  Secretarial services and stenographic services, 
28.  Duplicating services (not including commercial print shops), 
29.  Telephone answering services, 
30.  News syndicate services, 
31.  Detective and protective services (offices only), 
32.  Physicians' offices and services, 
33.  Dental offices and services, 
34.  Medical laboratory services, excluding manufacturing (biological, chemistry, x-ray services, and the like), 
35.  Dental laboratory services, 
36.  Medical clinics, 
37.  Blood banks, 
38.  Legal services, attorneys, 
39.  Engineering services (consulting and research) (including surveying and the like), 
40.  Architectural services and building designers, 
41.  Landscape architecture services, 
42.  Urban and regional planning services, 
43.  Educational and scientific research services and facilities, nonprofit (including institutional research, such as Carnegie and Salk Institutes, Scripps Research Foundation, and the like), 
44.  Social science research services, 
45.  Data processing services, 
46.  Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services, income tax services, and notary publics, 
47.  Interior decorating consulting services, 
48.  Artists, art studios and restoration services, and the like (excluding art museums), 
49.  Marriage and family counseling services, 
50.  Technical writers, report preparation, 
51.  Microfilming services, 
52.  Business and management consulting services (including computer programming, designing, and the like), 
53.  Religious reading rooms; 
54.  Business associations (including chambers of commerce, trade associations, boards of trade, better business bureaus, and the like), 
55.  Professional membership organizations (medical associations, and the like, excluding hiring halls), and 
56.  Civic associations (civic clubs, taxpayers associations, and the like), and 
D.  Cultural, entertainment, and recreational: 
1.  Libraries, 
2.  Museums, and 
3.  Art galleries. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1002.1)  
11.24.030 - Uses permitted with Planning Commission approval. 
The following uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission if they are found to be compatible with uses surrounding an Administrative-Professional Zone: 
Retail sales: 
A.  Office machines; 
B.  Office supplies; 
C.  Office equipment; 
D.  Restaurants (without alcoholic beverage sales); 
E.  Drugstores, excluding super drugstores with variety goods; 
F.  Prescription pharmacies; 
G.  Books; 
H.  Stationery and office supplies (including blank books, forms, pens, and pencils, and the like); 
I.  Art equipment and supplies; 
J.  Commercial art galleries, including art dealers; 
K.  Florists; 
L.  Cigars and cigarettes; 
M.  Newspapers and magazines; and 
N.  Gifts, novelties, souvenirs, greeting cards, artificial or plastic flowers, and the like. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1002.2)  
11.24.040 - Uses permitted subject to conditional use permits. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the A-P Zone subject to a conditional use permit: 
A.  Hospital and medical service organizations; 
B.  Mortuaries; 
C.  Employment agencies; 
D.  Sanitariums and convalescent and rest home services; 
E.  Professional schools; 
F.  Vocational or trade schools (excluding barber and beauty schools); 
G.  Business and stenographic schools; 
H.  Art, drama and music schools; 
I.  Dancing schools; 
J.  Driving schools; 
K.  Correspondence schools; 
L.  Language schools; 
M.  Welfare and charitable services (private or semi-private with no permanent residential uses); and 
N.  Labor unions and similar organizations, including union halls. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1002.3)  
11.24.050 - Building height limits. 
The maximum building height shall be two and one-half stories and shall not exceed 35 feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 11.38.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1003)  
11.24.060 - Minimum lot size. 
Every lot shall have a minimum width at the building line of 60 feet for interior lots and 65 feet for corner lots, a minimum depth of 100 feet, and a minimum area of 7200 square feet; however, if a lot has less width or less area than required by the provisions of this title and was held under separate ownership or was of official City record on May 15, 1958, such lot may be occupied by any use permitted in the A-P Zone if all other regulations stipulated for the particular use are complied with. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1004)  
11.24.070 - Lot coverage. 
The building area shall not cover more than 50 percent of the total area of any lot. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1006)  
11.24.080 - Yards. 
The following yards shall be established and maintained (see Section 11.38.060 of this title for additional setbacks which may be required for planned rights-of-way): 
A.  A front yard having a depth of not less than 75 feet of which the first 15 feet shall be landscaped. A portion of the front yard may be used for off-street parking in conformance with City standards. 
EXCEPTION: A lot with a depth of less than 175 feet shall have a front yard of not less than 25 feet of which the first 15 feet shall be landscaped. 
B.  Side yards shall not be required except when the side lot line is adjacent to or across an alley from any R Zone, there shall be a side yard of not less than 5 feet, which side yard may be used for off-street parking, and there shall also be a 6-foot high solid masonry wall erected and maintained along the side lot line abutting or across an alley from any R Zone; provided, however, such wall shall be no greater than 42 inches high from the building line of the R Zone to the front lot line or when requested by the Planning Commission as part of the Precise Plan of Design standards. 
C.  A rear yard shall not be required except when the rear lot line is adjacent to or across an alley from any R Zone, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 15 feet, which rear yard may be used for off-street parking, and there shall also be a 6-foot high solid masonry wall erected and maintained along the rear lot line abutting or across an alley from any R Zone or when requested by the Planning Commission as part of the Precise Plan of Design standards. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1007)  
11.24.090 - Distance between structures. 
The distance between structures shall be as required for the R-3 Zone. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1008)  
11.24.100 - Parking. 
See Sections 11.66.010 and 11.66.030 of this title. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1009)  
11.24.110 - Landscaping requirements. 
A.  Area. A minimum of 12 percent of the development site shall be developed as landscaped area. Actual landscape percentage required may exceed this figure depending on project design. 
B.  Landscape Standards. 
1.  A minimum 15-foot-wide continuous planted area shall be provided on the street frontage of each lot adjacent to parking or vehicle accessway, and continuous to an adjacent building where there is no adjacent parking. Frontage planter shall include landscaped berms or mounding for interest and to screen vehicle areas. A masonry wall, a maximum of 42 inches high, may be required to achieve necessary screening. 
2.  Trees. At least one 15-gallon minimum-sized tree shall be planted for every 300 square feet of landscaped area. Required street trees shall be credited to this requirement. One tree or 20 percent of the required number of trees (whichever is greatest) shall be 24-inch-box minimum size. 
3.  Street Trees. At least one 15-gallon minimum-sized street tree shall be planted per street frontage, with tree spacing no greater than 35 feet on center. Location, species, and planting procedures shall be in accordance with the Street Tree Master Plan and City development standards. 
4.  Shrubs. A minimum of one shrub shall be planted for each 150 square feet of front and street corner side yard areas. 
5.  Ground Cover. All planting areas shall be planted with live ground cover to development standards. 
6.  Parking Lot. A minimum of 4 percent of the parking lot area shall consist of planting areas. Actual landscape percentage may exceed this figure depending upon size of lot and amount of parking. 
a.  A minimum of one planting island shall be provided for every 12 single-row parking stalls and for every 24 double-row parking stalls. Planting islands shall be provided at the terminus of each parking row. 
b.  Each planting island shall have a minimum width of 4 feet; such islands shall have a minimum length of 16 feet for single-row parking stalls and 32 feet for double-row parking stalls. 
c.  All planting islands shall be surrounded by a concrete curb 6 inches above the level of the parking lot. If such a planting island lies adjacent to a sidewalk, masonry wall, or building, a raised concrete curb need not be provided in the adjacent area. 
d.  Each planting island shall be planted with a minimum of one 15-gallon tree, two shrubs, and ground cover. 
C.  Plant Materials; General. The number, size, spacing and species of required plant materials may be increased, decreased, or otherwise changed by the Director of Community Development when it is determined that an alternate design will better meet the intent of this section. 
D.  Irrigation. All front and street corner side yard planting areas shall have 100 percent irrigation coverage by an automatic irrigation system. 
E.  Design and Modifications. Planting and irrigation shall be according to a plan of design approved by the City Planning Division. Changes, removal, and deviation from approved plan, for duration of development's existence, shall require prior City approval. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1010)  
Chapter 11.26 - ZONES: C-2—RESTRICTED COMMERCIAL 
Sections: 
 
11.26.010 - C-2 Restricted Commercial Zone. 
The C-2 Restricted Commercial Zone is intended for retail business users. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any and every building and premises or land in the C-2 Zone shall be used for, or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained, and moved into or within such C-2 Zones exclusively and only in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1201)  
11.26.020 - Uses permitted. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-2 Zone provided site plans are approved by the Planning Commission and provided, further, that no dwelling or other structure designed or intended for residential use shall be converted to or used for nonresidential uses: 
A.  Retail business activities conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building for the following uses: 
1.  Banks, 
2.  Catering establishments, 
3.  Clothes and wearing apparel shops, 
4.  Clubs and lodges (nonprofit), 
5.  Custom dressmaking shops, 
6.  Decorating and drapery shops, 
7.  Department stores, 
8.  Dry goods stores, 
9.  Frozen food lockers, 
10.  Furniture stores (new only), 
11.  Interior decorating shops, 
12.  Markets, fish (retail), 
13.  Millinery shops, 
14.  Photographers, 
15.  Post offices, 
16.  Radio and home appliance stores, 
17.  Restaurants and cafes (sale of alcoholic beverages subject to CUP approval), 
18.  Shoe stores, 
19.  Studios, art, 
20.  Tailor shops; 
B.  Retail business uses similar to the above as provided in Section 11.38.020 of this title; 
C.  Parking lots for automobiles (see Section 11.66.030 of this title for improvements required); 
D.  Uses customarily incidental to retail businesses or accessory buildings, when located on the same lot, provided there shall be no storage, manufacturing, assembling, compounding, processing, or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental and essential to a retail store or business and where all such products are sold at retail on the premises; and 
E.  Signs as provided in Chapter 11.72 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1202)  
11.26.030 - Building height limits. 
The maximum building height shall be two and one-half stories and shall not exceed 35 feet except as otherwise provided in Section 11.38.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 3 (part))  
11.26.040 - Minimum lot dimensions. 
Every lot shall have a minimum width at the building line of 60 feet for interior lots and 65 feet for corner lots, a minimum depth of 100 feet, and a minimum area of 7200 square feet; provided, however, if a lot has less width or less area than required by the provisions of this chapter and was held under separate ownership or was of official City record on May 15, 1958, such lot may be occupied by any use permitted in the C-2 Zone if all other regulations stipulated for the particular use are complied with. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 3 (part); Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1203)  
11.26.050 - Lot coverage. 
The building area shall not cover more than 50 percent of the total area of any lot. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 3 (part); Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1205)  
11.26.060 - Yards. 
The following yards shall be established and maintained (see Section 11.38.060 of this title for additional setbacks which may be required for planned rights-of-way): 
A.  A front yard having a depth of not less than 75 feet, a portion of which may be used for off-street parking in conformance with City standards; 
B.  Side yards shall not be required, except when side lot line is adjacent to or across an alley from any R Zone, that shall be a side yard not less than 20 feet which may be used for off-street parking, and there shall also be a 6-foot-high solid masonry wall erected and maintained along the side lot line abutting or across an alley from any R Zone; provided, however, such wall shall be only 42 inches high from the building line of the R Zone to the front lot line; and 
C.  A rear yard shall not be required, except when the rear lot line is adjacent to or across an alley from any R Zone, this shall be a rear yard not less than 20 feet, which may be used for off-street parking, and there shall also be a 6-foot-high solid masonry wall erected and maintained along the rear lot line abutting or across an alley from any R Zone. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 3 (part); Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1206)  
11.26.070 - Parking. 
See Sections 11.66.010 and 11.66.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 3 (part); prior code § 9-4.1208)  
11.26.080 - Loading space. 
See Section 11.66.040 of this title. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 3 (part); prior code § 9-4.1209)  
11.26.090 - Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit. 
The following uses may be permitted subject to the approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this title: 
A.  Small animal clinics provided all business operations are conducted in a completely enclosed structure which shall be completely soundproof and air-conditioned so that there will be no emission of odor or noise that would be detrimental to adjacent properties; 
B.  Neighborhood convenience markets as defined under Chapter 11.02 of this title. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 3 (part); Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1210)  
11.26.100 - Landscaping requirements. 
See Section 11.28.100 of this title. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 3 (part); prior code § 9-4.1211)  
Chapter 11.28 - ZONES: C-3—GENERAL COMMERCIAL 
Sections: 
 
11.28.010 - C-3 General Commercial Zones. 
The C-3 General Commercial Zone is intended for general business uses. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any and every building in the C-3 Zone shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained, and moved into or within such C-3 Zones exclusively and only in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1301)  
11.28.020 - Uses permitted. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-3 Zone provided site plans are approved by the Planning Commission and provided, further, that no dwelling or other structure designed or intended for residential use shall be converted to or used for nonresidential uses: 
A.  Stores, businesses or commercial activities wholly within an enclosed building not involving any kind of manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental and essential to a retail business conducted on the premises and when such operations are not objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other similar causes. Permitted uses shall include: 
1.  Automobile body and fender repair shops and auto painting when operated wholly within a building, 
2.  Bakery, 
3.  Bird stores and pet shops, 
4.  Garages, public or storage, provided any repair or equipping of vehicles, and any tire repairing, battery charging, lubrication and car washing are done in a completely enclosed building, 
5.  Medical laboratories, 
6.  Office, administrative and professional, 
7.  Office, dental and medical, provided parking provisions under Section 11.66.010(B)(8) of this title are met, 
8.  Print shop, 
9.  Refrigerated lockers, 
10.  Repair of small appliances and electronic equipment, 
11.  Restaurants and cafes (excluding the on-sale of liquor), 
12.  Restaurants and cafes (sale of alcoholic beverages subject to CUP approval), 
13.  Small animal clinics provided all business operations are conducted in a completely enclosed structure which shall be completely soundproof and air-conditioned so that there will be no emission of odor or noise that would be detrimental to adjacent properties, 
14.  Storage of furniture, 
15.  Taxidermists, 
16.  Telephone exchanges, 
17.  Upholstery shops, 
18.  Used car sales areas provided no repair or reconditioning of automobiles shall be permitted except when enclosed in a building and provided, further, that any outdoor sales areas shall be improved in accordance with the provisions of Section 11.66.030 of this title; 
B.  General commercial uses similar to the above as provided in Section 11.38.020 of this title; 
C.  Parking lots for automobiles (see Section 11.66.030 of this title for improvements required); 
D.  Uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses or accessory buildings when located on the same lot; and 
E.  Signs as provided in Chapter 11.72 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1302)  
11.28.030 - Building height limits. 
The maximum building height shall be six stories and shall not exceed 75 feet except as otherwise provided in Section 11.38.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1303)  
11.28.040 - Minimum lot dimensions. 
Every lot shall have a minimum width at the building line of 60 feet for interior lots and 65 feet for corner lots, a minimum depth of 100 feet, and a minimum area of 7200 square feet; provided, however, if a lot has less width or less area than required by the provisions of this chapter and was held under separate ownership or was of official City record on May 15, 1958, such lot may be occupied by any use permitted in the C-3 Zone if all other regulations stipulated for the particular use are complied with. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 4 (part); Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1304)  
11.28.050 - Lot coverage. 
The building area shall not cover more than 50 percent of the total area of any lot. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1306)  
11.28.060 - Yards. 
The following yards shall be established and maintained (see Section 11.38.060 of this title for additional setbacks which may be required for planned rights-of-way): 
A.  A front yard having a depth not less than 75 feet, a portion of which may be used for off-street parking in conformance with City standards; 
B.  Side yards shall not be required, except when the side lot line is adjacent to or across an alley from any R Zone, there shall be a side yard not less than 20 feet, which may be used for off-street parking, and there shall also be a 6-foot-high solid masonry wall erected and maintained along the side lot line abutting or across an alley from any R Zone; provided, however, such wall shall be not more than 42 inches high from the building line of the R Zone to the front lot line; and 
C.  A rear yard shall not be required, except when the rear lot line is adjacent to or across an alley from any R Zone, there shall be a rear yard not less than 20 feet which may be used for off-street parking, and there shall also be a 6-foot-high solid masonry wall erected and maintained along the rear lot line abutting or across an alley from any R Zone. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1307)  
11.28.070 - Parking. 
See Sections 11.66.010 and 11.66.030 of this title. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1309)  
11.28.080 - Loading space. 
See Section 11.66.040 of this title. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1310)  
11.28.090 - Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit. 
A.  Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted following the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in Sections 11.78.080 through 11.78.120 of this title: 
1.  Amusement arcade or amusement game arcades; 
2.  Animal clinics, hospitals and boarding facilities; 
3.  Auctions; 
4.  Billiard parlors or pool halls; 
5.  Car washes, full- or self-service; 
6.  Churches, synagogues, temples or other houses of worship; 
7.  Commercial recreational uses as outlined in Section 11.78.030(C) of this title; 
8.  Dance halls, including dance academies; 
9.  Driving ranges and golf courses; 
10.  Fortune telling, tarot card reading, palm reading and the like; 
11.  Fueling stations, public and private, either as a stand-alone land use or in conjunction with another use; 
12.  Furniture sales and rentals; 
13.  Home improvement centers displaying or storing merchandise outside a permanent structure; 
14.  Hotels and motels as defined under Chapter 11.02 of this title; 
15.  Internet access establishments; 
16.  Laundries, coin-operated; 
17.  Lumber yards displaying or storing merchandise outside a permanent structure; 
18.  Neighborhood convenience markets as defined under Chapter 11.02 of this title; 
19.  Pawnshops; 
20.  Plant nurseries, retail or wholesale; 
21.  Sales, rental or leasing of new or used vehicles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, trailers, camper shells and watercraft that include outdoor display, provided no repair or reconditioning of vehicles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, trailers or watercraft shall be permitted except when enclosed in a building and provided, further, that any outdoor sales or storage areas shall be improved in accordance with the provisions of Section 11.66.030 of this title; 
22.  Service facilities for vehicles and motorcycles, including fueling stations with service bays, quick lube and smog check facilities; 
23.  Swap meets and marketplaces (multiple-tenant), indoor and outdoor; 
24.  Taxidermists; 
25.  Thrift store, including the sale of used or second-hand furniture, appliances, clothing, equipment, household items, books and other merchandise; 
26.  Uses displaying merchandise or equipment outside a permanent structure. 
B.  Display Setbacks. 
1.  The front yard setback for the uses set forth in subsection A of this section involving displays of a height in excess of 6 feet shall not be less than 40 feet in any case. A setback greater than 40 feet may be required when it can be shown that a 40-foot setback would adversely affect adjacent structures or uses by obstructing vision to the same. 
2.  Each determination of the Planning Commission granting a permit shall, where appropriate, contain as a condition thereof the following statement: "The permit hereby allowed is conditional upon the requirement that the permitted setback in any case is subject to change when it can be shown that the development of adjacent properties requires a change in such setback to allow visibility to such other properties." 
C.  Use of Trailer Coaches as Sales Offices. A State-approved trailer coach may be used as a sales office for a new or used mobile home sales business provided such office is located on the same lot or parcel where the business is located. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 4 (part); Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1311)  
11.28.100 - Landscaping requirements. 
A.  Area. A minimum of 12 percent of the development site shall be developed as a landscaped area. Actual landscape percentage required may exceed this figure depending on project design. 
B.  Landscape Standards. 
1.  Frontage Planter. A minimum 15-foot wide continuous planter area shall be provided on the street frontage of each lot if it is adjacent to parking or vehicle accessway and continuous to an adjacent building if there is no adjacent parking. Frontage planter shall include landscaped berms or mounding for interest and to screen vehicle areas. A masonry wall a maximum of 42 inches high may be required to achieve necessary screening. 
2.  Trees. A minimum of one 15-gallon minimum sized tree shall be planted for every 300 square feet of landscaped area. Required street trees shall be credited to this requirement. One tree or 20 percent of the required number of trees (whichever is greatest) shall be 24-inch box minimum size. 
3.  Street Trees. A minimum of one 15-gallon sized street tree shall be planted per street frontage, with tree spacing no greater than 35 feet on center. Location, species, and planting procedures shall be in accordance with the Street Tree Master Plan and City development standards. 
4.  Shrubs. A minimum of one shrub shall be planted for each 150-square-feet of front and street corner side yard area. 
5.  Ground Cover. All planting areas shall be planted with live ground cover, to development standards specifications. 
6.  Parking Lot. A minimum of 4 percent of the parking lot area shall consist of planting areas. Actual landscape percentage may exceed this figure depending upon size of lot and amount of parking. 
a.  A minimum of one planting island shall be provided for every 12 single-row parking stalls or for every 24 double-row parking stalls. Planting islands shall be provided at the terminus of each parking row. 
b.  Each planting island shall have a minimum width of 4 feet and a minimum length of 16 feet for single-row parking stalls and 32 feet for double-row parking stalls. 
c.  All planting islands shall be surrounded by a concrete curb 6 inches above the level of the parking lot. If such a planting island lies adjacent to a sidewalk, masonry wall, or building, a raised concrete curb need not be provided in the adjacent area. 
d.  Each planting island shall be planted with a minimum of one 15-gallon tree, two shrubs, and ground cover. 
C.  Plant Materials; General. The number, size, spacing and species of required plant materials may be increased, decreased, or otherwise changed by the Director of Community Development if it is determined that an alternate design will better meet the intent of this section. 
D.  Irrigation. All front and street corner side yard planting areas shall have 100 percent irrigation coverage by an automatic irrigation system. 
E.  Design and Modifications. Planting and irrigation shall be according to a plan of design approved by the City Planning Division. Changes, removal, and deviation from the approved plan, for the duration of the development's existence, shall require prior City approval. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1312)  
Chapter 11.30 - ZONES: MIP—MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIAL PARK 
Sections: 
 
11.30.010 - MIP Manufacturing Industrial Park Zone. 
The MIP Manufacturing Industrial Park Zone is intended to provide appropriate physical environment for the establishment of industry and light manufacturing and services which include manufacturing, assembling, fabricating, processing, and the compounding and sale of materials which are wholly or partially manufactured or processed. The operation of plants within such MIP Zones shall not create smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, vibration, soot, or lighting to any degree which might be obnoxious or offensive to persons residing near or conducting businesses within such zones or any other zones. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any and every building and premises or land in the MIP Zone shall be used for, or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained, and moved into or within such MIP Zones exclusively and only in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1601)  
11.30.020 - Uses permitted. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the MIP Zone, in addition to such other uses as the Planning Commission may deem to be similar and not detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, provided site plans are approved by the Planning Commission and provided, further, no dwelling or other structure designed or intended for residential use shall be converted to or used for nonresidential uses, and all such uses shall be subject to the property development standards set forth in Section 11.30.060 of this chapter: 
A.  Manufacturing. 
1.  Electronics: 
a.  Electrical parts, 
b.  Electrical appliances, 
c.  Electrical devices, 
d.  Motors, and 
e.  Radio, television, and phonographs; 
2.  Instruments: 
a.  Electronic, 
b.  Medical and dental tools, 
c.  Precision, and 
d.  Timing and measuring; 
3.  Office and related machinery: 
a.  Audio machinery, 
b.  Computers, electrical, 
c.  Computers, manual, and 
d.  Visual machinery; 
4.  Pharmaceutics: 
a.  Cosmetics, 
b.  Drugs, 
c.  Perfumes, 
d.  Soap, and 
e.  Toiletries; 
5.  Laboratories: 
a.  Chemical, 
b.  Dental, 
c.  Electrical, 
d.  Optical, 
e.  Mechanical, and 
f.  Medical; 
6.  Bottling plants, except those liquids which are offensive or obnoxious by reason of odor or are hazardous; 
7.  Garment manufacturing; 
8.  Manufacture and maintenance of electrical and neon signs; 
9.  Novelties and holiday paraphernalia; 
10.  Textiles; 
11.  Rubber and metal stamps; 
12.  Furniture upholstering; 
13.  Candy; 
14.  Manufacturing, compounding, assembly, and treatment or articles and merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: 
a.  Canvas, 
b.  Cellophane, 
c.  Cloth, 
d.  Cork, 
e.  Felt, 
f.  Fibre, 
g.  Fur, 
h.  Glass, 
i.  Leather, 
j.  Paper (no milling), 
k.  Precious and semiprecious stones and metals, 
l.  Plaster, 
m.  Plastics, 
n.  Shells, 
o.  Textiles, 
p.  Tobacco, 
q.  Wood, and 
r.  Yarn; 
15.  Fabrication of products made from finished rubber; 
B.  Services. 
1.  Banks and financial institutions; 
2.  Blueprinting and photocopying; 
3.  Business and research offices related to the administration and operation of the permitted industrial uses; 
4.  Newspaper publishing; 
5.  Offices, business and professional; 
6.  Off-street parking; 
7.  Printing, lithographing, and publishing; 
8.  Radio and television broadcasting; and 
9.  Restaurants. 
C.  Processing. 
1.  Carpet and rug cleaning; 
2.  Cleaning and dyeing; and 
3.  Laundries. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1602)  
11.30.030 - Uses permitted subject to Planning Commission approval. 
In areas adjacent to a residential district, commercial uses which are incidental and directly related to and serving the personnel of the permitted industrial uses shall be subject to the review and approval of the Commission, and the Planning Commission shall determine that the proposed use will not be incompatible with uses in the surrounding residential zones. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1603)  
11.30.040 - Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit. 
The following uses shall be permitted in MIP Zones subject to the provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this title and the securing of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Animal hospitals and shelters; 
B.  Ice and cold storage plants; 
C.  Retail or wholesale stores, businesses or commercial activities not exceeding 50 percent of the building and/or property area providing that portions of development designated for commercial use(s) be provided with parking ratio required by Section 11.660.010(B)(9) of this title; 
D.  Automobile, tractor, truck or camper assembly, rebuilding, repairing and reconditioning when operated within a solid masonry wall enclosure, not less than 6 feet in height; 
E.  Machine, welding and sheet metal shops, excluding the use of equipment producing undue noise or vibration, when wholly operated within an enclosed building. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1604)  
11.30.050 - Uses prohibited. 
The following uses shall be prohibited in MIP Zones: 
A.  Residential uses: 
1.  For existing residential uses, the existing residence may be used for residential purposes but may not be converted for residential and nonresidential uses at the same time other than for the use of a caretaker in connection with an industrial use. Such residential uses shall be subject to the provisions for nonconformity as set forth in Section 11.10.020 of this title; and 
2.  New residential uses. 
B.  Industrial plants: 
1.  Abrasives; 
2.  Bone black plants; 
3.  Carbon black and lampblack plants; 
4.  Chemical plants (heavy and industrial); 
5.  Charcoal manufacturing plants; 
6.  Coal and coke plants; 
7.  Detergents, soaps, and by-products using animal fats; 
8.  Fertilizers of all types; 
9.  Gas manufacturing plants; 
10.  Glue and sizing manufacturing plants; 
11.  Graphite manufacturing plants; 
12.  Gypsum and other forms of plaster base manufacturing; 
13.  Insulation manufacturing plants flammable types; 
14.  Match manufacturing plants; 
15.  Metals extraction and smelting plants; 
16.  Metal ingots, pigs, casting, and rolling mills; 
17.  Paper pulp and cellulose manufacturing plants; 
18.  Paraffin manufacturing plants; 
19.  Petroleum and petroleum products plants; 
20.  Portland and similar cement manufacturing plants; 
21.  Serum, toxin, and virus manufacturing plants; 
22.  Vinegar processing and refining; 
23.  Volatile and poisonous gas storage and processing; 
24.  Wood preserving by creosoting or other pressure impregnation of wood by preservatives; 
25.  Wood and lumber kilns for industrial kiln drying; and 
26.  Wineries and wine making. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1605)  
11.30.060 - Property development standards. 
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in MIP Zones: 
A.  Lot Area. No requirements. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. Each dimension shall be minimum only and as follows: 
1.  Width. Each lot shall have a minimum width of 150 feet. 
2.  Depth. Each lot shall have a minimum depth of 190 feet. 
C.  Population Density. One dwelling unit may be maintained for a caretaker or superintendent employed on the premises. No other dwellings of any kind shall be permitted. For existing residential uses, the provisions of Section 11.30.050(A)(1) of this chapter shall apply. 
D.  Building Height. 
1.  Unless otherwise provided, no building or structure erected shall have a height greater than four stories and shall not exceed 50 feet. 
2.  Unless otherwise provided, no building or structure located within 100 feet of the boundary of any R Zone shall have a height greater than one story and shall not exceed 15 feet. 
3.  Exceptions. Roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, silos, water tanks, wireless masts, or similar structures may be erected above the height limits prescribed in this subsection provided the same may be safely erected and maintained at such height in view of the surrounding conditions and circumstances. No roof structure, or any space above the height limit, shall be allowed to provide additional floor space. 
E.  Yards. 
1.  Front. 
a.  On a local street, major or secondary highway, or service road entirely within an MIP Zone or which is a boundary between an MIP and any other nonresidential zone, the requirement of the most restrictive district shall apply; provided, however, the front yard shall be not less than 25 feet extending across the full width of the lot. The front yard shall be landscaped and continuously maintained. 
b.  On a local street or major or secondary highway with or without a service road that is a boundary between an MIP Zone and any residential zone, there shall be a front yard of not less than 50 feet extending across the full width of the lot. The front 25 feet of such front yard shall be landscaped and continuously maintained. The next 25 feet may be used for either parking or landscaping but may not be used for loading. 
2.  Side. 
a.  On a local street, alley, major or secondary highway, or service road which is entirely within an MIP Zone or which is a boundary between an MIP and any other nonresidential district, there shall be a side yard of not less than 25 feet extending along the full depth of the lot. Such side yard shall be landscaped and continuously maintained. If the side yard is on an alley, it may be used for loading or for off-street parking. 
b.  On a local street or major or secondary highway without a service road which is a boundary between an MIP Zone and any residential zone, there shall be a side yard of not less than 50 feet extending along the full depth of the lot. The 25 feet nearest to the street shall be landscaped and continuously maintained. The next 25 feet toward the interior may be used for either parking or landscaping but may not be used for loading. 
c.  On a service road which is part of a major or secondary highway forming the boundary between an MIP Zone and any residential zone, there shall be a side yard of not less than 25 feet extending along the full depth of the lot. Such side yard shall be landscaped and continuously maintained. 
d.  On an alley which is the boundary between an MIP Zone and any residential zone, there shall be a side yard of not less than 20 feet extending along the full depth of the lot. Such side yard may be used for parking and loading. Such side yard may also be used for storage provided the entire storage area is enclosed by a solid masonry wall not less than 5 feet nor more than 6 feet in height and provided, further, no materials stored shall be at a height greater than the height of the enclosing wall. 
e.  On a boundary between an MIP Zone and any residential district, when such boundary is not a street, highway or alley, there shall be a side yard of not less than 40 feet extending along the full depth of the lot. There shall be a solid masonry wall of not less than 5 feet nor more than 6 feet in height on the side property line abutting the residential zone. The entire side yard area enclosed by the wall may be used for parking or for storage provided no materials stored in such yard shall be at a height greater than the height of the enclosing wall, and provided, further, no vehicles or appurtenances containing refrigeration units shall be parked or stored in such yard for purposes of generating lower temperatures or pre-cooling within the compartments overnight. 
f.  On a railroad right-of-way which is the boundary between an MIP Zone and any residential district, there shall be a side yard of not less than 75 feet measured from the opposite side of the right-of-way extending along the full depth of the lot. No building or structure, other than a railroad loading dock, shall be permitted in the required side yard. Such side yard may be used for parking. 
3.  Rear. 
a.  On an alley which is the boundary between an MIP Zone and any residential zone, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet extending across the full width of the lot. Such rear yard may be used for storage provided the entire storage area shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall not less than 5 feet nor more than 6 feet in height and provided, further, that no materials stored shall be at a height greater than the height of the enclosing wall. 
b.  On a boundary between an MIP Zone and any residential zone, when such boundary is not a street, highway or alley, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 40 feet extending along the full width of the lot. There shall be a solid masonry wall not less than 5 feet nor more than 6 feet in height on the rear property line abutting the residential zone. The entire rear yard area enclosed by the wall may be used for parking or for storage provided no materials stored in such yard shall be at a height greater than the height of the enclosing wall and provided, further, that no vehicles or appurtenances containing refrigeration units shall be parked or stored in such yard for purposes of generating lower temperatures or precooling within the compartments overnight. 
c.  On a railroad right-of-way which is the boundary between an MIP Zone and a residential district, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 75 feet measured from the opposite side of the railroad right-of-way extending across the full width of the lot. No building or structure, other than a railroad dock, shall be permitted in the required rear yard. Such rear yard may be used for parking. 
F.  Space Between Buildings. No requirements. 
G.  Lot Coverage. No requirements. 
H.  Fences and Walls. 
1.  The provisions of Sections 11.32.050(B) and (C) of this title relating to M-1 Zones shall apply. 
2.  Outdoor storage located on an area adjacent to a street which forms a boundary, or located on an area adjacent to a boundary between an MIP Zone and any residential zone, shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall not less than 5 feet nor more than 6 feet in height. 
I.  Off-street Parking. The provisions of Section 11.66.010(B)(9) of this title shall apply. 
J.  Access. There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street or alley to off-street parking and loading facilities on property requiring off-street parking and loading. The design of such access to withstand industrial usage shall be approved by the City Engineer. 
K.  Outdoor Advertising. The provisions of Chapter 11.72 shall apply. 
L.  Loading. The provisions of Section 11.66.040 of this title shall apply. 
M.  Size of Zones. In order to carry out the purposes expressed in Section 11.30.010 of this chapter, the minimum amount of land which may be zoned for MIP purposes in any one location shall be at least 5 acres in area. 
N.  Landscaping Requirements. The following landscaping requirements shall apply to all development in MIP Zones, in addition to those requirements stated in subsection E of this section. 
1.  Area. A minimum of 10 percent of the development site shall be developed as landscaped area. Actual landscaped percentage required may exceed this figure depending on project design. 
2.  Landscape Standards. 
a.  A minimum 25-foot-wide continuous planter area shall be provided on the street frontage of each lot if such frontage is adjacent to parking or vehicle accessway, and continuous to an adjacent building where there is no adjacent parking. Frontage planter shall include landscaped berms or mounding for interest and to screen vehicle areas. A masonry wall, a maximum of 42 inches high, may be required or permitted to achieve necessary screening. 
b.  Trees. A minimum of one 15-gallon minimum-sized tree shall be planted for every 300 square feet of landscaped area. Required street trees shall be credited to this requirement. One tree or 20 percent of the required number of trees (whichever is greatest) shall be 24-inch box minimum size. 
c.  Street Trees. A minimum of one 15-gallon size street tree shall be planted per street frontage, with tree spacing no less than 35 feet on center. Location, species, and planting specification shall be in accordance with Street Tree Master Plan and City development standards. 
d.  Shrubs. A minimum of one shrub shall be planted for each 150 square feet of front and street corner side yard areas. 
e.  Ground Cover. All planting areas shall be planted with live ground cover to development standards specification. 
f.  Parking Lot. A minimum of 4 percent of the parking lot area shall consist of planting areas. Actual landscaped percentage may exceed this figure depending upon the size of the lot and amount of parking. 
i.  A minimum of one planting island shall be provided for every 12 single-row parking stalls or for every 24 double-row parking stalls. Planting islands shall be provided at the terminus of each parking row. 
ii.  Each planting island shall have a minimum width of 4 feet and a minimum length of 16 feet for a single row and 32 feet for double-row parking stalls. 
iii.  All planting islands shall be surrounded by a concrete curb 6 inches above the level of the parking lot. If such a planting island lies adjacent to a sidewalk, masonry wall, or building, a raised concrete curb need not be provided in the adjacent area. 
iv.  Each planting island shall be planted with a minimum of one 15-gallon tree, two shrubs, and ground cover. 
3.  Plant Materials; General. The number, size, spacing and species of required plant materials may be increased, decreased, or otherwise changed by the Director of Community Development if it is determined that an alternate design will better meet the intent of this section. 
4.  Irrigation. All front and street corner side yard planting areas shall have 100 percent irrigation coverage by an automatic irrigation system. 
5.  Design and Modifications. Planting and irrigation shall be according to a plan of design approved by the City Planning Division. Changes, removal, and deviation from the approved plan, for the duration of the development's existence, shall require prior City approval. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 5; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1606)  
Chapter 11.32 - ZONES: M-1—LIMITED MANUFACTURING 
Sections: 
 
11.32.010 - Limited Manufacturing Zones. 
The M-1 Limited Manufacturing Zone is intended for limited manufacturing and limited industrial uses. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any and every building and premises or land in the M-l Zone shall be used for, or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained, and moved into or within such M-1 Zone exclusively and only in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1401)  
11.32.020 - Uses permitted. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the M-1 Zone provided site plans are approved by the Planning Commission and provided, further, no dwelling or other structure designed or intended for residential use shall be converted to or used for nonresidential uses: 
A.  Retail or wholesale stores, businesses, or commercial activities, except that residential uses, hotels, motels, auto courts, trailer courts, lodging houses, institutions, hospitals (other than emergency hospitals), or homes shall not be permitted in the M-1 Zone; provided, however, the provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit the use of such property for living purposes exclusively by the caretaker or superintendent of the property in connection with the business carried on on such property; 
B.  Light manufacturing and light industrial uses which are not obnoxious by reason of sound, fumes, repulsive odors and the like, whether the same constitute an actual nuisance or not, and including such uses as: 
Assembly plants 
Automobile painting, rebuilding, and reconditioning, body and fender works, and truck or tractor repairing or overhauling when enclosed within solid masonry walls not less than 6 feet in height 
Bakeries, wholesale 
Bottling plants 
Cabinet shops and furniture manufacture 
Canning and packing 
Canvas products manufacture 
Cereal factories 
Cleaning and dyeing plants 
Cosmetics manufacture 
Creameries 
Electroplating 
Feed and fuel yards when enclosed with solid masonry walls not less than 6 feet in height 
Food products manufacture, except fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and the rendering or refining of fats and oils 
Fruit and vegetable packing plants 
Garment manufacture 
Ice and cold storage plants 
Laboratories, experimental and the like 
Laundries 
Livery stables 
Machine, welding, and blacksmith shops, excluding the use of equipment producing undue noise or vibration 
Neon and electric sign manufacture 
Poultry and rabbits, wholesale and retail sales, including slaughtering and dressing within a building 
Public utility service yards and electric receiving and transforming stations 
Radio manufacture and assembly and electrical and electronic appliances 
Rug and carpet cleaning plants 
Storage of goods, materials, liquids, and equipment (except the bulk storage of matter or materials which are inflammable or explosive or which create dust, odor, or fumes) 
Tire retreading and recapping and battery manufacture 
Toy and novelty manufacture 
Warehouses and storage buildings 
Wholesale buildings 
C.  Light manufacturing and light industrial uses similar to those set forth in subsection B of this section as provided in Section 11.38.020 of this title; 
D.  One dwelling unit which may be maintained for a caretaker or superintendent employed on the premises of an industrial concern. No other dwellings, or hotels, motels, auto courts, lodging houses, trailer courts, institutions, hospitals (except emergency hospitals), or homes shall be permitted in the M-1 Zone; 
E.  Parking lots for automobiles (see Section 11.66.030 of this title for improvements required); 
F.  Uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses and accessory buildings; 
G.  Signs as permitted in Chapter 11.72 of this title; and 
H.  The following uses shall be permitted in the M-1 Zone subject to the provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this title and the securing of a conditional use permit: 
1.  Animal hospitals or clinics; 
2.  Dog kennels and dog training schools; 
3.  Lumber yards except the storage or sale of boxes or crates; 
4.  Mini-warehouse facilities, including all facilities designed exclusively for multitenant warehouse space; and 
5.  Any such other similar uses as the Planning Commission may deem to be similar and equally essential to the public welfare. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1402)  
11.32.030 - Building height limits. 
The maximum building height shall be 75 feet except as otherwise provided in Section 11.38.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1403)  
11.32.040 - Minimum lot size. 
Every lot on a publicly dedicated street shall have a minimum width of 75 feet, a minimum depth of 100 feet, and a minimum area of 10,000 square feet; provided, however, if a lot has less width or less area than required by the provisions of this chapter and was held under separate ownership or was of official City record on May 15, 1958, such lot may be permitted to be occupied by any use permitted in the M-1 Zone if all other regulations are complied with. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1404)  
11.32.050 - Yards. 
The following yards shall be established and maintained (see Section 11.38.060 of this title for additional setbacks which may be required for planned rights-of-way): 
A.  Front Yards. 
1.  On a local street, major or secondary highway or service road which is entirely within an M-1 (or M-2) District or which is a boundary between an M-l (or M-2) and any other nonresidential zone, the front yard shall not be less than 30 feet extending across the full width of the lot. Such front yard may be used for off-street parking. 
2.  On a local street or major or secondary highway with or without a service road which is a boundary between an M-1 (or M-2) District and any residential district, there shall be a front yard of not less than 50 feet extending across the full width of the lot. Adjacent to and behind the required landscaped area shall be a masonry wall of a minimum of 42 inches in height. The balance may be used for either parking or landscaping but may not be used for loading, 
B.  Side Yards. 
1.  On a local street, alley, major or secondary highway, or service road which is entirely within an M-l (or M-2) District or which is a boundary between an M-1 (or M-2) District and any other nonresidential district, there shall be a side yard of not less than 20 feet extending along the full depth of the lot. Such side yard may be used for off-street parking and for loading when adjacent to an alley. 
2.  On a local street or major or secondary highway without a service road which is boundary between an M-1 (or M-2) District and any residential district, there shall be a side yard of not less than 50 feet extending along the full depth of the lot, Adjacent to and behind the required landscaped area shall be a masonry wail of a minimum of 42 inches in height. The balance may be used for either parking or landscaping but may not be used for loading. 
3.  On a service road which is part of a major or secondary highway forming the boundary between an M-1 (or M-2) District and any residential district, there shall be a side yard of not less than 10 feet extending along the full depth of the lot. Such side yard shall be landscaped and continuously maintained. Adjacent to and behind such landscaped area shall be a masonry wall of a minimum of 42 inches in height. 
4.  On an alley which is the boundary between an M-1 (or M-2) District and any residential district, there shall be a side yard of not less than 20 feet extending along the full depth of the lot. Such side yard may be used for parking and loading. Such side yard may also be used for storage provided the entire storage area shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall not less than 5 feet nor more than 6 feet in height and provided, further, that no materials stored shall be at a height greater than the height of the enclosing wall. 
5.  On a boundary between the M-1 (or M-2) District and any residential district when such boundary is not a street, highway or alley, there shall be a side yard of not less than 40 feet extending along the full depth of the lot. There shall be a solid masonry wall 6 feet in height on the side property line abutting the residential district excepting that such wall shall decrease to a maximum of 42 inches whenever encroaching the prevailing setback of adjacent properties. The entire side yard area enclosed by the wall may be used for parking or for storage provided no materials stored in such yard shall be at a height greater than the height of the enclosing wall. 
C.  Rear Yards. 
1.  On an alley which is the boundary between an M-l (or M-2) District and any residential district, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet extending across the full width of the lot. Such rear yard may be used for storage provided the entire storage area shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall 6 feet in height and provided, further, that no materials stored shall be at a height greater than the height of the enclosing wall. 
2.  On a boundary between the M-1 (or M-2) District and any residential district when such boundary is not a street, highway or alley, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 40 feet extending along the full width of the lot. There shall be a solid masonry wall 6 feet in height on the rear property line abutting the residential district. The entire rear yard area enclosed by the wall may be used for parking or storage provided no materials stored in such yard shall be at a height greater than the height of the enclosing wall. 
D.  Deviations. Except for structures on lands across the street from, or otherwise adjacent to, any residential zone, the front, side, and rear yard setback requirements set forth in this section may be reduced by the Planning Commission, without notice, when it can be shown that such setbacks materially inhibit good design and a deviation therefrom will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the vicinity thereof. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1405)  
11.32.060 - Parking. 
See Sections 11.66.010 and 11.66.030 of this title. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1406)  
11.32.070 - Loading space. 
See Section 11.66.040 of this title. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1407)  
11.32.080 - Landscaping requirements. 
A.  Area Required. A minimum of 8 percent of the development site shall be developed as a landscaped area. Actual landscape percentage required may exceed this figure depending on project design. 
B.  Landscape Standards. 
1.  Frontage Planter. A minimum 15-foot wide continuous planter area shall be provided on the street frontage of each lot if such frontage is adjacent to parking or vehicle accessway, and continuous to an adjacent building if there is no adjacent parking. Frontage planters shall include landscaped berms or mounting for interest and to screen vehicle areas. A masonry wall, a maximum of 42 inches in height, may be required to achieve necessary screening. 
2.  Trees. A minimum of one 15-gallon minimum sized tree shall be planted for every 300 square feet of landscaped area. Required street trees shall be credited to this requirement. One tree or 20 percent of the required number of trees (whichever is greatest) shall be 24-inch-box minimum size. 
3.  Street trees. A minimum of one 15-gallon sized street tree shall be planted per street frontage, with tree spacing no greater than 35 feet on center. Location, species, and planting procedures shall be in accordance with the Street Tree Master Plan and City development standards. 
4.  Shrubs. A minimum of one shrub shall be planted for each 150 square feet of front and street corner side yard areas. 
5.  Ground Cover. All planting areas shall be planted with live ground cover, to development standards specification, 
6.  Parking Lot. A minimum of 4 percent of the parking lot area shall consist of planting areas. Actual landscaped percentage may exceed this figure depending upon the size of the lot and amount of parking. 
a.  A minimum of one planting island shall be provided for every 12 single-row parking stalls or for every 24 double-row parking stalls. Planting islands shall be provided at the terminus of each parking row. 
b.  Each planting island shall have a minimum width of 4 feet and a minimum length of 16 feet for single-row parking stalls and 32 feet for double-row of parking stalls. 
c.  All planting islands shall be surrounded by a concrete curb 6 inches above the level of the parking lot. If such a planting island lies adjacent to a sidewalk, masonry wall, or building, a raised concrete curb need not be provided in the adjacent area. 
d.  Each planting island shall be planted with a minimum of one 15-gallon tree, two shrubs, and ground cover. 
C.  Plant Materials; General. The number, size, spacing and species of required plant materials may be increased, decreased, or otherwise changed by the Director of Community Development when it is determined that an alternate design will better meet the intent of this section. 
D.  Irrigation. All front and street corner side yard planting areas shall have 100 percent irrigation coverage by an automatic irrigation system. 
E.  Design and Modifications. Planting and irrigation shall be according to a plan of design approved by the City Planning Division. Changes, removal, and deviation from the approved plan, for the duration of development's existence, shall require prior City approval. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1408)  
Chapter 11.34 - ZONES: M-2—GENERAL MANUFACTURING 
Sections: 
 
11.34.010 - M-2 General Manufacturing Zone. 
The M-2 General Manufacturing Zone is intended for general manufacturing and general industrial uses. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any and every building and premises or land in the M-2 Zone shall be used for, or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, enlarged, maintained, and moved into or within the M-2 Zone exclusively and only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1501)  
11.34.020 - Uses permitted. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the M-2 Zone provided site plans are approved by the Planning Commission and provided, further, no dwelling or other structure designed for or intended for residential use shall be converted to or used for nonresidential uses: 
A.  Business, commercial, limited manufacturing, and limited industrial uses permitted under the Limited Manufacturing (M-1) Zone, but not prohibited by law or by the provisions of Section 11.34.030 of this chapter; 
B.  General manufacturing or general industrial uses not prohibited by law or by the provisions of Section 11.34.030 of this chapter; 
C.  One dwelling unit which may be maintained for a caretaker or superintendent employed on the premises of an industrial concern; 
D.  Union halls; 
E.  Uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses and accessory buildings; 
F.  Parking lots for automobiles (see Section 11.66.030 of this title for improvements required); and 
G.  The following uses subject to securing a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this title; 
1.  Recycling plants within a structure when found to be properly equipped with air pollution equipment approved by the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and as long as the recycling plant meets all the performance standards, controls and requirements of the SCAQMD, EPA, and other regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over this type of facility and will not be detrimental to the public welfare by reasons of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or vibration, 
2.  Miniwarehouse facilities, including all facilities designed exclusively for multitenant warehouse space, 
3.  Outdoor manufacturing, 
4.  Specified hazardous waste facilities when they are found to be consistent with all provisions of the adopted County and City hazardous waste management plans, 
5.  Auto wrecking, salvage and junk yards, 
6.  Asphalt and concrete recycling, 
7.  Rock, sand or gravel excavation, rock crusher, 
8.  Contractor storage yards, and 
9.  Other conditionally permitted uses listed under Section 11.32.020 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1502)  
11.34.030 - Uses prohibited. 
The following uses shall be prohibited in the M-2 Zone; Acetylene gas manufacture 
Acid manufacture 
Ammonia manufacture 
Blast furnaces 
Bleaching powder manufacture 
Boiler works 
Brick manufacture 
By-products, the manufacture of by-products, or scrap from the handling or utilization of fish, meat, or animals 
Cattle sales yards 
Celluloid manufacture 
Cellulose manufacture 
Cemeteries for pets 
Chlorine gas manufacture 
Clubs and lodges 
Coal, the distillation of coal or coal tar, or the manufacture of any coal tar product 
Coke ovens 
Creosote manufacture and storage 
Cresoting plants 
Distillation of bones 
Dwellings, except one dwelling unit which may be maintained for a caretaker or superintendent employed on the premises of an industrial concern 
Explosives: manufacture and storage 
Fat rendering 
Fireworks manufacture 
Fish canneries 
Forging works 
Foundries other than nonferrous 
Gas, the storage of illuminating gas in excess of 500,000 cubic feet 
Gelatine manufacture 
Glue manufacture 
Grease manufacture 
Guncotton products manufacture 
Hog ranches 
Hospitals and care facilities 
Hotels, motels, auto courts, trailer courts, and lodging houses 
Hydrocyanic acid, the manufacture of any products of 
Lampblack manufacture 
Lime manufacture 
Lard manufacture 
Meat packing plants 
Oil reclaiming plants 
Oil wells 
Ore reduction plants 
Paint, shellac, turpentine, linseed oil, lacquer, and varnish manufacture 
Petroleum refineries 
Phenol manufacture 
Plaster of paris manufacture 
Plastics manufacture 
Potash manufacture and refining 
Pyroxylin material manufacture 
Refuse disposal 
Rifle ranges 
Rolling mills 
Roundhouses for railroads 
Rubber reclaiming plants 
Schools 
Sewer farms and sewage disposal plants not operated by or under the control of the City 
Size manufacture 
Smeltering 
Storage of oil, gasoline, and petroleum production or any quantity exceeding 100,000 U.S. gallons on any one lot or parcel of land 
Tallow manufacture 
Tanneries 
Tar and tar by-products manufacture 
Tile manufacture 
Terra cotta manufacture 
Tobacco processing 
Vinegar manufacture 
Wool pulling plants 
Other uses which are determined by the Planning Commission to be detrimental to the public welfare by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibration, or other causes (see Section 11.38.020 of this title) 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1503)  
11.34.040 - Building height limits. 
The maximum building height shall be 75 feet except that additional height may be permitted after a public hearing pursuant to a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1504)  
11.34.050 - Minimum lot size. 
Every lot on a publicly dedicated street shall have a minimum width of 75 feet, a minimum depth of 100 feet, and a minimum area of 10,000 square feet; provided, however, where a lot has less area than required by the provisions of this title and was held under separate ownership or was of official City record on May 15, 1958, such lot may be occupied by any use permitted in the M-2 Zone if all other regulations are complied with. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1505)  
11.34.060 - Yards. 
Yard and setback requirements in the M-2 Zone shall be the same as those provided for in the M-1 Zone. See Section 11.32.050 of this title and the provisions thereof for requirements. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1506)  
11.34.070 - Parking. 
See Sections 11.66.010 and 11.66.030 of this title. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1507)  
11.34.080 - Loading space. 
See Section 11.66.040 of this title. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1508)  
11.34.090 - Landscaping requirements. 
See Section 11.32.080 of this title. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1509)  
Chapter 11.36 - ZONES: SL—SMALL-LOT, DETACHED-HOUSING OVERLAY 
Sections: 
 
11.36.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The SL Small-Lot, Detached-Housing Overlay Zone is intended to increase development options within areas designated as Low-Density Residential (3-7 DU/AC) and Medium-Density Residential (7-14 DU/AC) by the Land Use Element of the City's adopted General Plan. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 6 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1730)  
11.36.020 - Establishment. 
The SL zone shall be applied in combination with the R1 (Single-Family Residential) Zone and shall be indicated on the official zoning map by an "SL" suffix (i.e. R1/SL). 
(Prior code § 9-4.1731)  
11.36.030 - Criteria. 
Small-lot, detached-housing overlay zoning (SL) shall be subject to the following criteria: 
A.  Shall consist of a minimum of 3 acres; 
B.  Shall have an R-1 (Single-Family Residential) base zone; 
C.  Shall meet the density, goals and objectives of the City's adopted General Plan; 
D.  Exception: If a lot has an area less than that required by the provisions of this chapter and was held under separate ownership or was of official City record prior to July 15, 1987, such lot may be occupied by uses permitted in the SL Overlay Zone after a public hearing pursuant to an adopted specific plan or accompanied by a specific plan covering such area. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1732)  
11.36.040 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in an SL Overlay Zone shall be as prescribed under Section 11.18.030(A) through (K) of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1733)  
11.36.050 - Development standards. 
The following development standards shall apply to all land and buildings within an SL Overlay Zone: 
A.  Building Height Limits. The maximum building height shall be one and one-half stories and shall not exceed 25 feet; however, a building may be a height of two stories and not exceed 35 feet subject to Precise Plan of Design Approval, and provided the Commission, upon receipt of evidence, determines that a greater height would not be detrimental to surrounding properties. A minimum of 20 percent of the units within a subdivision shall be single story. 
B.  Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 11.18.040(C) of this title, an "SL" suffix to the R-1 Zone designates a 4500 square foot minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
C.  Minimum Lot Size. Lots in an SL Overlay Zone shall meet the following minimum dimensions: 
1.  Standard interior lots—50 feet wide measured at the building line. Minimum lot depth shall be determined by plot plan evidence of meeting all minimum required setbacks and outdoor living areas; 
2.  Corner lots—55 feet wide; 
3.  Cul-de-sac lots—40 feet wide measured at the building setback line and a minimum of 30 feet wide at the street, provided the average lot width is not less than 50 feet. 
D.  Lot Coverage. The building footprint shall not cover more than 50 percent of the total area of any lot. 
E.  Yards. The following yards shall be established and maintained (see Section 11.38.060 of this title for additional setbacks that may be required for planned rights-of-way). In order to encourage architectural design interest and diversity, front and side yard variations will be permitted as follows: 
1.  Front Yards. Minimum front yard setbacks may vary depending upon structure, occupancy type, orientation, as defined in Chapter 11.02 of this title, and height, as follows: 
a.  Dwelling Unit. First story, primary orientation shall have a minimum setback of 20 feet from the property line; the first story, secondary orientation, and second story shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet from property line. 
b.  Garage. If the main auto access faces a public street, the minimum setback shall be 25 feet from the property line. If the main auto access opening does not face a public street, the setback may be reduced to 15 feet. 
2.  Side Yards. 
a.  Interior lots shall have a minimum 5-foot-wide side yard along one interior property line and a minimum 7-foot-wide side yard along the other interior property line. 
b.  Corner lots shall have a minimum 5-foot-wide side yard along the interior property line and a 15-foot-wide side yard along the street side. 
3.  Rear Yards. A rear yard having a depth of not less than 15 feet; provided, further, the provisions of subsection F of this section shall also apply. Additional setback and/or buffering may be required between two-story and single-story subdivisions. 
F.  Outdoor Living Spaces. 
1.  Each lot shall contain a minimum of 1000 square feet of permanent, open, outdoor living space to the rear of the front yard setback line. Such outdoor living area may be provided in one or more spaces; provided, however, such spaces shall average not less than 15 feet and at their narrowest dimension shall be not less than 10 feet. 
2.  The gradient or slope of any required outdoor living space shall not exceed 5 percent in any direction. 
3.  Patios, including patio roofs, may be erected within the required outdoor living space provided such patios are open on at least two sides. Patios enclosed with walls, windows, screens, or any other contrivance shall not be considered as open. Swimming, wading, spa or fish pools may be constructed within the required outdoor living space. Patios and pools shall not occupy more than 60 percent of such space. Open patios shall meet yard standards of subsection E of this section, except that an administrative adjustment may be approved which permits a minimum setback of 5 feet from the rear property line of a lot. Such exception shall be limited to open patios which are to be constructed on lots created per the provisions of this chapter. Such administrative adjustments shall be in accordance with Chapter 11.76 of this Code. 
4.  Vehicular driveways or parking areas, when lying to the rear of the front yard setback line, shall not be calculated as part of the required outdoor living space. 
5.  Side and rear yards, as set forth in subsection E of this section, may be included in calculating the area and minimum dimensions of the required outdoor living space provided such side and rear yards are contiguous with, and an integral part of, such space. 
6.  Spaces with a dimension of less than 10 feet shall not be calculated when determining the required outdoor living space. 
G.  Parking. See Section 11.66.010(B)(1)(a) of this title. 
H.  Zero Setback Provision. Whenever a zero side yard is permitted, CC & R's (Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions) covering maintenance and utility access, etc., shall be required. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 6 (part); Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1734)  
11.36.060 - Special development standards. 
A.  Minimum Area of Dwelling Units. Dwelling units within the SL Overlay Zone shall contain no less than the following floor area minimums per dwelling unit, exclusive of open porches, patios, carports and garages: 
1.  For one-bedroom and two-bedroom homes, 1250 square feet; 
2.  For three-bedroom homes, 1400 square feet; 
3.  For homes with four or more bedrooms, 1450 square feet. 
B.  Minimum Room Sizes. A single-family dwelling shall have no habitable room, except kitchens, bathrooms and halls, which has an area of less than 120 square feet. Such space shall be exclusive of closets. 
C.  Minimum Roof Pitch. Dwelling units utilizing typical gable, hip or shed roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 3 inches in 12 inches. 
D.  Minimum Eave Projection. Minimum eave projections may in no case extend less than 18 inches. Additional extension may be required through Precise Plan of Design review in order to ensure proper regard for energy conservation and/or compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood. 
E.  Private driveways shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide and a maximum of 18 feet wide and shall be constructed in concrete, brick, approved paver material or a combination thereof. 
F.  Paved areas shall not exceed 40 percent of required front yard setback area. 
G.  Landscaping and Irrigation. As a minimum, front yards shall have a 100 percent automatic irrigation system, one 15-gallon street tree, 5-gallon shrubs and turf or ground cover. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 6 (part); Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1735)  
11.36.070 - Performance standards R-1/SL. 
Establishment of a homeowners' association for the purpose of ensuring the preservation of the general welfare, aesthetics, and property values may be required for small-lot, detached-housing subdivisions. 
A.  Overall Maintenance. Each owner shall have the affirmative obligation to prevent what might be considered a fire hazard or a condition dangerous to the public health, safety and general welfare; or constitute an unsightly appearance or otherwise detract from the aesthetic and property values of neighboring properties. The following minimum performance standards for the maintenance of buildings, yards, landscaping and common-use areas shall be adhered to by each owner: 
1.  Landscaping visible from streets and common use areas shall be absent of the following: 
a.  Lawns in excess of 6 inches in height; 
b.  Untrimmed hedges; 
c.  Dying trees, shrubbery, lawns and other plant life from lack of water or other necessary maintenance; 
d.  Trees and shrubbery grown uncontrolled without proper pruning; 
e.  Vegetation so overgrown as to be likely to harbor rats or vermin; 
f.  Dead, decayed or diseased trees, weeds and other vegetation; 
g.  Inoperative irrigation systems. 
2.  Yards shall be maintained so as to be absent of the following: 
a.  Broken or discarded furniture, appliances and other household equipment stored in yard areas for periods exceeding one week; 
b.  Packing boxes, lumber, trash, dirt and other debris stored in yards for unreasonable periods in areas visible from public property or neighboring properties; 
c.  Unscreened trash cans, bins or containers stored for unreasonable periods in areas visible from public streets and common areas. 
3.  No building, wall or fence may be left in an unmaintained condition so that any of the following exist: 
a.  Buildings abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed or left unreasonably in a state of partial construction; 
b.  Unpainted buildings or buildings with peeling paint in such a condition as to: 
i.  Cause dry rot, warping and termite infestation, or 
ii.  Constitute an unsightly appearance that detracts from the aesthetic or property values of neighboring properties; 
c.  Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions and/or inviting trespassers and malicious mischief; 
d.  Damaged garage doors that may become inoperative or unsafe to operate; 
e.  Graffiti remaining on any portion of the property for a period exceeding 10 days. 
B.  Vehicle Parking and Storage. For automobiles, wagons, vans, and light trucks, parking shall be limited to garages and permitted paved areas within the front yard setbacks. Parking and/or storage of recreational vehicles and equipment including, but not limited to boats, trailers, motor homes, camper shells, as well as utility vehicles, trailers, etc., may be permitted provided they are located behind the minimum required front yard setback and are screened from public view by a method reviewed and approved by the Director of Community Development. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1736)  
Division III. - Development Standards  
Chapter 11.37 - EMERGENCY SHELTERS AND SINGLE-ROOM OCCUPANCY LODGING FACILITIES 
 
11.37.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to identify locations where emergency shelters and single-room occupancy lodging facilities ("SROs") may locate in the City and to provide development standards to facilitate their development. The City Council finds that these types of supportive housing units are different in so many respects from other types and forms of development as to require a specialized set of regulations. 
(Ord. No. 14-944, § 1, 9-15-14)  
11.37.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
Emergency shelter shall have the same meaning as that term defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50801, which currently is defined to mean housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. 
Single-room occupancy (SRO) lodging facilities means any building containing five or more guestrooms or units intended for or designed to be used, rented, and occupied for sleeping purposes by residents, which is also the primary residence of those residents. The individual units shall lack either cooking facilities or individual sanitary facilities or both. For purposes of this definition, an SRO does not include residential care homes, senior housing projects, rooming and boarding houses, hotels and motels, bed and breakfast lodging, extended care facilities or hospitals. 
(Ord. No. 14-944, § 1, 9-15-14)  
11.37.030 - Emergency shelters. 
A.  Permitted locations. Emergency shelters shall be permitted "by-right" in the "BP" (Business Park) land use district of the Holt Boulevard Specific Plan. 
B.  Development standards. The development standards for emergency shelters shall be governed by those outlined in Chapter IV ("Development Regulations") for the "BP" (Business Park) land use district of the Holt Boulevard Specific Plan, except that the following specific standards shall apply to emergency shelters: 
1.  The maximum number of persons that may be served by an emergency shelter on a nightly basis shall be 20. Community sanitary facilities shall be provided in a location, design, and capacity to the satisfaction of the Building Official. 
2.  Room Sizes. Living spaces intended to be occupied by persons needing shelter shall be between 150 and 300 square feet in area, exclusive of closets or storage areas. 
3.  Access. Each living space or room within the emergency shelter shall be accessed exclusively from the interior of the building. No direct access to the exterior of the building shall be permitted from any private living space. 
3.  Resident Intake/Waiting Areas. Emergency shelters shall provide a client intake area of at least 150 square feet in area and located entirely within the interior of the building. 
4.  Parking. Emergency shelters shall provide a minimum of one parking space per bed provided. 
5.  Lighting. The exterior illumination level around the building perimeter and in the parking lot shall be maintained at a minimum of one foot-candle at grade during all hours of darkness. 
6.  Open space/Recreation Area. If an emergency shelter desires to provide an area for rest, relaxation, or recreation on the exterior of the building, it shall be located outside of any front yard or street side yard setback and shall be fenced at a height of six feet and in a manner to provide a solid screen as viewed from any adjacent public right-of-way or adjacent property. The preferred access to such an area is directly from the interior of the building in order to provide a safe, secure area for residents of the emergency shelter. 
7.  Proximity to other emergency shelters. No emergency shelter shall be located within 300 feet of another emergency shelter. 
C.  Operational Standards. 
1.  Prior to commencing operation, an emergency shelter provider shall prepare a written management and operations plan and submit it to the City for review and approval by the Community Development Director and Police Chief. The management and operations plan shall include, without limitation, hours of operation; staffing levels; provisions for staff training; resident identification process; maximum length of stay; neighborhood outreach; policies regarding pets; the timing and location of outdoor activities; temporary storage of residents' personal belongings; safety and security; loitering control; management of outdoor areas; screening of residents to ensure compatibility with services provided at the shelter; and training, counseling, and social service programs for residents, as applicable. Emergency shelters shall provide on-site management on a 24-hour per day basis at all times when a shelter is open for business. 
2.  A minimum of one uniformed, licensed, and bonded security guard shall be provided on-site from dusk until dawn each day when the shelter is open for business or is occupied by at least one resident. Security guards shall comply with Section 7580 et seq. of the California Business and Professions Code. 
3.  The maximum stay at an emergency shelter for an individual, couple or family shall be 180 consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 14-944, § 1, 9-15-14)  
11.37.040 - Single-room occupancy lodging facilities. 
A.  Permitted Locations. Single-room occupancy ("SRO") lodging facilities shall be permitted in the "BP" (Business Park) land use district of the Holt Boulevard Specific Plan subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission. 
B.  Development Standards. The development standards for SROs shall be governed by those outlined in Chapter IV ("Development Regulations") for the "BP" (Business Park) land use district of the Holt Boulevard Specific Plan, except that the following specific standards shall apply to SROs: 
1.  Number of Units. An SRO lodging facility shall have a minimum of five units and a maximum of 30 units. 
2.  A maximum of two persons may occupy any single SRO unit. 
3.  Unit sizes. The living space of each SRO unit shall be between 150 and 300 square feet in area, exclusive of closets or storage areas. 
4.  Kitchens and Bathrooms. Either a kitchen or bathroom may be provided in an SRO unit, but no individual unit shall contain both. 
5.  Community cooking and/or sanitary facilities shall be provided in a location, design, and capacity to the satisfaction of the Building Official. 
6.  Access. Each unit within the SRO shall be accessed exclusively from the interior of the building. No direct access to the exterior of the building shall be permitted from any SRO unit. 
7.  Resident Intake/Waiting Areas. Emergency shelters shall provide a client intake area of at least 150 square feet in area and located entirely within the interior of the building. 
8.  Common Areas. A minimum of 50 square feet per unit of indoor common areas shall be provided for the use of SRO residents, except that any SRO lodging facility shall provide a minimum of 400 square feet of indoor common area. The required square footage shall be exclusive of storage rooms, closets, laundry areas, common kitchens, dining areas, sanitary facilities, and hallways. If outdoor common areas are provided, the square footage of such areas shall not be counted as a credit toward the required indoor common areas. 
9.  Laundry Facilities. Community laundry facilities consisting of at least one washer and one dryer shall be required for every 10 SRO units or fraction thereof. If the SRO facility is multiple stories, washers and dryers shall be provided on each floor based on the number of SRO units on that floor at the ratio stated herein. 
10.  Parking. SRO facilities shall provide a minimum of one parking space per unit. 
11.  Lighting. The exterior illumination level around the building perimeter and in the parking lot shall be maintained at a minimum of one foot-candle at grade during all hours of darkness. 
12.  Open Space/Recreation Area. If an SRO lodging facility desires to provide an area for rest, relaxation, or recreation on the exterior of the building, it shall be located outside of any front yard or street side yard setback and shall be fenced at a height of six feet (6'-0") and in a manner to provide a solid screen as viewed from any adjacent public right-of-way or adjacent property. The preferred access to such an area is directly from the interior of the building in order to provide a safe, secure area for residents of the SRO facility. 
13.  Separation. No more than one SRO development shall be permitted within a radius of one-quarter mile (1,320 feet) of another SRO development. 
C.  Operational Standards. 
1.  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the SRO operator shall submit a management plan to the City for review and approval by the Community Development Director and Police Chief. The management plan shall address operations, safety and security, and building maintenance. 
2.  SRO lodging facilities shall provide on-site management on a 24-hour per day basis at all times when the facility is open for business. The management shall be solely responsible for the enforcement of all rules reviewed and approved by the City as part of the Conditional Use Permit. 
3.  A minimum of one uniformed, licensed, and bonded security guard shall be provided on-site from dusk until dawn each day when the shelter is open for business. Security guards shall comply with Section 7580 et seq. of the California Business and Professions Code. 
4.  Affordability Requirements. The owner/operator of an SRO lodging facility shall execute a deed restriction to the satisfaction of the City Attorney ensuring the facility complies with Section 65580 et seq. of the California Government Code regarding affordability. 
(Ord. No. 14-944, § 1, 9-15-14)  
Chapter 11.38 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
11.38.010 - Scope of provisions. 
The general provisions set forth in this chapter shall apply to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1801)  
11.38.020 - Uses. 
All buildings erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, moved or maintained, and any existing building and the land upon which it exists, shall be used only for the purposes permitted in the zone in which such building or land is located, and then only after applying for and securing all the permits and licenses required by law. Any building or structure moved from one lot or premises to another shall be of the general character of the existing buildings in the neighborhood or better. 
If any use is for any reason omitted from the lists enumerated in this title, or if an ambiguity arises concerning the appropriate classification of a particular use within the meaning and intent of this title, it shall be the duty of the Planning Commission to ascertain all pertinent facts concerning such omitted or ambiguous use, to classify such omitted or ambiguous use, and set forth its findings and reasons for designating such specific classification for such use. Such findings and resolutions shall be referred to the City Council, and, if approved by the City Council, thereafter such designated classifications shall govern. 
No land in any R Zone shall be used for access to a use not permitted in that R Zone. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1802)  
11.38.030 - Height limits. 
All buildings erected and any existing buildings which may be reconstructed, altered, moved, maintained or enlarged shall comply with the height regulations of the zone in which they may be located. The Planning Commission may authorize, with or without a public hearing, roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the buildings and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, church spires, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, wireless masts, or similar structures to be erected above the height limits prescribed by the provisions of this title, provided the same may be safely erected and maintained at such height in view of the surrounding conditions and circumstances; but no roof structures or any space above the height limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space. If a public hearing is to be held, the procedure shall follow that for a conditional use permit as set forth in Chapter 11.78 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1803)  
11.38.040 - Lot area. 
A.  All buildings erected and any existing buildings which may be reconstructed, altered, moved, maintained or enlarged shall comply with the area regulations of the zone in which they may be located. 
B.  The lot area shall be that prescribed by this title and shall not be reduced, diminished or maintained so that the yards or open spaces shall be smaller than that prescribed by this title, and the density of population shall not be increased in any manner except in conformity with the area regulations of the zone in which the property is located. The open spaces provided around any building shall not be considered as providing the yard or open spaces for any other buildings, and the required yard or open spaces on an adjoining lot shall not be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected. 
C.  Every building erected shall be located on a lot as defined in Chapter 11.02 of this title. 
D.  Every individual parcel of land at the time it was first zoned shall be deemed to be one lot, and not more than one main building shall be permitted on such parcel of land unless all regulations established by this title are complied with or a subdivision tract map or record of survey map is recorded with the County Recorder and is filed with and approved by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1804)  
11.38.050 - Yards. 
A.  Churches, schools, institutions, or other similar uses when permitted in an R Zone shall be removed at least 20 feet from every boundary line of the property, and no front yard, as required in such zone, or side yard, as required in this paragraph, shall be used for play or parking purposes. 
B.  When dwellings or apartments are erected and used above stores, the front and side yard requirements shall be those for the stores. 
C.  If a through lot is improved as one building site, no main building or accessory building shall be located closer to either street than the distance constituting the required front yard on such street. 
D.  In computing the depth of a rear yard where such rear yard opens onto an alley, one-half of such alley shall be included in computing the required rear yard. 
E.  Detached accessory building(s) shall not occupy more than 35 percent of a rear yard and shall meet the setback criteria set forth in Chapter 11.19 of this title. 
F.  Reserved. 
G.  Reserved. 
H.  Garages or carports with automobile entrances from an alley shall be located not less than 25 feet from the opposite boundary of the alley. Garages or carports with vehicular access across a front or side yard abutting a street shall be located not less than 20 feet from the front or side lot abutting such street. 
I.  Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills or other architectural features may extend or project into a required front or rear yard not more than 30 inches, and may extend into a required side yard not more than 4 inches for each 1 foot of the width of such required side yard. Ground-mounted mechanical equipment and accessory structures shall not encroach within the required minimum side yard setbacks. 
J.  Fire escapes may extend or project into any yard not more than 4 feet. 
K.  Open, unclosed stairways, or balconies not covered by a roof or canopy, may extend or project into a required yard not more than 30 inches and may extend or project into a required rear yard not more than 4 feet. 
L.  Uncovered porches, platforms, or landing places which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend into any front yard a distance of not more than 20 percent of such front yard, and in no case more than 5 feet, and may extend into any side or rear yard not more than 3 feet; provided, however, an open work railing not more than 30 inches in height may be installed or constructed on any such porch, platform, or landing place. 
M.  The provisions of this subsection are intended to provide for the regulation of the height and location of fences, hedges and walls for the purpose of providing for light, air, and privacy and safeguarding the public welfare by preventing visual obstructions at street and highway intersections. 
The following regulations pertaining to corner cutoff areas shall apply to all intersections of streets, alleys, and private driveways in order to provide adequate visibility for vehicular traffic, and there shall be no visual obstructions within the cutoff areas established: 
1.  There shall be a corner cutoff area at all intersecting and intercepting streets or highways. The cutoff line shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of 45 degrees with the side, front, or rear property line, as the case may be. It shall pass through the points located on both the side and front (or rear) property lines at a distance of 30 feet from the intersection of such lines at the corner of a street or highway. 
2.  There shall be a corner cutoff area on each side of any private driveway intersecting a street or alley. The cutoff lines shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of 45 degrees with the side, front, or rear property line, as the case may be. They shall pass through a point not less than 10 feet from the edges of the driveway where it intersects the street or alley right-of-way. 
3.  There shall be a corner cutoff area on each side of any alley intersecting a street or alley. The cutoff lines shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of 45 degrees with the side, front, or rear property line, as the case may be. They shall pass through a point not less than 10 feet from the edges of the alley where it intersects the street or alley right-of-way. 
4.  If, due to an irregular lot shape, a line at a 45-degree angle does not provide for intersection visibility, such corner cutoff shall be defined by a line drawn from a point on the front (or rear) property line which is not less than 30 feet from the intersection of the side and front (or rear) property lines and through a point on the side property line which is not less than 30 feet from such intersection of the side and front (or rear) property lines. 
N.  Fences, hedges and walls not greater than six feet in height shall be permitted on or within all rear and side property lines on interior lots and on or to the rear of all front yard setback lines. 
1.  No fence, wall or hedge over 48 inches in height, as measured from the natural grade of the adjoining public right-of-way, shall be permitted in any required front yard or in the required street side yard of a reversed or standard corner lot; provided, however, fences or walls may be permitted to exceed the 48-inch maximum in the following instances: 
a.  Masonry pilasters or columns, when used in conjunction with an "open" fencing material such as wrought iron or tubular steel, shall be allowed to be a maximum of 54 inches in height as measured from adjacent natural grade. Pilasters or columns shall be a maximum dimension of 16? x 16? and shall be spaced a minimum of 8'-0? on center. "Open" fencing shall be defined as construction that admits a minimum of 75 percent light and air; or 
b.  Should a property owner desire to erect a garden wall or fence in a front or street side yard setback atop a retaining wall constructed to mitigate a grade change between the private yard and the adjoining public right-of-way, the maximum height of the structure shall conform to the requirements set forth in subsection (N)(1)(a) of this section, as measured from the artificially created higher adjacent grade within the front or street side yard. 
2.  The Director of Community Development may approve an administrative adjustment for the following deviations from this section: 
a.  To the required side yard on the street side of a reverse or standard corner lot pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.76 of this title; or 
b.  Fences and walls constructed on property occupied by public facilities. 
3.  Other than repairs to existing, legally installed chain-link fencing, new installations of chain-link fencing shall be prohibited within front or street side yard setbacks. "Repair" shall be defined in this subsection to constitute no more than 50 percent of the legally installed fence improvements. 
4.  Fences and walls shall be expressly prohibited within corner cutoff areas as defined in Section 11.38.050(M) of this title. Landscaping within corner cutoff areas shall be maintained at a height no greater than 30 inches in height as measured from natural grade in order to maintain a safe sight distance for motorists and pedestrians. 
5.  Fences or structures over six feet in height, to enclose tennis courts or other game areas located within the rear one-half of the lot, shall be composed of wire mesh capable of admitting at least 90 percent of light as measured on a reputable light meter. Such fences shall be permitted in the required side or rear yards, subject to review and approval of an administrative adjustment by the Director of Community Development in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11.76 of this title. 
6.  The provisions of this subsection shall not be so interpreted as to prohibit the erection of a fence enclosing an elementary, junior high, middle or high school site, nor to prohibit the erection of an enclosure around utility building and/or structure as required by any law or regulation of the State or other governmental agency, subject, however, to the approval by the Planning Commission of the type of enclosure to be erected in any R, A-P or C Zone. 
7.  Fences and walls not greater than eight feet in height may be permitted by administrative adjustment on or within all rear and side property lines and on or to the rear of all front yard setback lines in special circumstances where a fence or wall higher than six feet is necessary to provide for security, privacy, screening of yard or to act as a buffer between land uses where it is found to be necessary to eliminate objectionable noise, light or glare. Such special circumstances would include changes in elevation between properties, or characteristics of adjoining land uses that necessitate a higher fence or wall for the enjoyment of property rights enjoyed by other property owners of similarly zoned property in the vicinity. All administrative adjustments shall follow the procedures, findings, appeals, and other provisions of Chapter 11.76 of this title. The Director of Community Development may attach conditions of approval as deemed necessary to mitigate the appearance of any wall or fence permitted by this subsection. 
O.  The height of a wall along a lot line between properties of different levels shall be measured as follows: 
1.  In those instances where the provisions of this title require the construction of a wall of a specific height along a lot line of a property located on a higher level than adjacent property and a retaining walls exists or will be built along such lot line, the required wall shall be set back five feet from such lot line, and the height of the required wall shall be measured from the finished grade of the upper level. If an earth bank is to serve in lieu of a retaining wall, the required wall shall be constructed on the upper level, and the height of the required wall shall be measured from the finished grade of the upper level. 
2.  In those instances where the provisions of this title require the construction of a wall of a specific height along the lot line of a property located on a lower level than adjacent property, the height of the required wall shall be measured from the finished grade of the upper level. 
3.  In all other instances the height of any wall or fence constructed along a lot line shall be measured from the finished grade of the lower level. 
(Ord. 03-834 § 1; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1805) 
(Ord. No. 10-916, § 4, 10-18-10)  
11.38.060 - Setbacks for planned rights-of-way for major structures. 
A.  No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure to be located within the planned right-of-way of any major, secondary, or collector street as established and shown on the adopted Master Plan. The front and side yards required by the provisions of this title shall be measured from the nearest outer line of the planned right-of-way. Center lines of planned rights-of-way shall be as determined by the City Engineer. 
B.  Any person aggrieved by the refusal of a building permit for a structure closer to a street or highway than the setbacks required by the provisions of this section or within the future right-of-way of a proposed street or highway may file an application (without cost) for a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this title. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1806)  
11.38.070 - Site improvement requirements. 
In addition to the site improvements specifically required by this title for particular uses, the Planning Commission may require other on-site and off-site improvements in accordance with City specifications, and, in addition thereto, may require dedications for street widening and sidewalk purposes adjacent to such site. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1813)  
11.38.080 - Dedication of land or payment of fees for park and recreational facilities. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 11500 and Section 11546 of the Business and Professions Code as amended and added by Chapter 1809 and Section 66477 of the State Government Code. 
2.  The park and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of a fee is required by this section are in accordance with the recreational policies of the Public Facilities element of the adopted General Plan of the City of Montclair. 
B.  Requirements. If a park and recreation service area has been proposed in the adopted Montclair General Plan or in the adopted Development Plan for Parks and Recreation and a residential development is proposed in whole or in part within such service area, the park land dedication or park fees shall be required in accordance with one or more of the following provisions: 
1.  The developer will be required to dedicate a site or sites for a neighborhood park, sufficient in size and topography to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the developed area, based on an adopted ratio of three acres of park per 1000 persons. The actual amount of land dedication required per development, per dwelling unit shall be as periodically set by resolution of the City Council. Such dedication shall be shown on the tentative and final maps or sub-parcel map submitted by the developer and the necessary lands will be offered for dedication to the City at the time of filing the final map(s). 
2.  If the proposed residential development is in close proximity to an already-existing neighborhood park, as determined by the Planning Commission through the General Plan, and if the already-existing park is outside of the proposed limits of the development, the developer will be required to make a cash payment, in lieu of dedication, equivalent to the cost of the park land as determined by the Planning Commission. Such determination shall be based on the adopted ratio of park land per dwelling unit and corresponding fees, as periodically set by resolution of the City Council. Such moneys shall be used only for the acquisition and development of that community park serving that proposed development. The developer may develop land for park use within the residential development as an alternate to cash payment. The cash payment shall be made to the City with the filing of final map(s), and shall be deposited with the City Treasurer in a Park Development Fund to be used solely for acquisition and development of park facilities. 
3.  Land dedication figures per dwelling unit and in-lieu fees per dwelling unit shall be as periodically set by resolution of the City Council. Said figures and fees shall be based on the adopted ratio of three acres of park land per 1000 persons. The amount of land dedication per dwelling unit shall reflect the most recent State or federal census figures for persons per household, per type of dwelling unit (e.g., single-family lot, R-3; two-bedroom, mobile home), The amount of the in-lieu fee shall be based on the current actual cost of acquiring and developing land sufficient to meet City recreation objectives. Both land dedication and in-lieu fee figures shall also reflect current federal, state and local legislation. 
4.  If the proposed development contains 50 parcels or units or less, the developer will be required to make a payment in lieu of dedication equivalent to the cost of park land as determined by the Planning Commission. Such payment shall be based on the adopted ratio of park land per dwelling unit and corresponding fees as periodically set by resolution of the City Council. Such payments will be used to purchase or develop park land serving the needs of the residents of the proposed development. As an alternative to the payment required in this paragraph, and in the event the developer has land sufficient to satisfy the area ratio criteria, the developer may dedicate and develop such land for public park use if approved by the Planning Commission. 
5.  If an existing park and recreation area is insufficient in size to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the proposed development as determined by the Planning Commission in accordance with the Montclair General Plan or the Development Plan for Parks and Recreation, subsection (B)(1)—(4) of this section will apply. 
C.  Commencement of Development. At the time of approval of the final subdivision map, Precise Plan of Design or conditional use permit, the City shall specify when development of the park or recreational facilities shall begin. 
D.  Industrial/Commercial Subdivisions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to industrial or commercial subdivisions. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1818)  
11.38.090 - Redevelopment Agency applications. 
The Redevelopment Agency shall, in addition to other persons specifically authorized in Title 11 of this Code, be authorized to apply for changes to the General Plan and official zoning map, and to apply for specific plans, precise plans of design, variances, subdivision maps, parcel maps, administrative adjustments, and any other development standards and approvals under Title 11 of this Code, with respect to any real property located within the territorial boundaries of the redevelopment projects of the Redevelopment Agency, regardless of whether or not the Redevelopment Agency is the owner of the affected real property. In the event that the Redevelopment Agency does not own the real property so affected, such change or approval shall not become effective, and the approved subdivision map or parcel map shall not be filed for recording, until and unless the Redevelopment Agency or the person designated by the Redevelopment Agency acquires title to such real property. 
(Ord. 00-794 § 1)  
Chapter 11.40 - ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
Sections: 
 
11.40.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the operations of adult businesses, which tend to have judicially recognized adverse secondary effects on the community, including, but not limited to, increases in crime in the vicinity of adult businesses; decreases in property values in the vicinity of adult businesses; increases in vacancies in residential and commercial areas in the vicinity of adult businesses; interference with residential property owners' enjoyment of their properties when such properties are located in the vicinity of adult businesses as a result of increases in crime, litter, noise, and vandalism; and the deterioration of neighborhoods. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to prevent these adverse secondary effects and the blighting or degradation of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of adult businesses, while at the same time protecting the First Amendment rights of those individuals who desire to own, operate or patronize adult businesses. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 2(a))  
11.40.020 - Application of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all adult-oriented businesses in C-3, M-1 and M-2 zoned properties subject to review and approval by the City for conformance with development standards. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.401)  
11.40.030 - Definitions. 
In addition to any other definitions contained in the Municipal Code, the following words and phrases shall, for the purpose of this chapter and Chapters 4.52 and 4.53, be defined as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended. Should any of the definitions be in conflict with any current provisions of the Municipal Code, these definitions shall prevail. 
Adult arcade means a business establishment to which the public is permitted or invited and where coin, card, or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled devices, still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, holograms, virtual reality devices, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images on a regular or substantial basis, where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." Such devices shall be referred to as "adult arcade devices." 
Adult booth/individual viewing area means a partitioned or partially enclosed portion of an adult business used for any of the following purposes: 
1.  Where a live or taped performance is presented or viewed, where the performances and/or images displayed or presented are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; 
2.  Where "adult arcade devices" are located. 
Adult business means: 
1.  A business establishment or concern that, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, operates as an adult retail store, adult motion picture theater, adult arcade, adult cabaret, adult motel or hotel, or adult modeling studio; 
2.  A business establishment or concern that, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, offers, sells or distributes "adult-oriented material" or "sexually oriented merchandise," or which offers to its patrons materials, products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" but not including those uses or activities which are preempted by State law. 
Adult cabaret means a business establishment (whether or not serving alcoholic beverages) that features "adult live entertainment." 
Adult cabaret dancer means any person who is an employee or independent contractor of an "adult cabaret" or "adult business" and who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs as a sexually oriented dancer, exotic dancer, stripper, go-go dancer or similar dancer whose performance on a regular and substantial basis focuses on or emphasizes the adult cabaret dancer's breasts, genitals, and/or buttocks, but does not involve exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or depicting or engaging in "specified sexual activities." "Adult cabaret dancer" does not include a patron. 
Adult hotel/motel means a "hotel" or "motel" (as defined in the Municipal Code) that is used for presenting on a regular and substantial basis images through closed-circuit television, cable television, still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, holograms, virtual reality devices or other image-producing devices that are distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting or describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult live entertainment means any physical human body activity, whether performed or engaged in alone or with other persons, including but not limited to singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which: (1) the performer (including but not limited to topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar performers) exposes to public view, without opaque covering, "specified anatomical areas"; and/or (2) the performance or physical human body activity depicts, describes, or relates to "specified sexual activities" whether or not the specified anatomical areas are covered. 
Adult modeling studio means a business establishment which provides for any form of consideration, the services of a live human model, who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, displays "specified anatomical areas" to be observed, sketched, photographed, filmed, painted, sculpted, or otherwise depicted by persons paying for such services. "Adult modeling studio" does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the Board of Education of the State of California. 
Adult motion picture theater means a business establishment, with or without a stage or proscenium, where, on a regular and substantial basis and for any form of consideration, material is presented through films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, laser disks, digital video disks, holograms, virtual reality devices, or similar electronically generated reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult-oriented material means accessories, paraphernalia, books, magazines, laser disks, compact discs, digital video disks, photographs, prints, drawings, paintings, motion pictures, pamphlets, videos, slides, tapes, holograms or electronically generated images or devices including computer software, or any combination thereof, that is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." "Adult-oriented material" shall include "sexually oriented merchandise." 
Adult retail store means a business establishment having as a regular and substantial portion of its stock in trade "adult-oriented material." 
Establishment of an adult business means any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any "adult business" (as defined above) as a new business; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an "adult business," to any "adult business"; 
3.  The addition of any "adult business" to any other existing "adult business"; 
4.  The relocation of any "adult business"; 
5.  Physical changes that expand the square footage of an existing "adult business" by more than 10 percent. 
Owner/license holder means any of the following: (1) the sole proprietor of an adult business; (2) any general partner of a partnership that owns and operates an adult business; (3) the owner of a controlling interest in a corporation or limited liability corporation (LLC) that owns and operates an adult business; or (4) the person designated by the officers of a corporation or the members of an LLC to be the license holder for an adult business owned and operated by the corporation. 
Performer means a person who is an employee or independent contractor of an adult business or any other person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, provides "adult live entertainment" for patrons of an "adult business." 
Sexually oriented merchandise means sexually oriented implements, paraphernalia, or novelty items, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery-operated vaginas, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity or distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes any of the following: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered, and/or simulated to be reasonably anatomically correct, even if completely and opaquely covered human: 
a.  Genitals, pubic region, 
b.  Buttocks, anus, 
c.  Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following, irrespective of whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering: 
1.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, or arousal; 
2.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual stimulation, or arousal; 
3.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
4.  Masochism; erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain; or bondage and/or restraints; 
5.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; 
6.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 2(b))  
11.40.040 - Locational criteria. 
A.  Adult-oriented businesses shall only be permitted within the C-3, MIP, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts within the City. 
B.  The designated areas within the C-3, MIP, M-1 and M-2 zoned areas upon which adult-oriented businesses may be located is described herein as the following areas within the incorporated City limits: 
An area bounded on the north side by Brooks Street and the extension of Brooks Street; on the east by a line 600 feet parallel to and west of Central Avenue; on the south by a line 600 feet south of and parallel to State Street, except those areas presently within the unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino; and on the west by the City limits in the area south of State Street and by the San Antonio Flood Control easement in the area north of State Street; also excluded are properties located within 300 feet east or west from the right-of-way lines of Ramona and Monte Vista Avenues. 
(Prior code § 9-6.403)  
11.40.060 - Amortization schedule of nonconforming adult-oriented businesses. 
A.  Any adult-oriented business which becomes nonconforming after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be granted an amortization schedule to continue business operation for a period not to exceed two years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  Any adult-oriented business located in any territory annexed to the City shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. If such use is found to be nonconforming to this chapter at the time of annexation, the two-year amortization schedule shall begin on the effective date of such annexation. 
C.  The Director of Community Development shall cause official notification to be sent to the legal property owner of record as it appears on the County tax roll by U.S. registered mail, stating the nonconforming status of such adult-oriented business on the property as well as the start of the amortization schedule. If the operator of such business is different from that of the legal property owner, additional notification shall be sent to the business operator by U.S. registered mail. 
D.  No legal nonconforming adult business shall be allowed to be expanded, enlarged, modified, relocated or converted into another adult use without first securing an adult business license from the Director of Community Development in accordance with Chapter 4.53 of this Code. 
E.  Should any legal nonconforming adult-oriented business cease operation for a period exceeding six consecutive months within the two-year amortization period, said use shall be deemed to forfeit its legal nonconforming status and shall not be continued or reopened at said location. 
F.  Upon the conclusion of the two-year amortization schedule, any legal nonconforming adult-oriented business shall cease all business operation and shall remove all signs, advertising and displays relating to said business within 30 days of City notification. 
(Ord. 06-873 § 2(d); Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.405)  
Chapter 11.42 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES—REGULATION OF SALE 
Sections: 
 
11.42.010 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  The City Council finds and determines that business establishments and organizations engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on-premises or off-premises frequently generate or contribute to problems which adversely affect the health, peace or safety of the City's residents, property owners, businesses, visitors and workers. Such problems include, but are not limited to, loitering, obstruction of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, defacement of buildings and structures, disturbances of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, excessive littering, illegal parking, excessive loud noises especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, police detentions or arrests, and the deterioration of neighborhoods and discouragement of other businesses from locating in the vicinity of such establishments and business premises. 
B.  The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community by: 
1.  Imposing restrictions on the location of such establishments in relation to one another and in relation to certain public and private facilities and structures; and 
2.  Requiring that each such establishment or organization obtain a conditional use permit in connection with its business operations or its events and activities which involve the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.901)  
11.42.020 - Sales of alcoholic beverages—Conditional use permit (CUP) required. 
Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in this title, a CUP shall be required for all sales of alcoholic beverages within the boundaries of the City, whether for consumption on-site or off-site with the following exception: 
Any temporary public assembly relating to an event or activity where an alcoholic beverage is to be sold, served, given away, or consumed and which involved the rental, lease, donation or other temporary acquisition and occupation of a building shall be regulated by an entertainment permit granted by the Police Department. 
(Prior code § 9-6.903)  
11.42.030 - Area of application. 
This chapter applies to: 
A.  Establishments that do not currently sell, but propose to sell, alcoholic beverages; 
B.  Establishments that currently sell alcoholic beverages but which propose to change the type of alcoholic beverages to be sold, thus necessitating a change in the type of retail liquor license within a license classification; 
C.  Establishments that currently sell alcoholic beverages, whether as an existing nonconforming use or pursuant to a CUP, if there is a substantial change in the mode or character of operation of the establishment, which includes but is not limited to: 
1.  A 10 percent increase in floor area, 
2.  An increase of 25 percent in the seating capacity of any bona fide public eating place operated as a restaurant, 
3.  An increase of 25 percent in the shelf area used for the display of alcoholic beverages; 
D.  Establishments which have been abandoned or have discontinued operations for a period of six months or more. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to substantiate when such establishment was in operation. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.904)  
11.42.040 - Conditional use permits for on-sale liquor establishments. 
A.  Conditional Use Permit (CUP) Required. Any land use which is identified in any chapter of this title as a permitted use and which authorizes a business enterprise to engage in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages as an on-sale liquor establishment, such as a restaurant operating as a bona fide public eating place, a cocktail lounge, or a beer bar, shall be permitted only upon such conditions as the Planning Commission or, on appeal, the City Council deem necessary and appropriate, which shall include the mandatory condition set forth in subsection C of this section, as applicable. 
B.  Restrictions on Concentration of Certain On-Sale Liquor Establishments. No CUP shall be issued for an on-sale liquor establishment, and no application for such CUP shall be accepted, unless the proposed on-sale liquor establishment meets the location and distance requirements set forth herein. If the on-sale liquor establishment is a cocktail lounge, beer bar, or similar business enterprise which proposes to conduct business operations under a Type 40, Type 42, or Type 48 license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, said on-sale liquor establishment shall be located at least 500 feet from any existing church, temple or other place of worship, school, hospital, park or playground. Said distance shall be measured from property line to property line of the parcels involved. 
C.  Mandatory Conditions of Approval. The following mandatory conditions shall be imposed on any CUP issued under this section: 
1.  The premises shall be maintained at all times in a neat and orderly manner. 
2.  Trash receptacles shall be provided in such number and at such locations as may be specified by the Planning Commission. 
3.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, dispensed or offered for consumption except within the permitted premises, which shall consist of a wholly enclosed building, except as otherwise permitted by the Planning Commission. 
4.  The exterior appearance of the permittee's premises shall be designed and maintained in a manner consistent with the exterior appearance of commercial properties already constructed or under construction within the immediate neighborhood so as not to cause blight or deterioration, or to substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood. 
5.  The permittee shall comply with all State statutes, rules and regulations relating to the sale, purchase, display, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
6.  The permittee shall acknowledge and agree that the City has a legitimate and compelling governmental interest in permittee's strict compliance with all conditions imposed upon the permit, including adherence to State statutes, rules and regulations as specified in subsection (C)(5) of this section. The permittee shall further acknowledge and agree, in writing, that any violation of a State statute, rule or regulation concerning the sale to or consumption of alcoholic beverages by a minor has been determined by the City to have a deleterious secondary effect upon: 
a.  The specific land use requested by the permittee and authorized by the City; 
b.  The compatibility of permittee's authorized land use with adjacent land uses; 
c.  The welfare and safety of the general public within the City. 
In view of such deleterious secondary effects, permittee shall acknowledge that the City has specif ically reserved the right and authority to impose sanctions, including suspension or revocation of the CUP, as a consequence of one or more violations of a State statute, rule or regulation concerning the sale to or consumption of alcoholic beverages by a minor. 
7.  The permit shall, after notice to the permittee and an opportunity to be heard, be subject to the imposition of such additional conditions as may be reasonable and necessary to address problems of land use compatibility, security, or crime control that have arisen since the issuance of the permit. 
(Prior code § 9-6.905)  
11.42.050 - Conditional use permits for off-sale liquor establishments. 
A.  Conditional Use Permit (CUP) or Administrative Conditional Use Permit (ACUP) Required. Any land use that is identified in any Chapter of this Title as a permitted use, and which authorizes a business enterprise to engage in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages as an off-sale liquor establishment, shall be permitted only upon such conditions as the Director of Community Development, Planning Commission, or City Council deems necessary and appropriate, which shall include the mandatory conditions set forth in subsection (C) of this Section, as applicable. 
B.  Restrictions on Concentration of Off-Sale Liquor Establishments. 
1.  No CUP shall be issued to an off-sale liquor establishment of 8,000 square feet or less; and no application for such CUP shall be accepted, unless the proposed off-sale liquor establishment is located 500 feet or more from any other off-sale liquor establishment, measured from property line to property line of the parcels involved, provided, however, that businesses engaging in the off-sale of beer and wine as an incidental use as defined in this Title and subject to approval of an ACUP shall observe a minimum separation of 400 feet from any other off-sale liquor establishment or any other business engaging in off-sale beer and wine as an incidental use, measured as the shortest distance between the public entrances of the subject establishments. 
2.  No CUP shall be issued to an off-sale liquor establishment of 8,000 square feet or less; and no application for such CUP shall be accepted, unless the proposed off-sale liquor establishment is located 500 feet or more from any existing house of worship, public or private school, park, playground, or hospital measured from property line to property line of the parcels involved. The 500-foot separation requirement shall not be applicable if the proposed off-sale liquor establishment is located within a retail commercial center of two acres or more. 
C.  Mandatory Conditions of Approval. In addition to the applicable requirements of Section 25600 et seq. of the Business and Professions (B&P) Code, the following mandatory conditions of approval shall be imposed on any CUP or ACUP issued under this section: 
1.  No inventory, materials, merchandise, or supplies shall be stored or displayed except within a wholly enclosed building. 
2.  The premises shall be maintained at all times in a neat and orderly manner. 
3.  Trash receptacles shall be provided in such number and at such locations as may be specified by the Planning Commission (CUP) or Director of Community Development (ACUP). 
4.  No exterior security bars and rollup doors applied to windows and pedestrian building entrances shall be allowed. 
5.  Exterior lighting of the parking areas shall be modified as necessary to provide a minimum intensity of at least one foot-candle of light throughout the parking area at all times in compliance with the Montclair Security Ordinance. 
6.  Window signs or displays shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Temporary or permanent window signs, posters, banners, or other applied graphics shall not cover more than 25 percent of each window and shall not be placed in windows in a manner that will obstruct the view into the building by emergency personnel. 
b.  Window sign placement shall not obstruct the view of the sales transaction area from inside and outside the building. 
c.  Any window tinting shall allow for physical identification of all persons in the sales transaction area from outside the building. 
d.  Temporary or permanent window signs, interior or exterior banners, or other signs placed within the store that are visible from outside the store and advertise the availability of or offer for purchase alcoholic beverages of any kind at the site shall be prohibited. 
7.  No video or arcade games, pinball machines, pool tables, jukeboxes, or similar devices shall be allowed within the subject lease space with the exception of official State lottery machines. 
8.  No exterior public telephones, vending or other coin-operated machines, children's rides, collection boxes, and so forth shall be located on the exterior of the subject lease space or the remainder of the site. 
9.  No alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, shall be consumed on the premises. 
10.  Employees selling alcoholic beverages shall be of such age, and subject to such supervision, as is specified in B&P Code Section 25663(b). 
11.  The exterior appearance of the permittee's premises shall be designed and maintained in a manner consistent with the exterior appearance of commercial premises existing or proposed in the immediate neighborhood so as not to cause blight or deterioration or to substantially diminish or impair property values in the neighborhood. 
12.  The permittee shall comply with all State statutes, rules, and regulations related to the sale, purchase, display, possession, and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
13.  The permittee shall acknowledge and agree that the City has a legitimate and compelling governmental interest in permittee's strict compliance with all conditions imposed upon the permit including adherence to State statutes, rules, and regulations as specified in subsection (C)(12) of this section. The permittee shall further acknowledge and agree that any violation of a State statute, rule, or regulation concerning the sale to or consumption of alcoholic beverages by a minor has been determined by the City to have a deleterious secondary effect upon: 
a.  The specific land use requested by the permittee and authorized by the City; 
b.  The compatibility of permittee's authorized land use with adjacent land uses; and 
c.  The welfare and safety of the general public within the City. 
In view of such deleterious secondary effects, permittee shall acknowledge that the City has specifically reserved the right and authority to impose sanctions, including suspension or revocation of the CUP, as a consequence of one or more violations of a State statute, rule, or regulation concerning the sale to or consumption of alcoholic beverages by a minor. 
14.  The permit shall, after notice to the permittee and an opportunity to be heard, be subject to the imposition of additional conditions following its issuance, which additional conditions may be imposed by the Planning Commission or, upon appeal, by the City Council to address problems of land use compatibility, security, or crime control that have arisen since the issuance of the permit. 
15.  No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed on the site nor shall any person have an open alcoholic beverage container on the site or adjacent sidewalks, streets, or alleys. Signs stating, "NO LOITERING. POSSESSION OF OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS ON THESE PREMISES AND ADJACENT PUBLIC AREAS IS PROHIBITED PURSUANT TO MMC SECTION 7.08.010(A)" at each entrance and in the parking lot adjacent to the licensed premises. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.906) 
(Ord. No. 13-933, § 2, 6-17-13)  
11.42.060 - Conditions and time limit. 
The Commission or City Council may grant the requested use permit in whole or in part upon such terms and conditions as it may deem necessary to safeguard and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
Prior to issuance of any building or occupancy permit, the owner and/or anyone applying on the owner's behalf shall agree, in writing, to meet and abide by all the conditions and requirements imposed on the CUP. 
(Prior code § 9-6.907)  
11.42.070 - Procedure for notice of a hearing. 
Procedures for notice of a hearing, conduct of a hearing, and an opportunity for all parties to present testimony shall comply with Chapter 11.78 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.908)  
11.42.080 - Revocation. 
A CUP may be revoked, in accordance with Section 11.78.120 of this Code, if the Commission or Council make any of the following findings: 
A.  That any condition of a CUP or an amended CUP has not been complied with or has been violated; 
B.  That the use is detrimental to the public health or safety or is a nuisance; 
C.  That the CUP was obtained by fraud; 
D.  That the use for which the permit was granted is not being exercised; or 
E.  That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased or been suspended for six months or more. 
(Prior code § 9-6.909)  
11.42.090 - Expansion and transfers of existing licenses. 
A.  Any modification, expansion, or upgrade of an alcoholic beverage license issued by the Alcohol Beverage Control (ABC) Board requires one of the following: 
1.  An amendment to the existing CUP in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter; or 
2.  CUP approval if a use permit currently does not exist for the alcoholic beverage license. 
B.  Any transfers of an alcoholic beverage license from one owner to another, for the same address, shall not be subject to CUP approval, assuming there is no expansion or change to the existing license. 
(Prior code § 9-6.9010)  
11.42.100 - Automobile gasoline service stations. 
Automobile gasoline service stations with retail sales including food, groceries, magazines, alcohol, and the like shall be subject to at least the following standards and requirements: 
A.  CUP approval is required for all gasoline service stations with or without alcohol sales; 
B.  Site development standards shall comply with Section 11.20.050 of this Code; 
C.  The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be restricted to beer and wine. Distilled spirits (hard liquor) shall be prohibited; 
D.  The consumption of beer and wine on the premises shall be prohibited; 
E.  No beer and wine shall be displayed within 10 feet of the cash register or the front door; 
F.  Employees on duty between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. shall be at least 21 years of age to sell beer and wine; 
G.  No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made from a drive-in window; 
H.  Promotional display of beer and wine shall be made at room temperature; 
I.  No beer and wine advertising shall be located on motor fuel islands and no self-illuminated advertising, including neon lighting, for beer or wine shall be located on buildings or windows; and 
J.  No display or sale of beer or wine shall be made from an ice tub. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.9011)  
11.42.110 - Appeals. 
Any interested party may appeal by filing a Notice of Appeal with the City Council no later than 10 days after the Planning Commission's decision is made. Said appeal shall state the grounds upon which the appeal is made. Said Notice shall be accompanied by a fee equal to one-half of the original filing fee. The City Council shall schedule a public hearing to be held no later than 30 days after the Notice of Appeal is filed and shall render its decision within 30 days of said hearing date. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.9012)  
Chapter 11.44 - AMUSEMENT GAME ARCADES 
Sections: 
 
11.44.010 - Authorization. 
The Planning Commission is authorized to grant amusement game arcade use permits for particular cases which are qualified pursuant to the provisions of this title. In granting such amusement game arcade permits, the Planning Commission may stipulate conditions in addition to those required by this chapter which will tend to safeguard the health, safety, and property values in the area. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.300)  
11.44.020 - Application of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all amusement arcades in appropriate C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2 zoned districts, as well as all use of amusement devices within the City. 
(Prior code § 9-6.301)  
11.44.030 - Findings, intent and purpose. 
A.  The City Council finds that the use of amusement devices, and particularly when in amusement arcades, has sufficient potential for associated problems and concerns so as to require specific regulations other than those found within the appropriate zoning classifications. 
B.  The intent of this chapter is to develop standards, procedures and guidelines to provide a uniform method whereby amusement arcades can operate for the overall community good without causing detriment to surrounding uses, businesses, neighborhood, or the community. 
C.  The purpose of the chapter is to provide specific standards for the review of all amusement arcades within the City which are equitable to the arcade establishments and yet protect the interests of the community. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.302)  
11.44.040 - Permit required. 
Amusement arcades are permitted in the appropriate C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts within the City, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.78, the provisions of this chapter, and other applicable sections of this Code. 
(Prior code § 9-6.304)  
11.44.050 - Locational criteria. 
A.  Amusement arcades shall only be permitted within the C-2 C-3, M-l and M-2 zoned districts within the City. 
B.  Public entrances to an amusement arcade shall be: 
1.  A minimum walking distance of 200 feet from any residentially zoned property, church, or religious institution; 
2.  A minimum walking distance of 300 feet from any public or private elementary, intermediate, or high school which provides education for at least 50 students; 
3.  A minimum walking distance of 50 feet from any business devoting over 50 percent of its floor area to the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption. 
C.  Amusement devices and/or amusement arcades shall be prohibited within any business devoting over 50 percent of its floor area to the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption. 
D.  The Planning Commission shall be empowered to take location into account and determine compatibility of an amusement arcade with an adjacent or surrounding use, neighborhood, or shopping area as justification for approving or denying an application. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.306)  
11.44.060 - Hours of operation. 
A.  Amusement arcades located within a walking distance of 1000 feet of a public or private elementary, intermediate, or high school which provides education to at least 50 students shall not be permitted to be open for business during school hours and not until at least 30 minutes after the school(s) day officially ends. These limitations shall not apply on weekends, holidays, or official school vacation periods. 
B.  Beyond the above hours of operation limitations, the Planning Commission may further establish conditions limiting the hours of operation for any amusement arcade when it is determined necessary or desirable in order to protect nearby properties or uses to provide for the general public safety or welfare. Such hours of operation limitations may be imposed as a condition at the time of the original approval or any time subsequent thereto. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.307)  
11.44.070 - Supervision and security. 
Amusement arcades shall provide the following adult supervision (over 21 years of age) and evening parking lot security guard (dusk until 30 minutes after business closes): 
4—10 amusement devices 	Provide 1 adult supervisor 
11—25 amusement devices 	Provide 2 adult supervisors 
26—50 amusement devices 	Provide 2 adult supervisors plus 1 evening security guard 
51 + amusement devices 	Provide 2 adult supervisors, plus 2 evening security guards 
 
(Prior code § 9-6.308)  
11.44.080 - Public restrooms. 
Amusement arcades shall provide a minimum of two public restrooms within the approved building. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 9-6.309)  
11.44.090 - Interior waiting area. 
Amusement arcades shall provide an area within the approved building for patrons wishing to relax or wait for a particular amusement device to become available. Seating facilities shall be included within this waiting area. 
(Prior code § 9-6.310)  
11.44.100 - Change-making or token-exchange facilities. 
Amusement arcades shall provide change-making machines or token-exchange facilities for patron use. Whatever facility is utilized, it shall be such as to discourage patrons from requesting change from other patrons or nearby businesses or persons. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.311)  
11.44.110 - Adequate interior clear space. 
A.  Amusement arcades shall provide a minimum of interior clear space for safe and convenient patron circulation pursuant to the following minimum standards: 
1.  Provide minimum aisle widths of 90 inches; 
2.  Provide a minimum of 90 inches between amusement devices and any entrance or exit; 
3.  Provide a minimum 24-inch separation between amusement devices. 
B.  Additional clear space may be required by the Building Official in order to maintain public safety. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.312)  
11.44.120 - Common wall insulation. 
Upgraded common wall insulation and other noise attenuation measures may be required in order to attenuate excess arcade noise from disturbing adjacent uses or businesses. 
(Prior code § 9-6.313)  
11.44.130 - Parking requirements. 
Each amusement arcade shall be required to provide adequate off-street parking for its own use at a rate of one space per six permitted occupants or one space per two amusement devices, whichever figure may be greater. Other differing uses within the amusement arcade building, including but not limited to restaurants, shall be required to meet the parking standards as established in Section 11.66.010 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.314)  
11.44.140 - Provision of bicycle racks. 
Amusement arcades shall be required to provide bicycle racks within 25 feet of the amusement arcade's entrance. Bicycle rack spaces shall be provided at a rate of one space per each amusement device (up to 25 devices), with one additional space per each additional five devices. The design and placement of the bicycle rack shall be determined by the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.315)  
11.44.150 - Exterior lighting. 
Amusement arcades shall be required to provide sufficient and adequate lighting to provide for a safe and functional exterior environment. Particular attention shall be paid to the placement of adequate lighting around all entrances and exits, in areas which may present a likely location for patron congregation, and in areas which are unduly dark. All lighting shall be arranged and shielded so as to eliminate excessive glare or reflection onto adjoining properties. A requirement of additional or upgraded lighting may be imposed as a condition at the time of the original approval or any time subsequent thereto. 
(Prior code § 9-6.316)  
11.44.160 - Signs. 
All signs on the exterior of an amusement arcade or visible from the public right-of-way shall require prior City approval in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(Prior code § 9-6.317)  
11.44.170 - Building and safety requirements. 
Prior to occupancy, the arcade applicant shall take all necessary steps in order to comply with the requirements of the Building, Police and Fire Departments which may be imposed as a result of applicable codes or community objectives. 
(Prior code § 9-6.318)  
11.44.180 - Miscellaneous requirements. 
In its review of an amusement arcade permit request, the Planning Commission may consider and/or specify conditions to deter outdoor congregation by arcade patrons, to limit the method and hours of operation in order to achieve use compatibility, and to discourage illegal or undesirable activities. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.319)  
Chapter 11.46 - ANTENNAS AND SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS 
Sections: 
 
11.46.010 - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is enacted in order to control the location and design of antennas and satellite dish antennas in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to maintain community design objectives. It is recognized that large antennas and satellite dish antennas improperly located may pose a form of aesthetic blight on the community, in that the appearance of many antennas is in conflict with architectural standards required of developments within the community. Further, it is recognized that the location of antennas at certain heights and placement may constitute a hazard to the surrounding community. The following zoning regulations pertaining to antennas are required in order to control the size and location of these objects in order to minimize aesthetic blight and to ensure proper location, attachment, and structural integrity thereby protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Prior code § 9-6.600)  
11.46.020 - Compliance. 
No person shall install, either as an owner, or as an agent, employee, or independent contractor for the owner, or otherwise, any antenna, satellite dish antenna, any additions thereto, or any substitution for any existing antenna unless said antenna installation complies with the provisions of the underlying zoning and the provisions of this chapter and a building permit is obtained, as required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9-6.601)  
11.46.030 - Antennas in residential areas. 
The following development standards shall be met for placement or installation of antennas and satellite dish antennas in residential zoned (R-1, R-2, R-3) areas, agricultural zoned (A-1) areas, and for any other residential development: 
A.  Permits and General Requirements. 
1.  A building permit shall be required for placement of any antenna having a boom or pole arrangement 10 feet or greater in length or for any satellite dish antenna having a diameter exceeding 3 feet. Not more than one such antenna shall be permitted for any residential development or address. 
2.  No antenna or satellite dish antenna shall be placed or installed, nor shall a permit be issued, for properties or developments which would violate legal provisions limiting or prohibiting antennas, such as covenants, conditions, restrictions or other previous requirements of the City. 
3.  Antennas or satellite dish antennas in residential zones and developments shall be for domestic use only with no commercial use permitted. 
B.  Size Limitations. 
1.  Antenna boom, tower or pole arrangement shall not exceed a height or length of 12 feet in any direction. 
2.  Satellite dish antennas shall not exceed a diameter of 10 feet. 
C.  Height Limitation. 
1.  Ground-mounted antennas shall not exceed a height of 12 feet from grade. 
2.  Roof- or structure-mounted antennas, approved subject to the provisions of subsection D of this section, shall not exceed the height of the highest roof ridge line of subject structure. In no case, however, shall roof-mounted antennas exceed a height of 35 feet from grade. 
D.  Location and Placement. 
1.  Mounting. Antennas having a boom or pole arrangement of 10 feet or greater in length or any satellite dish antenna having a diameter exceeding 3 feet shall be ground mounted. The Director of Community Development, or his or her designee, may grant exception, however, for roof or structure mounting. In order to receive such exception, the applicant shall demonstrate that ground mounting is not feasible due to insufficient line-of-sight to transmitter or satellite, inadequate yard area, or other limiting physical features of the property. Roof- or structure-mounted antennas shall be located on the portion of structure least visible from public view. This will generally require placement to rear side of structure and below roof ridge lines visible from public streets. 
2.  Yards. Antennas and satellite dish antennas shall not be located within required front or street corner side yards. Placement of antennas in rear and interior side yards shall meet the accessory building location standards of Section 11.38.050(E)—(G) of this title. 
E.  Screening. Satellite dish antennas exceeding a diameter of 3 feet shall be screened from public view with no more than the upper one-third of the antenna visible from any public view. Ground- mounted antennas shall be screened with fencing, walls, landscaping or other compatible material. Roof- or building-mounted antennas shall be screened with architectural material(s) which is compatible with the design and material of the structure. All methods and materials used for screening shall require prior Planning Division approval and a separate building permit where applicable. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.602)  
11.46.040 - Antennas in commercial areas. 
The following development standards shall be met for placement or installation of antennas and satellite dish antennas in commercial zoned areas (C-1, C-2, C-3), industrial zoned areas (M-1, M-2, MIP, office zoned areas (AP), and all other nonresidential or nonagricultural areas: 
A.  Permits and General Requirements. 
1.  A building permit shall be required for placement of any antenna having a boom or pole arrangement 10 feet or greater in length or for any satellite dish antenna having a diameter over 3 feet. 
2.  No antenna or satellite dish antenna shall be placed or installed, nor shall a permit be issued, for properties or developments which would violate legal provisions limiting or prohibiting antennas, such as covenants, conditions, restrictions or other previous requirements of the City. 
B.  Size Limitations. 
1.  Antenna boom, tower or pole arrangement shall not exceed a height or length of 15 feet in any direction. 
2.  Satellite dish antennas shall not exceed a diameter of 15 feet. 
C.  Height Limitation. Antennas and satellite dish antennas shall not exceed the maximum height permitted in the underlying zone. 
D.  Location and Placement. Antennas and satellite dish antennas shall not be located within required yard setback areas. 
E.  Screening. All antennas and satellite dish antennas shall be completely screened from public view. Screening shall be of fencing, walls or other architectural materials, with or without a combination of landscaping, which is compatible with the architectural design and materials of the development. All method and materials used for screening shall require prior Planning Division approval and a separate building permit where applicable. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.603)  
11.46.050 - Exceptions to antenna standards. 
The Planning Commission may grant a conditional use permit to property owners for placement or installation of antennas and satellite dish antennas which do not meet the antenna development standards of this chapter. 
Such conditional use permits are subject to all provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this title, including, but not limited to, the requirement for findings of need and revocation for nuisance or noncompliance. 
(Prior code § 9-6.604)  
11.46.060 - Antennas—General provisions. 
A.  Antennas and satellite dish antennas and their supporting structures and hardware shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the adopted Uniform Building Code(s) and all requirements of the Building Official including attachment, foundation, noncombustion, noncorrosion, protection against falling, and grounding protection. 
B.  Satellite dish antennas shall not be of silver or other bright colors and shall be treated so as to not reflect glare of sunlight. 
(Prior code § 9-6.605)  
11.46.070 - Antennas maintenance. 
A.  All antennas shall be maintained in good condition and in accordance with all requirements of this chapter. 
B.  All antennas shall be subject to periodic reinspection. No additions, changes or modifications shall be made to an antenna, unless the addition, change or modification is in conformity with the Building Code and with the approval of the Director of Community Development. 
C.  Failure to abide by and faithfully comply with this chapter or with any and all conditions that may be attached to the granting of any permit shall constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.606)  
Chapter 11.48 - CHILDREN'S DAY-CARE FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
11.48.010 - Purpose and intent. 
Recognizing that the unrestricted use of residential properties for purposes other than those normally associated with home living has a detrimental effect on the residential area in which the use is conducted, and further recognizing that quality licensed child care is essential to the well-being of parents and children in the community, it is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a comprehensive and reasonable system to regulate the operation of all child day-care facilities within the City in accordance with provisions and guidelines under the Health and Safety Code of the State of California. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1816 (part))  
11.48.020 - Permit required. 
A.  A small family day-care home, as defined in Chapter 11.02 of this title, shall be considered to be a permitted use within any residential zone. No City business license, fees or permit shall be required to operate such a facility other than the required State license. 
B.  The operator of a large family day-care home, as defined in Chapter 11.02 of this title, shall first apply for and obtain a conditional child-care use permit pursuant to the provisions of Section 11.48.030 of this chapter prior to operation. 
C.  "Day-care center," as defined in Chapter 11.02 of this title, shall be subject to the conditional use permit requirements in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1816 (part))  
11.48.030 - Conditional child-care use permit. 
A.  Fees. Application fees for a conditional child-care use permit for a large family day-care home shall be as established by resolution adopted by the City Council. 
B.  Application. A child-care provider shall submit a formal application for a large family day-care home on a form furnished by the City providing specific information with regard to the proposal such as property ownership, location, plot plan, floor plan, staffing and enrollment capacity, program description, meal services and other data as may be required by the City. 
C.  Public Notices and Hearing. Not less than 10 days prior to the date on which the decision will be made on the application, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall give notice of the proposed use by mail or delivery to all property owners shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within a 100-foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the parcel containing the proposed large family day-care home. No hearing on the application for a permit issued pursuant to this section shall be held before a decision is made unless a hearing is requested by the applicant or other affected person. The applicant or other affected person may appeal the decision within 10 calendar days in writing and by paying one-half of the original filing fee. The Community Development Department Director, or his/her designee, shall be authorized to act as Hearing Officer to consider such application at a time and date prescribed in the public hearing notice. The Hearing Officer may, in approving such application, impose reasonable requirements and conditions relative to spacing and concentration, traffic control, parking, and noise. 
D.  Revocation. Day-care permits granted in accordance with the provisions of this title may be terminated if the Planning Commission or Council makes any of the following findings: 
1.  That any condition of the day-care permit has been violated; 
2.  That the use has become detrimental to the public health or safety or is deemed to constitute a nuisance; 
3.  That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud; or 
4.  That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased or has become suspended for six consecutive months or more. 
(Ord. 01-809 § 2: Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1816 (part))  
Chapter 11.50 - DRIVE-IN BUSINESSES 
Sections: 
 
11.50.010 - Intent. 
Uses which provide a business or service to the occupants of a motor vehicle without the occupants alighting from the motor vehicle, or where the occupants alight from the motor vehicle for quick service at or within a structure, present a variety of unique development problems. 
It is the intent of this chapter to provide a means whereby the Planning Commission may review individual development proposals in relation to specific sites and consider the effect of the use upon adjacent properties and businesses and impose reasonable conditions or modify existing Code requirements in order to best solve the problems presented by these uses. 
(Prior code § 9-6.200)  
11.50.020 - Setbacks. 
Buildings shall be set back from property lines in accordance with the requirements of the zone in which the use is located. Where the Planning Commission determines that the best interests of the City and/or adjacent development or property will be best served, and the intent of this chapter will be complied with, a lesser or greater setback may be established. 
(Prior code § 9-6.201)  
11.50.030 - Lot area. 
Each drive-in business shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than 15,000 square feet. If the Planning Commission determines that a site of lesser area, because of the proposed plan of development and arrangement of facilities, will meet the intent of this chapter, the Planning Commission may permit a modification of the minimum area requirement. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.202)  
11.50.040 - Parking requirements. 
Every drive-in business shall be subject to all parking requirements applicable to the zone in which such use is located in addition to complying with the following: 
A.  On-site parking shall be provided for each employee on duty. The peak employment period shall be used to determine the number of employee parking spaces. 
B.  Automobile restaurants shall provide a minimum of two parking spaces for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
C.  The provisions of Section 11.66.010 of this title and the various requirements of this chapter notwithstanding, if the Planning Commission has determined that the intent of this chapter will be best served, the Planning Commission may impose a greater or permit a lesser number of parking spaces. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.203)  
11.50.050 - Accessways. 
Each developed site shall not have more than two accessways to any one street except that the Planning Commission shall have the right to prescribe additional requirements if it is deemed necessary that a change in the location and number of accessways will reduce the possibilities of traffic hazards. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.204)  
11.50.060 - Activities permitted and prohibited. 
The following shall regulate activities on any drive-in business site: 
A.  Vehicles. No vehicles shall be parked on the premises other than those of persons attending to business on the site, vehicles being serviced for customers, vehicles of employees, and other service vehicles. No vehicles may be parked on the premises and offered for sale, lease or rent. 
B.  Public Telephones. Public telephone facilities shall be located within the main building. Freestanding telephone booths shall not be permitted. Enclosed telephone booths or open telephone stations which are located in or on the exterior walls or surfaces may be permitted if their design is integrated with and compatible to the architecture of the building. 
(Prior code § 9-6.205)  
11.50.070 - Signs. 
Signs shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Signs shall contain only such subject matter which refers to the name of the establishment or to the type or general category of goods and services sold on the premises on which the sign is located. 
B.  The total area of signs, inclusive of all monument, menu board, and building signs on the property, shall not exceed one and one-half square feet of sign area for each linear foot of property frontage. Corner lots shall use only one street frontage to determine maximum sign area. 
C.  The maximum area of any single sign shall not exceed 60 square feet. 
D.  One monument sign not to exceed an area of 60 square feet shall be permitted. 
E.  The maximum height of monument signs shall not exceed 10 feet. 
F.  The Planning Commission shall have the discretion of limiting the number of monument signs on any parcel to no more than one; or in the case of reduced setback to freestanding building, not granting any monument sign to any parcel. 
G.  All provisions for sign application, review, approval and permits listed under Chapter 11.72 of this title shall be complied with. 
H.  Sign design standards for all signs relating to drive-in businesses shall be in accordance with provisions under Chapter 11.72 of this title. 
I.  All provisions for sign regulations of window signs, temporary signs, neon signs, exempt and prohibited signs relating to drive-in businesses shall be in accordance with Chapter 11.72 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.206)  
11.50.080 - Walls and fences. 
Masonry (brick, block, slumpstone, adobe, etc.) walls shall be required on all exterior property lines to a minimum height of 5 feet and a maximum height of 6 feet. Such height shall be reduced to a minimum of 36 inches and a maximum of 42 inches within any front-yard setback. If access to an alley or other adjacent use is permitted, such wall shall be reduced to the 36-inch minimum and 42-inch maximum height for a distance of 10 feet on each side of such entrance. The height, material and color of the wall shall be approved by the Planning Department. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.207)  
11.50.090 - Lighting. 
All lighting, except within the building, shall be of an indirect nature, emanating only from fixtures located under canopies, under eaves of buildings, or recessed within screening walls, or at ground level within the landscaped areas. All lighting shall be arranged and shielded so as to eliminate glare and reflection. Performance specifications shall accompany the Precise Plan of Design. If, because of unusual circumstances, freestanding lighting is permitted, top-mounted pole lights generally mushroomed in character shall be required and shall be so situated and shielded to not direct or reflect lighting on adjacent properties, buildings, or public rights-of-way. Freestanding lights shall generally be limited to a height of 18 feet. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.208)  
11.50.100 - Architecture. 
Buildings shall be so designed that the architectural theme will reflect time most recent thinking in good design. Innovative designs may be permitted provided the same can be shown to be an asset to the area under consideration and will not cause other structures and property in the local environment to materially depreciate in appearance and value. To accomplish the desired architecture, the use of native stone, brick, exposed aggregate, or similar materials on the exterior of the building is encouraged. 
(Prior code § 9-6.209)  
11.50.110 - Landscaping. 
A.  Landscaped areas which are a minimum of 15 feet in width shall be required along all street frontages (except at drive or pedestrian access locations), and all such planted areas shall be contained within a planter backed up by an ornamental masonry wall (brick, stone, or similar material) of not less than 36 inches nor more than 42 inches in height. The material used for the construction of such raised planters shall be the same as that used on the exterior of the building or other related materials as approved by the Planning Commission. 
B.  One 15-gallon on-site tree shall be provided within the general area of the main structure. Such tree shall be contained within a raised planter of not less than 12 inches in height. A ground cover and such other plants as deemed necessary shall also be provided within such planter. 
C.  Additional peripheral planting areas having a minimum width of 5 feet shall be required along the interior side and rear property lines. Such planting areas shall contain trees of at least 6 feet in height; the size of the containers for such trees shall be at least 15 gallons. Such trees shall be spaced a maximum of 20 feet apart on center. 
D.  An automatic sprinkling system providing 100 percent irrigation to all planted areas shall be installed; hose bibs shall not be acceptable. 
E.  If the Planning Commission determines that, because of the proposed plan of development, the arrangement of facilities, particular site problems, or other similar matters, the proposed landscaping plan and facilities will meet the intent of this section, the Planning Commission may waive or modify the requirements accordingly. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.210)  
11.50.120 - Utilities. 
All electrical, telephone, C.A.T.V., and similar service wires or cables which provide direct service to the property being developed shall, within the exterior boundary lines of such property, be installed underground. Risers on poles and buildings shall be permitted and shall be provided by the developer or owner onto the pole which provides service to such property. Utility service poles may be placed on the rear of the property to be developed only for the purpose of terminating underground facilities. The developer or owner shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and he/she shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation of such facilities. 
For the purpose of this section, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system, may be placed aboveground. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.211)  
11.50.130 - Restroom locations. 
All restrooms shall be located toward the rear of the building. Entrances shall be screened from the view of adjacent properties or street rights-of-way by solid decorative screening and/or landscape materials. 
(Prior code § 9-6.212)  
11.50.140 - Deliveries. 
All deliveries made to drive-in businesses located on sites adjacent to residential zones shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(Prior code § 9-6.213)  
11.50.150 - Storage and displays. 
All merchandise, wares and crates in the form of temporary and permanent storage, displays, or goods offered for sale shall be within the building except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(Prior code § 9-6.214)  
11.50.160 - Trash areas. 
A fully enclosed trash area shall be provided and constructed of a material which shall be in harmony with the architecture of the building. The height of all such enclosures shall be determined by the Planning Commission. Provisions for adequate vehicular access to and from such areas for the collection of trash and garbage shall be provided. 
(Prior code § 9-6.215)  
11.50.170 - Hours of operation. 
If the Planning Commission determines it is necessary or desirable in order to protect nearby properties or uses to provide for the general public safety or welfare, it may establish restrictions or the permitted hours of operation. Such restrictions may be imposed as a condition at the time of the original approval or any time subsequent thereto. 
(Prior code § 9-6.216)  
11.50.180 - Variances. 
If practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, or results inconsistent with the general purposes of this chapter would occur from its strict literal interpretation and enforcement, the Planning Commission may grant a variance therefrom upon such terms and conditions as it deems necessary. Such variances shall be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this chapter so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will ensure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties. 
To grant a variance, the provisions of Chapter 11.82 of this title shall be complied with. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.217)  
Chapter 11.52 - FOSTER HOMES 
Sections: 
 
11.52.010 - Statement of intent. 
The intent of this chapter is to regulate the location and operation of foster homes to ensure such homes will not have a detrimental effect on the area in which the use is conducted, and that the location and operation will provide for the safety and well-being of persons residing in foster homes. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1815 (part))  
11.52.020 - Permit. 
A foster home permit shall be granted by the Planning Commission for the care of foster children or persons with disabilities after an application therefor to the Planning Commission and after the Planning Commission has ascertained the following pertinent facts: 
A.  That the applicant has met the requirements of whatever public agency regulates the activity sought to be approved and shows proof of a license or permit if issued by such agency; 
B.  That the provisions of the definitions of "family" and "foster family" in Chapter 11.02 of this title are complied with; and 
C.  That the minimum sleeping and housing standards of the public agency supervising such activity have been complied with. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1815 (part))  
11.52.030 - Conditional use permits. 
The Planning Commission is authorized to grant conditional use permits in such cases where the number of foster children or persons with disabilities exceeds the limits set forth in the definitions of "family" and "foster family" in Chapter 11.02 of this title. In granting a conditional use permit the Planning Commission shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 11.78 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1815 (part))  
11.52.040 - Revocation. 
A foster home permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may be terminated if the Planning Commission or City Council makes any of the following findings: 
A.  That any condition of the foster home permit has been violated; 
B.  That the use has become detrimental to the public health or safety or is deemed to constitute a nuisance; 
C.  That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud; or 
D.  That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased or has been suspended for six consecutive months or more. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1815 (part))  
Chapter 11.54 - HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES—SITING CRITERIA 
Sections: 
 
11.54.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to set forth a reasonable yet effective siting criteria for evaluating proposals for specified hazardous waste facilities and serve to focus the evaluation of facility proposals on critical issues. 
Siting criteria represent a uniform set of standards to be applied to all applications, yet they are designed with some flexibility depending on the type of facility and the proposed site location. Siting criteria are to be used for evaluating a project at a particular site. When used along with General Plan policies, the siting criteria determine the suitability of a site for a specified hazardous waste facility proposal. The use of the siting criteria and General Plan policies are part of the full application review and environmental analysis required of all applications for specified hazardous waste facilities under State law. 
In order to adequately safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare, all specified hazardous waste facilities, including land disposal facilities, may only be sited within areas specifically designated for such use, subject to all requirements and provisions of this Code, the adopted County and City General Plans, inclusive of their hazardous waste management plans. 
(Prior code § 9-6.701)  
11.54.020 - Permit required. 
Specified hazardous waste facilities, including land disposal facilities, may only be permitted in the appropriate General Manufacturing (M-2) Zone District within the City, subject to issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to guidelines set forth in the County and the City Hazardous Waste Management Plans and the provisions of Chapter 11.78, the provisions of this chapter, and other applicable sections of this Code. In addition, the approval of a hazardous waste facility permit by the State Department of Health Services is required for all such facilities to ensure that operating conditions imposed are fully met. 
(Prior code § 9-6.703)  
11.54.030 - Application fees. 
The Director of Community Development shall not accept applications for land use decisions for any specific hazardous waste facilities unless they are accompanied by the fee in an amount equal to the fee established by resolution of the City Council for an Environmental Impact Report. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.704)  
11.54.040 - Local application review process. 
The City's review procedures for a specified hazardous waste facility are similar to the consideration given other conditionally permitted industrial facilities, with the addition of the requirements identified in the Tanner Act, AB 2948 (Chapter 1504, Statutes of 1986), et al. 
The Tanner Act identifies a formal administrative process for the local review of facility applications. The process provides for notification regarding a pending application, procedures for initial review, participation by the interested public, and a procedure for State review of the local decision-making process, if the resulting decision is appealed. The following is an outline of the procedures added to the local application review process by the Tanner Act. 
SUMMARY OF PERMIT PROCEDURES 
ADDED BY THE TANNER ACT, AB 2948 
* Delegates specified duties and responsibilities to the office of Permit Assistance (OPA), local jurisdictions, and permitting agencies. 
* Requires the project applicant to file a Notice of Intent with OPA and the local land use jurisdiction before filing for a land use permit. 
* Requires a seven-member Local Assessment Committee to assist in negotiating the terms and conditions of project approval with the project applicant and to make advisory recommendations to the Planning Commission and City Council. 
* Requires the OPA to convene a meeting to inform the public on the proposed project and the application review procedures that will be followed. 
* Authorizes an applicant-paid fee for hiring an independent consultant to the Local Assessment Committee for review of the project. 
* Requires a meeting up-front among lead and responsible agencies, project applicant, the Local Assessment Committee, and the interested public to discuss issues of public concern and explain the application review process. 
* Provides for a written determination of a project's consistency with applicable general plans, development codes, and the City Hazardous Waste Management Plan (CHWMP). 
* Sets time frames for review and action by permitting agencies. 
* Authorizes the establishment of a State Appeals Board and specifies the Board's composition, responsibilities, and appeal procedures. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.705)  
11.54.050 - Contents of application. 
Every application for a Hazardous Waste Facility Project shall be made in writing to the Planning Commission on forms provided by the Community Development Department, and accompanied by a filing fee as set by resolution of the City Council. An application must meet all the requirements set forth in Chapters 11.06, 11.78 and 11.80 of this Code. An application shall also include the following information: 
A.  Name and address of the applicant; 
B.  Evidence that the applicant is the owner of the premises involved or that the applicant has written permission of the property owner of record to make such application; 
C.  A plot and development plan drawn in sufficient detail determined by the Community Development Director and the Public Works Director/City Engineer to clearly describe the following: 
1.  Physical dimensions of the property and structures, 
2.  Location of existing and proposed structures, 
3.  Proposed setbacks and landscaping, 
4.  Proposed methods of circulation and parking, 
5.  Existing and proposed drainage patterns, 
6.  Proposed ingress and egress, 
7.  Proposed storage and processing areas, 
8.  Utilization of property under the requested land use permit, 
9.  The distance from the project property line to the nearest adjacent structure, and a description and location of such structure, 
10.  Proximity of the project to the 100-year floodplain areas, 
11.  Proximity of the project to any known earthquake fault zones, 
12.  The relationship of the proposed project to all above ground water supplies and all known underground aquifers that might be threatened with contamination, 
13.  Topographic description of the property and surrounding area, 
14.  A preliminary geological study of the property and surrounding area which contains information regarding depth of soils analysis, an analysis of any known aquifer, and the potential location of aquifers, regardless of the potability of those aquifers, 
15.  Existing and proposed utilities which service or will be required to service the facility, and 
16.  Vicinity map which indicates, at a minimum, proximity of the project to schools, parks, and other community facilities within the City; 
D.  Indication of all wastewater, treated and untreated, generated by the proposed facility and the method and place of final discharge; 
E.  An analysis of visual, noise, and any olfactory impacts associated with the project and recommended mitigation measures; 
F.  An analysis of all anticipated air quality impacts associated with the project and proposed mitigation measures to ensure no degradation of air quality in the area; 
G.  Identification of any rare or endangered species of plant or animals within the project site and recommended impact mitigation measures; 
H.  Identification of the amounts, sources and types of hazardous wastes to be treated, stored, or disposed of at the proposed facility; the ultimate disposition of the wastes, and anticipated life of the facility. This information shall be based on an actual survey of the industries to be served and, thereby, be representative of the wastes that will be processed at the facility; 
I.  A risk assessment which analyzes, in detail, all probabilities of accidents or spills at the site, transportation-related accidents from the point of origin to the facility, and any other probabilities requested by either the Community Development Director, the Public Works Director/City Engineer, or the Planning Commission. Such analyses shall identify mitigation measures to reduce the identified risks. The risk assessment shall identify the most probable routes for transporting hazardous wastes to the facility; 
J.  A plan that identifies an ongoing monitoring program of air, soil and groundwater. This plan shall include any monitoring requirements imposed by other permitting agencies such as, but not limited to, the South Coast Air Quality Management District, Regional Water Quality Control Board and Department of Health Services; 
K.  All applications shall contain a designation of at least two reasonable alternative sites which shall be reviewed pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act; 
L.  All applications shall be accompanied by an Environmental Assessment checklist in sufficient detail to enable the City to complete an initial study pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act for the preparation by a qualified environmental consulting firm of an Environmental Impact Report or Negative Declaration; 
M.  An emergency response plan that includes, but which is not limited to, the following: 
1.  That the proposed plan is consistent with any and all applicable County and regional emergency plans and all City, County, State and federal regulatory requirements regarding emergency response procedure, 
2.  Detailed procedures to be employed at the time of emergency for each and every type of chemical substance and emergency, including contingency procedures, 
3.  Anticipated impacts on local fire, police and medical services, 
4.  Names, home and business addresses, and home and business telephone numbers of all management personnel at the facility, if known, and a detailed description of uncontrolled release and emergency situation reporting procedures. 
An application shall not be declared complete until such emergency response plan is approved by the Directors of Community Development and Public Works and the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.706)  
11.54.060 - Consistency with the General Plan. 
All specified hazardous waste facility projects submitted for review shall be consistent with all General Plan requirements, zoning ordinances, and other planning actions or policies that were in place at the time the application was deemed complete. In addition, all such projects shall comply with the hazardous waste siting policies, standards, and location criteria in the Safety Element of the Montclair General Plan. 
(Prior code § 9-6.707)  
11.54.070 - Siting criteria for specified hazardous waste facilities. 
A.  Zoning District. All specified hazardous waste facilities shall be located within the General Manufacturing (M-2) Zone District, subject to conditional use permit approval in accordance with Section 11.34.020(G)(4) and Chapter 11.78 of this title. 
B.  Proximity to Populations. For a residual repository or other land disposal facility, a buffer of a minimum of 2000 feet shall be required between any portion of the facility in which hazardous waste will be stored, handled, transported or otherwise located and any residential properties or other sensitive sites, such as hospitals, schools or places of public assembly. 
Treatment recycling, storage, and transfer facilities, as those terms are defined in the Health and Safety Code, shall comply with the underlying M-2 zoning setback requirements for industrial facilities, unless a greater distance is justified pursuant to a risk assessment. 
The risk assessment for each specified hazardous waste facility shall consider the physical and chemical characteristics of the specific type of wastes that will be handled, the design of the facility, and any need for buffering residential areas or other sensitive sites (such as hospitals, schools or places of public assembly) from potential accidents or adverse emissions from a proposed facility. The study shall also provide an estimate of the distance over which the affects of a spill or emergency situation would carry, a variety of options for reducing the risks, and procedures for dealing with such spills or emergency situations, including incidents involving transportation of hazardous materials and/or waste to and from the facility. 
C.  Proximity to Immobile Populations. Immobile populations include, but are not limited to, schools, hospitals, convalescent homes, prison facilities, and facilities for persons with disabilities. For all types of facilities, a risk assessment must be performed which details the maximum potential credible accident from facility operations and its impact on all immobile populations in the City. An adequate buffer between the hazardous waste facility and immobile populations shall be established by a risk assessment at the time of review. The risk assessment shall consider the physical and chemical characteristics of the specific types of wastes which will be handled, the design features of the facility, the transportation routes which will potentially serve the facility, and the proximity of both the facility and the transport of hazardous waste and materials to immobile populations. 
D.  Proximity to Public Facilities. Specified hazardous waste facilities shall be sited in such a manner so as to not adversely impact the public health and safety of large numbers of people in public areas or public facilities. An adequate buffer shall be determined by a risk assessment at the time of permit review. 
All facilities shall locate in areas where fire departments are able to immediately respond to hazardous materials accidents and where demonstrated emergency response times are the same or better than those recommended by the National Fire Prevention Association. In addition, hazardous materials accident response services at the facility may be required based on the types of waste handled or the location of the facility. 
Specified hazardous waste facilities shall be located in areas where emergency response capabilities and public water and sewer services are available. 
E.  Flood Hazard Areas. Residual repositories and other land disposal facilities are prohibited in areas subject to inundation by floods with a 100-year return frequency, and shall not be located in areas subject to flash floods and debris flows. 
All other facilities shall avoid locating in flood-plains or areas subject to flash floods and debris flows unless they are designed, constructed, operated and maintained to prevent migration of hazardous wastes in the event of inundation. 
F.  Proximity to Active or Potentially Active Faults. All facilities are required to have a 200-foot setback from a known active or potentially active earthquake fault. 
G.  Slope Stability/Subsidence/Liquefaction. Residuals repositories and other land disposal facilities are prohibited from locating in areas of potential rapid geological change, subsidence, or potential liquefaction. 
All other facilities shall avoid locating in areas of potential rapid geologic subsidence or liquefaction change unless containment structures are designed, constructed and maintained to preclude failure as a result of such changes, subject to the determination of the City Engineer. 
H.  Dam Failure Inundation Areas. All hazardous waste management facilities shall locate outside a dam failure inundation area. 
I.  Aqueducts and Reservoirs. All facilities shall locate in areas posing minimal threats to the contamination of drinking water supplies contained in reservoirs and aqueducts. 
J.  Discharge of Treated Effluent. Facilities generating wastewaters shall be located in areas with adequate sewer capacity to accommodate the expected wastewater discharge. 
K.  Proximity to Supply Wells and Well Fields. A residuals repository and other land disposal facilities shall be located beyond the cone of depression created by pumping a well or well field for 90 days. Location is preferred where the saturated zone predominantly discharges to nonpotable water without any intermediate withdrawals for public water supply. 
All other hazardous waste facilities shall locate outside the cone of depression created by pumping a well field for 90 days unless an effective hydrogeologic barrier to vertical flow exists. This determination shall be made by a qualified hydrologist. 
L.  Depth to Groundwater. Residuals repositories, other land disposal facilities and any facilities with subsurface storage and/or treatment are prohibited in areas where the highest anticipated elevation of underlying groundwater is 25 feet or less from the lowest subsurface point of the facility. 
At all facilities, the foundation of all containment structures at the facility must be capable of withstanding hydraulic pressure gradients to prevent failure due to settlement, compression, uplift, or other geologic hazard or soil failure, as certified by a California Registered Geotechnical Engineer. 
M.  Groundwater Monitoring. Residuals repositories land disposal facilities, and facilities with subsurface storage and/or treatment, must develop a program that successfully satisfies the RWQCB (Regional Water Quality Control Board) permit requirements for groundwater monitoring. 
N.  Existing Groundwater Quality. Residuals repositories and other land disposal facilities are allowed only where the uppermost water-bearing zone or aquifer is presently mineralized (by natural or human-induced conditions) to the extent that it could not reasonably be considered for beneficial use. 
All other facilities located in areas where existing groundwater quality is Class 1 or Class 2 shall provide increased spill containment and inspection measures, as determined by a qualified hydrologist, the City Engineer, and the General Manager of the Monte Vista Water District. 
O.  Major Aquifer Recharge Area. Residual repositories are prohibited within any area known to be, or suspected of, supplying principal recharge to a regional aquifer. 
Facilities with subsurface storage or treatment must be located at least one-half mile away from potential drinking water sources and well sites. 
All other facilities located in areas known to be, or suspected of, providing recharge to an existing water supply well shall provide for increased spill containment, inspection, and other measures. 
P.  Soil Permeability. Soil permeability requirements for disposal and subsurface treatment and storage facilities shall conform to those required by the State Water Resources Control Board (pursuant to Title 23, Subchapter 15, Section 2531(b)(1) of the California Code of Regulations). 
All other aboveground facilities shall have engineered structural design features common to other types of industrial facilities, including spill containment, monitoring devices, and inspection measures. 
Q.  Air Emissions: Non-Attainment Areas. All facilities with air emissions located in non-attainment areas and emitting air contaminants in excess of established limits will require review and permits from the South Coast Air Quality Management District Agency. A risk assessment must show that this contribution is not significant when compared to the emissions from transportation of hazardous waste out of this area. 
R.  Air Emissions: Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) Areas. All facilities with air emissions located in the region which are classified under the PSD regulations are required to meet the plans and regulations of the air quality agency of each district. These facilities, however, may not be located near or within national parks, wilderness and memorial areas, and other similarly dedicated areas, as specified in the Clean Air Act. 
S.  Recreation, Cultural, or Aesthetic Resource Areas. All facilities shall be prohibited in close proximity to or within areas of recreation, cultural, or aesthetic value as determined by the Community Development Director, City Engineer, Planning Commission and/or City Council. 
T.  Areas of Potential Mineral Deposits. Residual repositories and other land disposal facilities shall not be located on or near lands classified as containing mineral deposits of significance by California's Mineral Land Class Maps and Reports, and those mineral resources indicated in the Conservation Element of the City of Montclair General Plan. 
All other facilities shall avoid locating on or near lands classified as containing mineral deposits of significance if the use or preservation of the mineral deposit would be restricted or prevented. 
U.  Proximity to Areas of Waste Generation. Subject to other standards and criteria described herein, all facilities shall be located in areas best suited for providing services to the hazardous waste generators. Facilities which will primarily serve generators from outside the City must demonstrate why the facility cannot be located closer to the points of hazardous waste generation to be serviced. 
V.  Transportation Safety. Transportation serving a specified hazardous waste facility shall be confined to designated truck routes, as shown on the City of Montclair Development Plan for Circulation and Transportation. Distance traveled on minor roads shall be minimal. The City may require the facility proponents to pay user fees to ensure proper road construction and maintenance necessary to accommodate the anticipated increase in traffic due to the facility and the safe transportation of hazardous waste. 
Facilities shall be located such that any minor routes to and from State or interstate divided highways to or from the facility are used primarily by trucks, and the number of nonindustrial structures (homes, hospitals, schools, etc.) along such routes is minimal. 
The proposed routes shall be demonstrated to be safe with regard to road design and construction, accident rates, excessive traffic, etc., and have good access to and from major transportation routes. The transportation of hazardous waste and materials shall be limited to nonpeak traffic hours only. 
The facility proponent shall evaluate the population at risk based on the Federal Highway Administration's Guidelines for applying criteria to designate routes for transporting hazardous materials. The population at risk factor shall not exceed that for similar existing facilities and sites with lower factors. 
W.  Impact on Level of Service. Any impact on the traffic level of service on the routes serving the facility shall be mitigated, pursuant to the findings of a traffic impact study. The changes in the ratio of route capacity to average annual daily traffic shall be negligible after calculating the number of trucks on the major and minor routes expected to service the facility. 
X.  Protect Environmentally Sensitive Areas. Specified hazardous waste facilities shall be prohibited from impairing the viability of critical habitats of threatened, rare or endangered species, wetlands or prime agricultural lands as defined in general, regional, State and federal plans. A protective buffer zone shall be established based on an environmental impact study and risk assessment conducted at the time of permit review. When siting of hazardous waste management facilities is proposed in or near such areas, overriding public services needs must be demonstrated. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.708)  
11.54.080 - General conditions. 
A.  General Conditions. The City may impose, as necessary, conditions and standards other than those presented here in order to achieve the purposes of this chapter and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
B.  Modifications. Any modifications of the types and quantities of hazardous waste to be managed at the facility which were not included in the approved application for land use are subject to review and approval by the City before such modifications occur at the facility. 
C.  Waste Minimizations. No hazardous waste facility project will be approved if it significantly undercuts incentives for waste minimization by hazardous waste generators. 
D.  Affective Responsibility. Prior to issuance of an occupancy permit to begin the use identified in the land use decision, the applicant shall show proof that it has met all the financial responsibility requirements imposed by the Department of Health Services and any other federal, state and local agency. 
E.  Closure Plan. The owner or operator of a hazardous waste facility project shall, prior to the local land use decision, submit to the Planning Department a written closure plan approved by the Department of Health Services. All revisions to such closure plans shall also be submitted to the Planning Department. 
F.  Reports. The owner or operator of a facility shall report annually to the Community Development Director the amount, type and disposition of all wastes processed by the facility. Included in the report shall be copies of all manifests showing the delivery and types of hazardous wastes and a map showing the exact location of quantities and types of materials placed in repositories or otherwise. The frequency of these reports may be increased or decreased to reflect the nature of the facility and those materials handled. 
G.  Extremely Hazardous Waste. Any storage, treatment, disposal or transportation of "extremely hazardous waste" as defined in Section 25115 of the Health and Safety Code by the facility owner/operator shall be reported to the Community Development Director at least 48 hours prior to such storage, treatment, disposal or transportation. 
H.  Contingency Operation Plan. Every hazardous waste facility project must have a contingency operation plan approved by the California Department of Health Services (DHS). A copy of the contingency plan approved by DHS shall be maintained at the facility. The facility owner or operator shall provide a current copy of the contingency plan to the Chief of Police, Fire Chief, each hospital within 10 miles, and the County Department of Environmental Health. 
I.  Emergency Response Plan. The emergency response plan shall be updated annually, signed by all management personnel at the facility, and distributed to all local emergency response agencies and the Community Development Director. 
J.  Emergency Response Procedures. The owners or operators of all facilities shall prepare and submit an annual emergency response preparedness report to the Community Development Director. Such report shall be initialed by each person at the facility who has emergency response responsibilities. 
K.  Environmental Monitoring Report. The owners or operators of all facilities shall submit an annual air, soil and groundwater monitoring report to the Community Development Director. 
L.  Safety and Security. The owners or operators of all facilities shall prevent the unknowing entry and minimize the possibility for unauthorized entry of persons, livestock, or wild animals onto any portion of the facility by means of a 24-hour surveillance system, perimeter fencing and appropriate signage. 
M.  Complaints: Forwarding. The owner or operator of a hazardous waste facility shall immediately send copies of all complaints as to facility operations and copies of all inspection reports made by other local, State or federal agencies to the Community Development Director. 
N.  Excess Volume. No hazardous waste facility shall be sited if such facility will manage a volume or type of hazardous waste in excess of that generated within the City and not currently being managed by a facility located in Montclair unless satisfactory compensation is made to the City of a joint power or if governmental agreement provides otherwise. Special findings justifying such excess volume or oversaturation shall be made as part of the conditional use permit requirements for mandatory findings. 
O.  Compliance Costs. All costs of compliance with this chapter shall be borne by the facility owner or operator. 
P.  Release Response Costs. The facility owner or operator shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the City and its officers, agents, employees or contractors for responding to a release or threatened release of hazardous wastes at or in route to or from the facility. 
Q.  Indemnification. The applicant agrees to protect, defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City and its City Council, City Attorney, and all officers, employees and agents of the City against and from all claims, actions, or liabilities relating to the land use decision or arising out of its implementation at the site. 
R.  Monitoring. Upon reasonable notice, and for the purpose of ensuring compliance with all standards, conditions, and other requirements which the City is authorized to enforce under its police power, City officials or their designated representatives may enter the premises on which a hazardous waste facility permit has been granted. 
S.  Enforcement. The City may employ any and all methods permitted by law to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.709)  
Chapter 11.56 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
Sections: 
 
11.56.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is created for the purpose of recognizing the desirability of establishing guidelines for the preservation, restoration and protection of historic and cultural resources within the City. The guidelines are considered necessary in order for the public and the City to work together in preserving those elements of Montclair's heritage which may now, or in the future, be endangered. The purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.  Encourage public knowledge, understanding and appreciation of the City's past; 
B.  Strengthen civic and neighborhood pride in the beauty and architecture of the past; 
C.  Preserve diverse architectural styles and designs reflecting phases of the City's heritage; 
D.  Promote the enjoyment and use of cultural resources appropriate for the education and restoration of the City; 
E.  Encourage new construction and exterior modification of historical buildings that are compatible with the historical character of such buildings; 
F.  Protect and enhance property values and to provide possible added benefits to the City and its inhabitants through the exploration of creative financial incentives for preservation; 
G.  Encourage the adaptive recycling or reuse of existing historic landmarks. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-10.101)  
11.56.020 - Area of application. 
This chapter shall apply to all historical landmarks within the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-10.102)  
11.56.030 - Historic Preservation Commission—Appointed. 
The Planning Commission shall be appointed as the Historic Preservation Commission. Meeting times shall be the regular meeting times of the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-10.104)  
11.56.040 - Administration. 
The Community Development Director shall act as secretary to the Historic Preservation Commission and shall be the custodian of its records, conduct official correspondence, and generally coordinate the clerical and technical work of the Historic Preservation Commission in administering this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-10.105)  
11.56.050 - Powers and duties. 
The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  Administer the provisions of this chapter; 
B.  Perform such other advisory functions as may be delegated from time to time to the Historic Preservation Commission by the City Council; 
C.  Maintain a current register of landmark designations for public use and information. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-10.106)  
11.56.060 - Landmark designation—Criteria. 
A building or structure may be designated a historic landmark if it is found that one or more of the following conditions exist with reference to such building or structure: 
A.  The proposed landmark is particularly representative of a historical period, type, style, region or way of life; 
B.  The proposed landmark is an example of a type of building which was once common but is now rare; 
C.  The proposed landmark is one of the best remaining examples of a particular architectural type or style in the area; 
D.  The proposed landmark is identified with persons or events significant in local, State or national history; 
E.  The proposed landmark is representative of the notable work of a builder, designer or architect. 
(Prior code § 9-10.107)  
11.56.070 - Landmark designation—Procedure. 
A.  Any person may request the designation of real property as a landmark for the purpose of preserving an identified cultural resource on the property or portions of the real property by submitting an application for such designation to the Historic Preservation Commission. The City Council may initiate such an application on its own motion. When the property is privately owned, the application shall include the written consent of the property owner. 
B.  Any such proposal shall be filed with the Community Development Department upon the prescribed form and shall include the following data: 
1.  Assessor's parcel number and legal description of site; 
2.  Description detailing the special aesthetic, cultural, architectural, or engineering interest or value of the proposed landmark; 
3.  Sketches, drawings, photographs or other descriptive material; 
4.  Statement of condition of structure; 
5.  Other information requested by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
C.  Proposals shall first be reviewed by the Development Review Committee with comments and recommendations from the Montclair Foundation for History and Art forwarded to the Historic Preservation Commission. 
D.  The application shall then be referred to the Historic Preservation Commission for review and report to the City Council as to conformance with the purposes and criteria of this chapter. The Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing. The Historic Preservation Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the designation to the City Council. 
E.  The City Council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed designation so transmitted. The City Council may approve, modify and approve, or deny the proposed designation. 
F.  The property included in any such designation shall be subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter and any further controls specified in the designating chapter. 
G.  The designation of historic landmark shall run with the land and be binding upon the subsequent owners of the real property. Upon the designation, the real property owner shall sign a certificate of historic landmark designation and shall file said certificate for recordation with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office. 
H.  A landmark shall be identified by an approved City marker. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-10.108)  
11.56.080 - Landmark alteration—Permit procedure. 
The following procedures shall be followed in processing applications for approval to do work on landmarks covered by this chapter: 
A.  The Building Official shall report any application for a permit to do work that affects the exterior appearance of a designated landmark to the Planning Division. If the Planning Division determines that such proposed work will affect the exterior appearance of the landmark, the application shall be referred to the Historic Preservation Commission. 
B.  Such applications shall be accompanied by such plans and materials as are required by the Historic Preservation Commission and are reasonably necessary for the proper review of the proposed work. 
C.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall complete its review and make a decision within 30 days of the application being accepted as complete. All decisions, interim or final, shall be made at regular meetings of the Historic Preservation Commission. The Historic Preservation Commission's decision shall be in writing and shall state the findings of fact and reasons relied upon in reaching its decision. This decision may be appealed pursuant to Section 11.56.120 of this chapter. 
D.  Applications for demolition of designated landmarks or relocation permits to relocate designated landmarks from within City boundaries may only be approved by the City Council upon a showing of hardship by the applicant or the owner of the subject property pursuant to Section 11.56.100 of this chapter. 
E.  Notice of the date, place, time and purpose of the Historic Preservation Commission hearing shall be given by first class mail to the applicants and the owners and occupants of the designated site at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
F.  Any person or entity who fails to obtain permits or plan review approval to do work or to do work in compliance with permits or plan review approval obtained shall be guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 06-889 § 13; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-10.109)  
11.56.090 - Landmark preservation—Incentives. 
The Historic Preservation Commission shall promote the use of appropriate preservation incentives to encourage owners to designate, maintain, preserve and improve their culturally significant property. Incentives shall be authorized upon approval by the City Council, and shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  Mills Act contracts which will lower property taxes of designated structures; 
B.  Preservation easements on the facades of designated buildings to enable owners to receive income tax deductions; 
C.  Use of the California State Historical Building Code to provide alternative building regulations for rehabilitation of designated structures; 
D.  Technical assistance for designated structures through the City's Building Division; 
E.  Reduced processing fees for appropriate rehabilitation of designated historic landmarks; 
F.  Assistance in processing applications for federal investment tax credits for rehabilitation of landmarks on the National Register of Historic Places; 
G.  Grants and loans for appropriate rehabilitation of designated historic landmarks; 
H.  Awards and other symbols of recognition of exemplary rehabilitation. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-10.110)  
11.56.100 - Landmark—Certificate of hardship. 
A.  A certificate of hardship may be granted permitting demolition, moving, subdivision, new construction or alteration for properties that have been denied an "alterations to historic landmark permit." 
B.  In determining whether substantial hardship exists, the Historic Preservation Commission shall consider the evidence submitted by the applicant and evidence which demonstrates, but is not limited to the following: 
1.  Bonafide efforts to rent or sell the property have been unsuccessful; 
2.  Approval or conditional approval to do work permitted by this chapter will not enable the applicant to rent or sell the property at a reasonable rate of return; 
3.  It is not economically or technically feasible to renovate or undertake an alternative development compatible with the permit criteria outlined in this chapter; 
4.  Personal or economic circumstances exist which preclude the applicant from performing work in compliance with the permit criteria outlined in this chapter; 
5.  Any other showing of hardship exists as may be found by the City Council. 
C.  The Historic Preservation Commission may delay the decision on the application for a period not to exceed six months to investigate plans to allow for a reasonable use of or return from the property or other measures to preserve the property, including selling the property to an individual or group that would preserve it. 
D.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall review the evidence presented at the scheduled public hearing, and take action by resolution stating the findings and facts relied upon in making the decision. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-10.111)  
11.56.110 - State Historic Building Code. 
The California State Historic Building Code (SHBC) provides alternative building regulations for the rehabilitation, preservation, restoration or relocation of structures designated as historic landmarks. The most current SHBC may be used for any designated historic landmark in the City's building permit procedure when the Director of Community Development makes the determination that appropriate alterations cannot feasibly occur utilizing the current Uniform Building Code. 
(Prior code § 9-10.112)  
11.56.120 - Appeals. 
Any interested party may appeal a decision of the Historic Preservation Commission by filing a Notice of Appeal with the City Council no later than 10 days after the Historic Preservation Commission's decision is made. Said appeal shall state the grounds upon which the appeal is made. Said notice shall be accompanied by a fee equal to the fee set by resolution of the City Council for zone variances for homeowners. The City Council shall schedule a public hearing to be held no later than 30 days after the notice of appeal is filed, and shall render its decision within 30 days of said hearing date. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 9-10.113)  
11.56.130 - Ordinary maintenance and repair. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any designated site covered by this chapter that does not involve a change in design, material, or external appearance thereof, nor does this chapter prevent work on such feature when the Building Official certifies to the Historic Preservation Commission that such action is required for the public safety due to an unsafe or dangerous condition which cannot be rectified through the use of the California State Historical Building Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-10.114)  
11.56.140 - Duty to keep in good repair. 
The owner, occupant, or other person in actual charge of a landmark shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such improvement, building or structure, and all interior portions where whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of any exterior architectural feature. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-10.115)  
Chapter 11.58 - HOME OCCUPATIONS 
Sections: 
 
11.58.010 - Statement of intent. 
Recognizing that unrestricted use of residential properties for purposes of an occupational nature other than that normally associated with home living has a detrimental effect on both the residential area in which the occupations are conducted and the areas properly designated for such uses, and further recognizing that this detrimental effect results in the depreciation of values, welfare, happiness and morale of the entire community, it is the purpose of this chapter to eliminate this detrimental effect by creating criteria for the establishment and conditions for the continuance of home occupations. This chapter shall not apply to foster homes or children's day-care facilities. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1814 (part))  
11.58.020 - Classification. 
A.  Home occupations may include the following: 
1.  Secondary business offices when a business has its principal office, staff and equipment located elsewhere; 
2.  The home office of a salesman when all sales are consummated by telephone and/or written orders with no commodities or displays on the premises; 
3.  Drafting, designing, and the like, using only the normal drafting equipment; and 
4.  Such other uses as are found by the Planning Commission, and approved by the City Council, to be a home occupation in accordance with the standards as set forth in Section 11.58.030 of this chapter. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the Planning Commission to ascertain all pertinent facts concerning such use and, by resolution of record, to set forth its findings and reasons for designating such specific classification for such use. Such resolutions shall be referred to the City Council, and, if approved by the City Council, such designated classification shall govern unless the same is revoked as provided in Section 11.58.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1814 (part))  
11.58.030 - Criteria. 
The following criteria shall be employed for the evaluation of a home occupation: 
A.  No employment of help other than the members of the resident family; 
B.  No use of materials or mechanical equipment which creates sound, vibration, odors, or other effects which can be heard, felt, or otherwise sensed upon adjoining property or a public right-of-way; 
C.  No commodities sold upon the premises; 
D.  No advertising signs displayed which are visible from any street or highway and no vehicles with advertising thereon kept standing in front of the dwelling; 
E.  The use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that normal to the neighborhood in which it is located; 
F.  It shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises other than a vehicle not to exceed one-half-ton rated capacity; 
G.  No excessive or unsightly storage of materials or supplies, indoors or outdoors; 
H.  Not more than one room in the dwelling shall be employed for the home occupation; 
I.  No building or space outside the main building shall used for home occupation purposes; 
J.  In no way shall the appearance of the structure be so altered or the conduct of the occupation within the structure be such that the structure may be reasonably recognized as serving a nonresidential use (either by color, materials, construction, lighting, signs, sounds or noises, vibration, etc.); and 
K.  There shall be no use of utilities or community facilities beyond that normal to the use of the property for residential purposes. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1814 (part))  
11.58.040 - Revocation. 
A.  A home occupation permit granted in accord-ance with the provisions of this title may be terminated if the Planning Commission and City Council make any of the following findings: 
1.  That any condition of the home occupation permit has been violated; 
2.  That the use has become detrimental to the public health or safety or is deemed to constitute a nuisance; 
3.  That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud; 
4.  That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased or has been suspended for six consecutive months or more; 
5.  That the condition of the premises, or of the neighborhood of which it is a part, has changed so that the use may no longer be justified under the meaning and intent of this chapter. 
B.  After a hearing upon the revocation of a home occupation permit, the Planning Commission shall report its findings of fact and recommendations to the City Council by resolution; and, upon receipt of such recommendation, the City Council shall determine the facts and may revoke, modify, or allow to remain unchanged the home occupation permit in accordance with the City Council's final determination. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1814 (part))  
11.58.050 - Permit nontransferable. 
A home occupation permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferred, assigned, nor used by any person other than the permittee, nor shall such permit authorize such home occupation at any location other than the one for which the permit is granted. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1814 (part))  
Chapter 11.60 - WATER-EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING AND CONSERVATION[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-913, § 4, adopted July 6, 2010, repealed the former Chapter 11.60, §§ 11.60.010—11.60.090, and § 4, of Ord. No. 10-913 enacted a new Chapter 11.60 as set out herein. The former Chapter 11.60 pertained to landscape water conservation and derived from Prior code §§ 9-6.801—9-6.809 and Ord. No. 791. 
 
11.60.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of the Water-Efficient Landscape and Conservation Ordinance is to: 
A.  Recognize that landscaping enhances the aesthetic appearance of developments and communities. 
B.  Support the beneficial, efficient, and responsible use of water resources for all customers/users within the City of Montclair. 
C.  Retain the land's natural hydrological role within the Santa Ana Watershed and promote the infiltration of surface water into the groundwater in the Chino Basin. 
D.  Acknowledge that landscape water use accounts for more than 60 percent of all domestic water use in the City of Montclair and the need to utilize water and other resources as efficiently as possible. 
E.  Promote the use of low-water-use plants and minimize the use of cool season turf. 
F.  Preserve existing natural vegetation and the incorporation of native plants, plant communities, and ecosystems into landscape design, where possible. 
G.  Conserve potable water by maximizing the use of recycled water and other water conserving technology for appropriate applications. 
H.  Encourage the appropriate design, installation, maintenance, and management of landscapes so that water demand can be decreased, runoff can be retained, and flooding can be reduced without a decline in the quality or quantity of landscapes. 
I.  Increase public education about water conservation and efficient water management. 
J.  Reduce or eliminate water waste. 
K.  Be at least as effective in conserving water as the model ordinance adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 65595, commonly known as Assembly Bill 1881. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.020 - Authority. 
The Director of Community Development or his/her designee shall have the duty and authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. For projects requiring Planning Commission or City Council review and approval, additional conditions may be imposed as may be deemed necessary in order to fully carry out the provisions and intent of this chapter. 
No building permits or design approval shall be granted for projects subject to this chapter without prior review and approval of the Landscaping Documentation Package as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.030 - Applicability. 
Effective September 1, 2010, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all of the following types of landscape projects: 
A.  New construction and rehabilitated landscape areas associated with all public agency projects, private commercial, industrial, and institutional projects, and developer-initiated single-family subdivisions and multifamily residential projects that require a building permit and/or design review and have a net aggregate project landscape area equal to or greater than a total of 2,500 square feet. 
B.  New construction and rehabilitated residential landscape areas associated with a homeowner-installed project (do-it-yourself or contractor projects) that require a building permit and have a total net aggregate project landscape area equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.040 - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Existing landscapes installed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Voluntary upgrades of existing landscaping to meet the general requirements for all properties as listed in this chapter are strongly encouraged. 
B.  Registered local, state, or federal historical sites. 
C.  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system. 
D.  Mined land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system. 
E.  Botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.050 - General landscape requirements for all properties. 
Landscaping shall be required for all residential, commercial, and industrial properties. It shall be the responsibility of the Planning Division to regulate and control the scope, quantity, and quality of all landscape development within the City, including, but not limited to street trees, open areas, parking lots, City parkways, front and street side yards, residential tract entries, and establish criteria for hardscape elements such as walls and fences. 
The following landscape standards and requirements shall be used when preparing new landscape plans development projects within the City including modifications to existing planned development(s). 
A.  A landscape design plan shall illustrate a recognizable pattern or theme for the overall improvement of the property and shall incorporate basic design principles of scale, balance, texture, form, and unity. Creativity is encouraged in the preparation of landscape schemes so long as the designs are attractive, easy to maintain, and promote water conservation. 
B.  Each landscape plan shall address functional aspects of landscaping, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Drainage, erosion prevention, and wind barriers. 
2.  Slope Protection. Any disturbed slopes to be revegetated with erosion protective plantings and surfacing. 
3.  Provision for shade, reduction of glare, recreation use, and visual relief. 
4.  Screen adjacent uses from parking or storage areas, trash enclosures, public utilities, and other similar land uses or elements that could cause a negative impact on adjacent uses based on aesthetics, noise, odors, etc. 
5.  Provide landscaping that is compatible with the neighboring uses. 
6.  Relieve solid, unbroken building elevations and/or to soften the appearance of continuous wall planes. 
7.  Specify vines or planted wall coverings to deter graffiti of walls and other architectural surfaces. 
C.  Landscaping plans shall feature the predominate use of water saving plant materials suitable to the local climate that are grouped together into distinct hydrozones (plants having similar water needs and microclimate growing requirements), and be of a variety that will provide a high degree of visual interest during all seasons. 
D.  Concrete and/or asphalt pavement surfaces may not be used within landscape areas, except for required driveways and walkways. 
E.  Plant materials—including vines, shrubs, perennials, ornamental grasses, turf, and groundcover plants—shall comprise a minimum of 50 percent of the landscape area of the front and street side yard areas. Turf grasses may not comprise more than 50 percent of the living plant materials used within any required front and street side yard landscape areas. 
F.  Decorative hardscape elements may not exceed a maximum of 50 percent of a required front and street side yard landscape area. Decorative hardscape elements include appropriately sized fountains or boulders, river rock, cobbles, crushed rock, gravel, organic mulches, walks, decorative pavers, and artificial turf which complement living plant materials, enhances the appearance of the property and structures built thereon, and an integral part of an overall landscape concept. 
G.  Clear Vision Triangle. On all corner lots, in zones with a required front yard, this triangle is defined as an area bounded by the front and side property lines and a line connecting them at two points 30 feet back from their intersection. Within this triangle, no plant material or structure may exceed three feet in height, measured from top of the adjacent curb. 
H.  Painted surfaces or use of artificial plants, except synthetic turf as allowed by this chapter, shall not be permitted under any circumstances. 
I.  Existing healthy and mature trees shall be preserved or relocated elsewhere on the site, wherever feasible. 
J.  Landscaping shall be compatible with the character of landscaping on adjacent property, provided that the quality of the adjacent landscape meets the standards of this chapter. It is not the intent of this section to require the use of identical plant materials or landscape designs. 
K.  All landscaped areas shall be supported by an automatic irrigation system and a backflow prevention assembly according to standard details adopted by the City. All irrigation systems and landscaped areas shall be designed, constructed, and maintained so as to promote water conservation, avoid overspray onto walls and structures, and to prevent water overflow or seepage onto the street, sidewalk, parking areas, or other nonpervious areas to the maximum extent feasible. 
L.  All aboveground irrigation devices, such as timers, Fire Department connections (FDC), double detector check valves (DDC), backflow devices, etc., shall be incorporated into planting areas and located out of public view or screened to minimize the aesthetic impacts to the greatest extent possible. For FDC and DDC devices, the applicant shall consult with the local water purveyor and/or Fire Department to verify technical requirements and to find the least prominent location(s) possible. 
M.  Each landscape plan shall demonstrate a concern for solar access, including exposure and shading of window areas. 
N.  Property owners shall be responsible for regularly maintaining all landscaping in a healthy and vigorous living condition at all times. This requirement shall include proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter and debris, fertilizing, and the regular watering of all plants. Dead vegetation shall be promptly replaced with healthy, living plants in accordance with standard seasonal planting practices. 
O.  In addition to conforming to this chapter, all landscaping shall also conform to the specific landscape requirements contained in all other applicable code sections. If a discrepancy arises between any landscape requirements, the section requiring the most landscaping and stricter design criteria shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.060 - Fences, walls, and retaining walls. 
Fence, wall, and retaining wall materials height and placement are regulated by the provisions of Title 11 herein and require a building permit. Scaled construction plans and details—including dimensions, materials, and finishes—shall be provided for fences and walls including a site plan that shows the location, height, and length of each fence, wall, and retaining wall. No permits shall be issued if this information is not provided or if the information provided is incomplete. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.070 - Parkway standards. 
Property owners shall properly landscape, irrigate and maintain City parkways adjacent to and/or fronting their properties. All work within City parkways shall be reviewed and approved by the City and, depending on the scope of work occurring within the parkway, an encroachment permit or construction permit may be required. 
The following minimum guidelines shall apply to landscaping and improvements within parkway planters: 
A.  Use of a parkway shall be limited to landscaping. At least 75 percent of a curb-adjacent parkway shall be devoted to plant materials and appropriate organic mulching materials. For noncurb-adjacent parkways, landscaping shall be provided and incorporated into the landscaping scheme of the adjoining front or street yard area. 
B.  The placement of any plant materials, hardscape, or structures within a curb adjacent parkway shall not obstruct car doors from opening and/or the ability of passengers to safely exit from parked vehicles. 
C.  New plant materials installed within the parkway shall be water efficient plants that grow to a maximum height of 18 inches or less. The replacement of turf in the parkway with new water conserving plant materials is greatly encouraged. 
D.  No structures shall be allowed in parkways, except for mailboxes when required by the US Postal Service (USPS), or other utility structures as approved by the City Engineer. 
1.  Mail boxes shall be subject to USPS standards, and of a size that is limited to the smallest size necessary to safely secure the mail box and not obstruct visibility. Mail boxes shall not protrude beyond back of curb. 
2.  Mailbox structures shall be designed to be compatible with the design of the main structure it serves. 
E.  Parkway improvements shall not interfere with above- or belowground public or private utilities. Any changes or damages to any public or private utility caused by the installation shall be repaired at the sole expense of the property owner. 
F.  Only street trees listed on the official City Street Tree List shall be planted within the parkway. City street trees shall not be pruned, removed or damaged in any way. Removed or damaged trees shall be replaced with trees of similar size and maturity as that which was removed or as otherwise required by the Community Development Director. 
G.  No cacti, thorny plants, or other hazardous plant species shall be allowed. 
H.  The growing of crops, fruit-bearing trees, or vegetables shall not be permitted. 
I.  All rock/stones, bark and mulch shall be no higher than the plane established by the top of the adjacent curb and the sidewalk. Grouted rock or stonework shall be subject to review and approval of the City Engineer. 
J.  Only natural earth tone colors will be permitted for mulch, stones, or rocks and shall be subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director and the City Engineer. 
K.  Proper maintenance of parkways shall be the sole responsibility of the adjacent property owner at all times and at no expense to the City of Montclair. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.080 - Review process. 
The review of all landscaping projects subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be performed by the Community Development Department pursuant to its general development review process for projects within the City as specified in Chapters 11.06 and 11.80. Landscaping may be reviewed as an individual project or as part of a larger development review submittal, whichever applies. 
A.  Submittal. Prior to issuance of a building permit or approval of an entitlement where landscaping is required, the project applicant shall submit a Landscape Documentation Package to the City for review and approval. The Landscape Documentation Package shall contain the information required by Section 11.60.110 herein. 
The Landscape Documentation Package shall include certification indicating that the Landscape Concept Plan and water use calculations have been prepared by or under the supervision of a California licensed landscape architect and are certified to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Review for Compliance. Landscape Documentation Package will be reviewed for completeness and compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Water use calculations shall be consistent with calculations contained herein and shall be provided to the local water purveyor, as appropriate, under procedures determined by the City. 
Following a review of the Landscape Documentation Package, the City will approve the Landscape Documentation Package if it is complete and in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and will issue a permit, approve a plan check, or proceed to obtain formal project design review and approval from the Planning Commission or City Council. If the Landscape Documentation Package is not complete or not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, it will be returned to the applicant for required corrections. Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be grounds for denial of the project. 
C.  Design Approval. A Landscape Documentation Package shall be approved when the Community Development Director verifies that the proposed Landscape Concept Plan for the project complies with the provisions of this chapter, other applicable provisions of this code, and when any applicable land use permit or other entitlement requirements have been fulfilled. A copy of the approved plan will be kept on file in order to use at a later date to ensure that the plan was implemented as permitted and maintained as required. 
D.  Plan Check. When a Landscape Documentation Package has been approved by the Community Development Director, it shall be submitted to the Building Division and/or City Engineer for plan check review and subsequent issuance of required permits. Plans submitted for plan check review shall be shall be consistent with and in compliance with the approved Landscape Documentation Package for a project. 
E.  Inspection Prior to Occupancy. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or a final approval of a building permit, a field inspection requested by the owner must be conducted by the City to determine that materials have been installed in accordance with the approved Landscape Concept Plan. 
F.  Verification. Verification of compliance of the landscape installation with the approved plans shall be obtained through a Certification of Completion in conjunction with a Certificate of Occupancy or final permit approval process. The landscape architect shall submit, prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or final approval inspection, a sealed letter of concurrence certifying that the project has been implemented in accordance with the approved plans signed and sealed by the landscape architect. 
Any as-built changes made during construction and approved by the landscape architect must be noted in digital and conventional drawings delivered to the Director with the written letter of certification. This certification does not make the landscape architect responsible for the success of the project, responsible for required maintenance, or responsible for the long-term survivability of the living materials used in the project. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.090 - Landscape architect required. 
All landscape plans for landscaping projects subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect and bear the official seal and signature of the landscape architect responsible for their preparation. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.100 - Plan readability and enforceability. 
The landscape plan is a legal document that is binding on the developer or owner, successors, and assigns. The landscape plan is a commitment to quality and is a long-term maintenance agreement. Therefore, the plans must be complete and legible and will not be accepted if information is illegible or missing. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.110 - Landscape Documentation Package. 
Projects subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be required to provide a complete Landscape Documentation Package meeting the intent and design criteria of this chapter. The Landscape Documentation Package shall include the following items: 
A.  Development Review Application accompanied by the associated fee; 
B.  Landscape concept plan; 
C.  Water budget; 
D.  Landscape construction drawings (including a grading plan, irrigation plan, plant plan); 
E.  Soils test presenting laboratory analysis of soil samples and recommendations; and 
F.  Approved Water Quality Management Plan (WQMP). 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.120 - Landscape concept plan requirements. 
The Landscape Concept Plan shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect. Any documentation packages submitted without the signature of a licensed landscape architect shall not be accepted for review. The Landscape Concept Plan shall include the following elements. 
A.  Design Statement and Concept. The design statement and concept plan shall demonstrate awareness of the water conservation goals and design standards and specifications contained in this chapter. 
B.  Landscape Site Plan. The landscape site plan shall be drawn to scale, fully dimensioned and detailed, and shall include the following information: 
1.  A north arrow, scale, site boundaries, calculation of the total landscape area, identification of topographic features on and adjacent to the site, approximate slope percentages, and solar exposure. 
2.  Location of all buildings, parking areas, and any other physical structures/improvements on the project site including fences and walls, light fixtures, meters and utility boxes, transformers, fire equipment, other ground mounted equipment, etc. 
3.  Proposed hydrozones, plant palette (with botanic and common names), and planting notes (i.e., number and size of plants, planting distances, etc.). 
4.  Location of existing plant materials to be preserved (including street trees) on the site. 
5.  Tree staking, plant installation, soil preparation details, and other applicable planting and installation details. 
6.  Any Water Quality Management Plan requirement as it relates to landscape design. 
7.  Any other such information that may be required by the Community Development Director that is reasonable and necessary to determine that the landscape design plan meets the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  Plant Selection and Grouping Criteria. The following criteria shall be considered in selecting plants and for plan preparation: 
1.  Unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter or the Montclair Municipal Code, any plant may be used in the landscape plan if the EAWU (estimated annual applied water use) does not exceed the MAWA (maximum annual water allowance). 
2.  Select plants based upon their adaptability to the climate, geologic, and topographical conditions of the site. The use of long-lived drought tolerant or native and/or regionally grown plant species are recommended to meet MAWA limits. A water-efficient landscape material list meeting these criteria is on file with the Community Development Department. 
3.  Short-lived annual or exotic plant species may be utilized in moderation as a supplement to the long-lived materials. 
4.  Group plants having similar water needs together in distinct hydrozones. 
5.  Protect and preserve existing native species, particularly healthy trees and natural areas whenever feasible. 
D.  Minimum Plant Quantities and Sizes. 
1.  Street Trees. All Street Tree selections shall be consistent with the approved street tree plan. Ultimate placement and spacing will depend on tree species, parkway width, existing in-ground or overhead utility poles and wires, and/or any other extraordinary field condition as determined by the Community Development Director. 
a.  For residential properties a minimum of one street tree per street frontage and/or two street trees for every corner lot. Minimum tree size shall be 24-inch box size. 
b.  For nonresidential properties. A minimum of one 24-inch box size street tree shall be planted per property street frontage, spaced at 35 feet on center, or as otherwise specified by the Community Development Director. 
2.  Trees. A minimum of one 15-gallon-sized tree shall be planted for every 300 square feet of landscaped area on the property. 
a.  One tree or 20 percent of the required number of trees (whichever is greatest) shall be in a minimum box size of 24 inches. 
b.  Required trees may be located anywhere within the street yard planting area at least five feet away from adjacent public sidewalks. 
3.  Shrubs. A minimum of one shrub shall be planted for each 25 square feet of front and street corner side yard areas. Minimum shrub size at installation shall be five-gallon size or one-gallon size for California Native shrubs. 
4.  Ground Covers. Ground covers shall be installed in all landscaped areas at a quantity and spacing distance that will achieve at least 80 percent coverage within one year from the date of planting. 
5.  Turf—Minimize the Use of Turf. Where turf is installed, the following standards shall be considered: 
a.  Turf areas shall be used wisely in response to functional needs and shall not exceed the MAWA. 
b.  Use of warm-season turf is strongly encouraged. 
c.  Limit the use of turf to high use areas or for specific recreational uses. 
d.  Turf shall not be permitted on slopes greater than 4.1. 
e.  All turf areas shall be separated from other landscaped areas by concrete curbing, redwood header board, or other acceptable and durable material. 
f.  Use of turf within parking area landscape islands is strongly discouraged. In no case shall turf be allowed in any landscaping islands or planters with less than an eight-foot dimension in any direction. 
6.  Avoid use of invasive species of plants especially near parks, buffers, greenbelts, water bodies, and open spaces because of their potential to cause harm in sensitive areas. 
7.  Use organic mulch within developed landscapes to retain moisture. At least two inches of mulch shall be used in all nonturf planting areas and slopes of 4.1 or greater. For slopes of 4.1 or greater, jute netting or other slope stabilization measures shall be required. 
E.  Water Features. 
1.  Recirculating water systems shall be used for decorative water features. 
2.  Where available, recycled water shall be used as the source for water features (excluding swimming pools and spas). 
3.  The surface area of a water feature shall be included in the MAWA calculation with the evaporation rate being equivalent to that of a high-water-use plant. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.130 - Synthetic turf. 
Synthetic turf may be incorporated as an element of a landscaping plan as a substitute for natural turf and for the purposes of water conservation. The Community Development Director shall review and approve all requests to install synthetic turf subject to the following criteria: 
A.  Synthetic turf shall consist of lifelike individual blades of grass that emulate real grass in look and color and have a minimum pile height of one and one-half inches. The use of indoor or outdoor plastic or nylon carpeting as a substitute for artificial turf or natural turf is prohibited. 
B.  Synthetic turf shall be limited to a maximum of 50 percent of the landscape area visible to a public street, and shall be permitted only in combination with other live plant materials (i.e., trees, shrubs, and groundcover) that are designed to achieve an overall natural landscaped appearance for the property. 
C.  In no case shall synthetic turf be used in combination with natural turf in the same landscape area, or in a landscaping scheme where both elements can be viewed together. 
D.  Proper drainage shall be provided for all synthetic turf installations to prevent excess runoff or pooling of water. In some cases, a drainage plan prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer may be required. 
E.  Synthetic turf shall be professionally installed and routinely maintained to effectively simulate the appearance of a well-maintained live lawn. The turf shall be maintained in a green fadeless condition and shall be maintained free of weeds, debris, tears, holes, and impressions. 
F.  Synthetic turf shall not be included as part of the landscape area when calculating the MAWA. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.140 - Development of a water budget. 
To promote water conservation, projects subject to this chapter shall develop a water budget. The water budget is based on the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA), which is a calculation of the maximum amount of water allowed to be used within the landscape area, and the estimated applied water use (EAWU), which is the actual amount of water to be used within the landscape area. The EAWU cannot exceed the MAWA. 
A.  Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA). A landscape's maximum applied water allowance shall be calculated using the following formula: 
MAWA = (ETo) (0.7) (LA) (0.62) 
Where: 
ETo = Evapotranspiration Rate 
0.7 = Evapotranspiration (ET) Adjustment Factor 
LA = Landscape Area 
0.62 = Conversion factor (to gallons) 
For special landscape areas, the ET adjustment factor is 1.0. When the project area consists of both standard and special landscape areas, calculate each area separately and combine to receive a final MAWA. 
B.  Estimated Applied Water Use (EAWU): A landscape's estimated applied water use shall be calculated using the following formula: 
Where: 
ETo = Evapotranspiration Rate 
0.62 = Conversion factor (to gallons) 
PF = Plant Factor 
HA = Hydrozone area (square feet) 
0.71 = Irrigation efficiency 
SLA = Special Landscape Area (square feet) 
C.  Water Budget Calculations. All water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements: 
1.  The plant factor used shall be from "Water Use Classification of Landscape Species" (WUCOLS). Plant factor ranges from 0.0 to 0.3 for low-water-use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate-water-use plants and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high-water-use plants. 
2.  All water features shall be included in the high-water-use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low-water-use hydrozone. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.150 - Landscape construction plans. 
A.  Grading Plan. Grading onsite shall be designed to minimize unnecessary soil compaction, erosion, and water waste. Grading plans must satisfy City grading ordinances and be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package. The grading plan shall include the following information: 
1.  Locations of all physical improvements on the site, including buildings/structures, paving, curbing, walls/fences, etc., with grade elevations noted. 
2.  All cut-and-fill slopes indicated with appropriate symbols and noting slope ratios. 
3.  Sufficient information about the grades of adjacent properties and streets so as to make clear the relationship of the subject property to the adjacent properties. 
4.  Drainage patterns and improvements. 
5.  Erosion and sediment control measures for all phases of the construction project. 
B.  Soil Testing. Soil testing shall be performed after mass grading, but prior to landscape installation, to ensure the selection of appropriate plant material that is suitable for the site and reported in a soil management plan. The soil management plan shall include: 
1.  Determination of soil texture indicating the available water holding capacity. 
2.  An approximate soil infiltration rate as measured or derived from a soil texture/infiltration rate table. A range of infiltration rates shall be noted where appropriate. 
3.  Measure of pH and total soluble salts. 
4.  Recommended soil amendments. 
C.  Water Management Plan. A water management plan shall be prepared and submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The Plan shall include the following information: 
1.  A description of the site conditions and the anticipated water requirements in inches per year, and water budget for the various hydrozones identified in the Landscape Concept Plan. The water management plan shall include calculations demonstrating an overall water budget that requires no more irrigation than the 0.7 of the ET adjustment factor. This includes full calculations for both the MAWA and EAWU. 
2.  Identify the party(ies) responsible for implementation of the water management plan. 
3.  Describe water delivery systems, including the type of irrigation system to be used, and water conservation methods to be applied. 
4.  Specify seasonal irrigation water schedules or procedures for programming proposed SMART controllers. 
5.  Provide a maintenance schedule for the ongoing operation and maintenance of the irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.160 - Irrigation requirements. 
A.  Irrigation Plan. The irrigation plan shall be prepared and submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package for review and approval. The plan shall use the same format and scale as the Landscape Concept Plan and shall include the following information: 
1.  The location and size of water meter(s) used for landscape irrigation purposes. 
2.  The location, type, and size of all components of the irrigation system including automatic controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, recycled water systems, moisture sensing devices, rain cutoff switches, quick couplers, and backflow prevention devices. 
3.  The static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply. 
4.  The flow rate (GPM), application rate/inches per hour (IPH), and design operating pressure (PSI) for each station. 
5.  An irrigation schedule that identifies the runtime (in minutes per cycle), number of cycles per day, and number of days per week. 
6.  The amount of applied water (in 100 cubic feet) recommended on a monthly and annual basis. 
7.  A regular maintenance schedule for checking, adjusting, and repairing irrigation equipment and resetting automatic controllers. 
B.  Irrigation System Design Criteria. 
1.  Dedicated (i.e., separate) landscape water meters shall be installed for all projects with landscape areas greater than 5,000 square feet, except for single-family residences. Dedicated landscape water meters are also highly recommended on landscape areas less than 5,000 square feet to facilitate water management. 
2.  Provide separate valves for each plant hydrozone. The planting areas shall be grouped and irrigated in relation to hydrozones based on similarity of water requirements (i.e., turf separate from shrubs and groundcover, full sun exposure areas separate from shade areas, top of slope separate from toe of slope). 
3.  All irrigation systems shall be designed to prevent runoff, overspray, low-head drainage, and other similar conditions to the greatest extent practical. This can be accomplished through the use of low-trajectory spray nozzles to reduce the effect of wind velocity on the spray system and by placing sprinkler heads to reduce or eliminate direct overspray onto impervious areas. 
4.  Soil types and infiltration rates shall be considered when designing irrigation systems. 
5.  Irrigation systems shall be designed, constructed, managed, and maintained to achieve as high an overall efficiency as possible. For the purpose of determining the MAWA, irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.71. Irrigation systems shall be designed, maintained, and managed to meet or exceed 0.71 efficiency. 
6.  All irrigation systems shall include a SMART irrigation controller, or other equivalent technology which automatically adjusts the frequency and/or duration of irrigation events in response to changing weather conditions. 
7.  A rain sensor with an automatic rain shutoff feature shall be required as part of any irrigation system. 
8.  Sprinkler heads and emitters shall have consistent application rates within each control valve circuit. Sprinkler heads shall be selected for proper area coverage, application rate, operating pressure, adjustment capability, and ease of maintenance. 
9.  Soil moisture-sensing devices are recommended where appropriate. 
10.  Narrow or irregularly shaped areas, including turf, with a dimension of less than eight feet in any direction, shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other low volume irrigation technology. 
11.  Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within 24 inches of any impervious surfaces. Allowable irrigation within the setback from impervious surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow nonspray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if: 
a.  The landscape area is adjacent to pervious surfacing and no overspray and runoff occurs. 
b.  The adjacent impervious surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscape areas. 
c.  The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology that will prevent overspray and runoff. 
12.  Nonturf areas on slopes greater than 25 percent shall be irrigated with drip irrigation or other low-volume irrigation technology. 
13.  An antidrain check valve(s) shall be installed to prevent low-head drainage in sprinkler heads. 
14.  A pressure regulator shall be installed when the static water pressure exceeds the maximum recommended operating pressure of the irrigation system. 
C.  Irrigation Maintenance. 
1.  Landscape irrigation shall be maintained to ensure water efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, checking, adjusting, and repairing irrigation equipment; resetting automatic controllers, aerating and dethatching turf areas, replenishing mulch, fertilizing; and pruning and weeding. 
2.  Repair of irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally specified materials or their equivalents. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.170 - Recycled water. 
A.  The installation of recycled water irrigation systems (i.e., dual distribution systems) shall be required to allow for the current and future use of recycled water, unless a written exemption by the Monte Vista Water District has been granted stating that recycled water will not be available in the foreseeable future. 
B.  The recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all local agency, Monte Vista Water District, and state codes and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.180 - Water Quality Management Plan. 
A Water Quality Management Plan (WQMP) combines practices into the landscape, irrigation, and grading design plans to minimize runoff and increase retention and infiltration, and is highly recommended onsite. Each project shall incorporate stormwater management practices into the project design that minimize runoff, increase onsite infiltration, and improve water quality as necessary to comply with applicable stormwater regulations. 
A.  Implementing stormwater Best Management Practices (BMPs) into the landscape, irrigation, and grading design plans to minimize runoff, and increase retention and infiltration are highly recommended onsite. 
B.  Prior to submitting an application for plans examination, grading permit or building permit, all qualifying land development/redevelopment projects shall submit and receive approval from the City for a WQMP. The WQMP shall identify all BMPs that will be incorporated into the project to control stormwater and nonstormwater pollutants during and after construction and shall be revised as necessary during the life of the project. The WQMP submittal applies to construction projects covered by the NPDES permit and general construction permit as well as construction projects less than five acres. 
C.  No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for a development/redevelopment project without ensuring that all treatment control BMPs as specified in the approved WQMP will be maintained in compliance with the requirements of the municipal permit. To ensure maintenance of BMPs, the owner of the development site shall enter into a permanent stormwater quality BMP maintenance agreement with the City and have the maintenance agreement recorded at the County of San Bernardino. 
D.  Project applicants shall refer to the local agency or Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any stormwater ordinances and WQMPs. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.190 - Modification or waiver from specific requirements. 
The Community Development Director may administratively modify or waive one or more such requirements of this chapter when practical difficulties make their strict application infeasible. The Community Development Director shall review the plans and a written detailed explanation of the reason(s) for the waiver request, and make a determination on the request based on both of the following findings: 
A.  Practical difficulties make the strict application of portions of the ordinance infeasible. 
B.  The waiver is consistent with the purpose and intent of the ordinance in that the project substantially achieves the overall objective of water conservation. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.200 - Coordination with local water agency. 
The City shall coordinate with the Monte Vista Water District in the review of Landscape Documentation Package, including assistance in the review of proposed water budgets for projects. Whenever feasible, the City shall seek District assistance in requiring dedicated irrigation meters for all new metered connections, in providing irrigation surveys and/or water use analyses to existing and new landscapes, in developing and distributing public information materials on water conservation, and in reviewing project applications for future recycled water usage potential and recycled water system design specifications. Whenever feasible, the City shall assist the District in enforcing applicable water waste prevention measures as established by District ordinances and/or resolutions. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.210 - Minor revisions to approved landscape plans. 
Minor changes to approved landscape plans subject to this chapter may be approved by the Community Development Director, or designee, when there is. 
A.  No significant reduction in the quantity of plant materials. 
B.  No significant change in size or location of plant materials. 
C.  A lack of availability for specified plant materials and the new plants are of the same general category (e.g., evergreen tree or shrub) and have the same general design characteristics as the materials being replaced. 
D.  No significant change in the approved irrigation plan or MAWA calculations. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.220 - Certificate of completion. 
A.  Upon completion of the installation of landscaping and irrigation systems, a certified landscape irrigation auditor shall conduct an irrigation audit. 
B.  A licensed landscape architect or contractor, or other licensed or certified professional in a related field, shall conduct a final field inspection and shall prepare a certificate of completion, which shall be filed with the Community Development Director. The certificate of completion shall specifically indicate that plants were installed as specified by the landscape design plan, that the irrigation system was installed as specified by the irrigation design plan, and that an irrigation audit has been performed. 
C.  The certificate of completion shall include the following: 
1.  Date; 
2.  Project name; 
3.  Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address; 
4.  Project address and location; 
5.  Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address; 
6.  Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved Landscape Documentation Package; 
7.  Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule; 
8.  Irrigation audit report; 
9.  Soil analysis report and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.230 - Inspection and enforcement. 
Upon notice to the property owner, the Community Development Director, or his/her designee, shall have the right to enter the project site to conduct inspections for the purpose of enforcing this chapter before, during, and immediately after installation of the landscaping. 
A.  Any landscaping that is installed, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of the conditions of a permit or variance granted under this chapter is declared to be unlawful. The City Attorney may initiate an action or proceeding to enforce the provisions of this chapter, as appropriate. 
B.  A copy of the approved Landscape Documentation Package shall be submitted to the Monte Vista Water District. If the property is found to be in excess of its established MAWA, the property shall be subject to a landscape water audit conducted by the District or its designee and shall implement remedies recommended by the audit. 
C.  Landscaping found to be improperly installed or not according to approved plans is subject to correction. Installations deemed to be significantly different than approved may be required to resubmit plans for City review and approval including the payment of additional fees. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
11.60.240 - Maintenance of approved landscapes. 
All landscaping and irrigation systems shall be maintained in accordance with the approved site and/or landscape plan to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted to the City with the certificate of completion and a copy shall be kept by the property owner for reference. 
A.  Any plant material that does not survive or which was removed or destroyed, shall be replaced upon its demise or removal, with plant material of like type and size as that which was originally approved and installed. 
B.  Plant material shall not be severely pruned such that the natural growth pattern or characteristic forms are significantly altered. Trees shall only be pruned as necessary to promote healthy growth and for aesthetic purposes (i.e., to enhance the natural form of the tree) according to established horticultural standards. Improperly or severely pruned trees, including topping as defined by this chapter, which results in the removal of the normal canopy and/or disfigurement of the tree shall be replaced with trees of similar size and maturity as that which was removed or, as required by the Community Development Director. 
C.  All landscape areas and material shall be maintained in a healthy, neat, clean, and weed-free condition. 
D.  Modifications to and/or removal of existing landscaping shall require prior approval by the Planning Division. 
(Ord. No. 10-913, § 5, 7-6-10)  
Chapter 11.62 - MOBILE HOME PARKS 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
11.62.010 - Title. 
This title shall he known as and may be referred to as the "Minimum Mobile Home Park Development Standards." 
(Prior code § 9-8.101)  
11.62.020 - Intent and purpose. 
A.  It is the intent of this chapter to provide minimum regulations for the establishment, operation and maintenance of mobile home parks, which regulations equal or exceed all applicable State laws. It is intended that livability be one of the major concerns in the development of mobile home parks. With the increased development and use of mobile homes and mobile home parks, privacy, convenience and recreation have become critical factors and are of primary concern in regulating mobile home parks. 
It is the further intent of these regulations that innovative and modern design criteria shall be one of the central concerns in the development of mobile home parks within the City. Additionally, mobile home park design shall be developed to conform to community goals enumerated in the General Plan. 
B.  An optimum living environment shall be maintained within the City's mobile home developments. It is the management's responsibility to ensure such maintenance. The optimum living environment, based on General Plan goals and objectives and staff analyses of current mobile home park trends, shall observe the following general characteristics: 
1.  Responsible neighborhood relationships with amenities, such as street lighting; street trees; and walkways to every home site, park site, and recreational area; 
2.  Open to "all" segments of the community: young and old, family and non-family, and all ethnic backgrounds; 
3.  Provisions for all current coach styles at the time of the park construction; 
4.  Proper and equitable public and private utility and management services; and 
5.  It is also intended to permit individually owned mobile home sites within an approved mobile home park with adequate management services. 
C.  It is intended that these regulations shall be minimum regulations below which no variance or deviation will be permitted. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.102)  
11.62.030 - Provisions supplementary to other laws. 
In addition to other pertinent State and local regulations, the regulations and the general rules set forth in this chapter shall apply for the construction of any new mobile home park or the expansion of any existing park site. 
(Prior code § 9-8.103)  
Article II. - Construction and Design Requirements 
 
11.62.040 - Criteria. 
Subject to the securing of a conditional use permit, a mobile home park shall be permitted when it meets: 
A.  The provisions of this chapter; 
B.  The provisions of Chapters 11.38, 11.48, 11.52, 11.58, 11.66, 11.74, 11.76, 11.78 and 11.82 of this title; 
C.  Any additional conditions which might be imposed by the Planning Commission; and 
D.  The provisions of Chapters 11.86 and 11.88 of this title shall apply in the event individual ownership of individual mobile home sites is desired. 
(Prior code § 9-8.104)  
11.62.050 - Density. 
The maximum density shall not exceed seven dwelling units per gross acre; furthermore, the density of the mobile home park shall conform to the density indicated on the General Plan of the City for that area in which the mobile home park is to be constructed. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.105)  
11.62.060 - Site area. 
A mobile home park shall consist of a minimum of 10 acres and have frontage on a dedicated street of at least 500 feet. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.106)  
11.62.070 - Occupants. 
All mobile home park developments shall provide for both family and adult living and appropriate amenities provided for all age groups being served. It is the intent of this section that families not be excluded from mobile home park living in the City. The mobile home park may have a scheme by which part of the park is devoted to family homes and part to adult homes. A minimum of 15 percent of the mobile home spaces shall be provided for family use. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.107)  
11.62.080 - Minimum yard setbacks. 
The following minimum yard setback requirements shall be maintained in each mobile home park: 
A.  Public Street Frontage. Where a mobile home park property line is adjacent to a major street, a setback to the wall of 20 feet shall be required. When such property line is adjacent to a secondary street or a street with a lower classification, a setback of 15 feet shall be required. All setbacks shall extend across the entire width of the parcel's street frontage. See Diagram No. 1 set forth at the end of this chapter. 
B.  Interior Lot Lines. Where a mobile home park property line is an interior lot line, a minimum setback from the mobile home to the interior or property line wall of 10 feet shall be required. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.108)  
11.62.090 - Projections into required setback areas. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this section, no projection into the setback areas, except for nonremovable towing tongues, shall be prohibited: 
A.  A 6-foot masonry wall may be permitted along interior lot lines. 
B.  When a required yard is adjacent to a major street, an average setback of 20 feet, or 15 feet for streets of a lower classification, may be utilized for the placement of the required perimeter wall. In these cases, one-half of the linear footage of the perimeter wall may encroach a maximum of 5 feet into the respective setback area. The remaining one-half of the linear footage of the perimeter wall shall be set back a distance that will result in the perimeter wall having an average setback of 20 feet or 15 feet, whichever case applies. See Diagram No. 1 set forth at the end of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.109)  
11.62.100 - Vehicular circulation. 
A.  The main entrance of a mobile home park shall consist of two 12-foot travel lanes for ingress and two 12-foot travel lanes for egress, separated by a 10-foot landscaped median island. See Diagram No. 1 set forth at the end of this chapter. No access to interior streets from the main entrance street, or auto access to mobile homes fronting on the main street, or auto parking along the main entrance street shall be permitted within the first 100 feet, measured from the property line at the main entrance. 
B.  Streets providing access to more than 20 home sites shall be considered collector streets and shall be a minimum of 30 feet wide, curb to curb. 
C.  Streets providing access to 20 home sites or less shall be considered service streets and shall be a minimum of 25 feet, curb to curb. 
D.  One-way streets shall not be permitted within a mobile home park. 
E.  No parking shall be permitted on the interior streets unless the street width is increased to provide for adequate parking lanes. Such parking lanes shall be a minimum of 8 feet in width. See Diagram No. 2 set forth at the end of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.110)  
11.62.110 - Pedestrian circulation. 
A.  A pedestrian circulation system shall be incorporated into the mobile home park site plan for the purpose of providing direct access to and from all individual mobile home sites, trash storage areas, recreation facilities, laundry facilities, guest parking, and other outdoor living spaces (See Section 11.62.200 of this chapter). The pedestrian circulation system may be developed with either or a combination of both of the following techniques: 
1.  A sidewalk system may be developed adjacent to the street system and shall consist of a concrete sidewalk with a minimum width of 5 feet see Diagram No. 2 set forth at the end of this chapter; or 
2.  An interior walkway system may be developed within a 12-foot greenway containing landscaped areas and a walk or path with a minimum width of 5 feet. See Diagram No. 3 set forth at the end of this chapter. 
B.  Construction materials for sidewalks shall be concrete. Walkway systems shall utilize a substantial material, i.e. concrete, brick, flagstone, or other similar materials approved by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.111)  
11.62.120 - Outdoor living space. 
A.  The mobile home park shall contain a minimum of 500 square feet of outdoor living space for each mobile home site. Such space shall be in addition to that outdoor space provided on the individual mobile home site and shall be open, permanent, functional, and accessible to all the residents. Such space shall be located within the setback lines of the mobile home park. An interior landscaped walkway system (see Section 11.62.110 of this chapter) may be included in satisfying a part of the outdoor living space requirements. 
B.  If the gross area of the mobile home park is 15 acres or greater, the outdoor living space shall be provided in more than one location. If the outdoor living space is provided in more than one location, the individual outdoor living spaces shall be a minimum of 6000 square feet in area and have a minimum dimension of 30 feet. 
C.  Outdoor living space is intended to be the functional area which provides for outdoor activities available to all the mobile home park residents. Further, it is intended to be a space which may provide for activities that are also quite passive to those who are recreation or activity oriented. 
D.  Areas devoted to vehicular circulation and parking shall be excluded from the required outdoor living space. 
E.  The gradient or slope of all required outdoor living space shall not be greater than 5 percent in any direction, except when grade variations are used as landscape features which do not interfere with proper drainage of the site, except that the 5 percent gradient limit shall not apply to walkway systems. 
F.  Swimming pools with related deck areas, wading pools, fish ponds, volley ball courts, tennis courts, barbecue areas, game rooms, putting greens, or other recreational facilities provided for the common use of all the residents may be constructed within the required outdoor living space; provided, however, they shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the required outdoor living space. In addition, recreation facilities shall be appropriate for the age group served. The family aspect of the mobile home park requires that children's play areas be the primary consideration. Such other facilities as volley ball courts, tennis courts, swimming pools, handball courts, and putting greens should be considered so as to maximize the amount of personalized recreation. 
G.  Under all conditions, the open spaces created pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall remain open and available for such use during the life of the development. 
H.  The intent of outdoor living space is to provide usable areas for outdoor activities. In this regard, a minimum of 50 percent of all areas devoted to outdoor living space shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, and ground cover; however, it should be noted that inaccessible outdoor areas (areas in which the landscaping precludes the use of the ground areas) shall not qualify as such living space. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.112)  
11.62.130 - Boat and trailer storage. 
All pleasure boats and travel trailers shall be stored in an area set aside for such storage on the approved plans. Such area shall be screened from view and shall provide a minimum of one boat or trailer space not less than 10 feet for each 10 mobile home sites in the park. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.113)  
11.62.140 - Park directory signs. 
Each park shall maintain a directory sign depicting the location and house number of each mobile home unit. 
(Prior code § 9-8.114)  
11.62.150 - Park identification signs. 
Park identification signs shall comply with the provisions of this Code. 
(Prior code § 9-8.115)  
11.62.160 - Home site development standards. 
A.  Coverage. No more than 60 percent of a mobile home site may he covered with structures, such as mobile homes, carports, covered patios, and storage buildings. 
B.  Mobile Home Site Area. A mobile home site designed for a double-wide mobile home (between 20 feet and 24 feet in width) shall have a minimum site area of 3800 square feet and a minimum width of 40 feet. A mobile home site designed for a single-wide mobile home (between 10 feet and 12 feet in width) shall have a minimum site area of 2850 square feet and a minimum width of 30 feet. See Diagram No. 4 set forth at the end of this chapter. A minimum of 10 percent of the mobile home spaces shall be designed for single wide coaches. 
1.  A mobile home unit shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the front home site line, 6 feet from any side home site line, and 5 feet from the rear home site line. 
2.  Attached or detached accessory structures shall be located not less than 3 feet from any space line and not less than 6 feet from any adjacent mobile home or accessory structure. 
3.  Permanent structures, such as laundry buildings, recreational buildings, and caretaker residences, shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from any mobile home. 
4.  Mobile homes, accessory structures, and permanent buildings shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the mobile home park perimeter wall, except when such wall is located within the average setback, in which case the 10-foot distance shall be measured from the average setback line. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.116)  
11.62.170 - Parking. 
There shall be two off-street parking spaces, 10 feet by 20 feet, for each dwelling unit, at least one of which shall be covered. Such spaces may be in tandem and shall be designed so that a parked automobile will not encroach into the street or sidewalk area. Parking areas shall be paved with concrete. In addition, there shall be one guest parking space 10 feet by 20 feet, for each four mobile home sites within the park. Such guest parking sites shall be dispersed throughout the park to provide convenient guest parking to all mobile home sites. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.117)  
11.62.180 - Trash storage. 
Trash storage areas shall be provided at a ratio of one trash enclosure for every 20 mobile home sites. All such trash enclosures shall be located conveniently for use by park residents. All trash enclosures shall be constructed to City of Montclair Development Standard No. 106. Easy access to trash enclosures shall be provided for trash pickup services. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.118)  
11.62.190 - Special requirements. 
To ensure a residential character for a mobile home park and minimize the adverse effects on surrounding properties, the following requirements shall apply: 
A.  A 6-foot decorative masonry wall shall be required around the perimeter of the mobile home park and shall be located in conformance to the yard and setback requirements of this title. 
B.  All tongues, when readily removable, shall be removed when a mobile home is in place. Those not detachable shall be screened by landscaping or other materials satisfactory to the Planning Department. 
C.  All open areas under a mobile home shall be enclosed by approved skirts or by a combination of skirts and grading, except for minimum openings required for cross ventilation. 
D.  Street trees shall be required along all interior streets and shall be located at 30-foot intervals. 
E.  Individual mobile home sites shall be constructed to provide a level patio surface a minimum of 10 feet wide and 100 square feet in area. Such patio requirements shall not preclude the construction of a porch if so desired by the developer or a mobile home resident. 
F.  To lower the profile of mobile homes, the following shall apply: 
1.  The utility island sewer connection shall be set as low as possible consistent with State laws. 
2.  Whenever possible and consistent with proper drainage and minimum State cross-ventilation requirements, a mobile home shall be lowered by grading and excavating underneath such home, and adequate nonmechanical drainage shall be provided. 
G.  All utilities shall be installed underground. 
H.  Individual radio receiving and television antenna with a maximum height of 25 feet measured from grade level may be permitted within the park at a ratio of one pole per individual lot or unit. No part of said antenna shall encroach upon any public right-of-way or designated interior street or adjacent lot or designated space. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.119)  
11.62.200 - Design criteria. 
The mobile home park shall be evaluated with regard to how it implements the General Plan residential goals, objectives, principles and standards. A primary consideration which goes towards implementing the General Plan goals is the site plan design and its illustration of the amenities required by this title. 
A.  The City is initially concerned with a functional and innovative circulation system which would be somewhat more than the typical grid street plan. This innovative character can be developed in many ways, such as the use of short cul-de-sacs, curvilinear streets or the cluster concept. In order to encourage more design flexibility, a 25 percent variation in the size of individual mobile home site areas may be permitted provided the average area of all the sites combined complies with the required minimum site area requirements. In addition, all yards and spaces between mobile homes shall conform to the standards of this chapter. 
B.  The concern for a functional pedestrian system has been identified in these standards. In addition to the requirements in this title, it has been established that the pedestrian system should serve not only the residents' needs within the mobile home park, but should also serve these residents by providing access to and from areas outside the mobile home park, such as schools, commercial land uses, and parks. Such service can be accomplished by providing pedestrian access points in addition to that provided at the main entrance. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.120)  
11.62.210 - Laundry facilities. 
A.  Laundry facilities equipped with washing machines and dryers shall be provided consistent with the needs of the mobile home park residents. 
B.  Outside drying areas shall be enclosed with a 6-foot-high solid fence. Laundry drying lines shall not be permitted on any individual mobile home space. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.121)  
11.62.220 - Construction requirements. 
A.  See Chapter 10.08 of this Code (Uniform Building Code), Section 11.38.040 of this title (lot area), and Section 11.38.050 of this title (yards), in addition to the following: 
1.  All on-site sewer plans and installations shall be designed to meet City engineering specifications and shall be inspected by the City. 
2.  All streets within the mobile home park shall be designed to meet City engineering street specifications and shall be inspected by the City. 
3.  All on-site water systems shall be designed to meet City engineering and Monte Vista County Water District specifications and shall be inspected by City and/or Monte Vista County Water District personnel. 
B.  As part of the requirements of subsection (A)(1), (2) and (3) of this section, the usual Engineering Department plan-check fees shall be required in addition to any other fees which the Engineering Department may deem necessary. 
(Prior code § 9-8.122)  
11.62.230 - Health permits. 
Any person or owner who operates or permits the use of a mobile home park, or portion thereof, shall first obtain a public health permit, issued by the County Health Department, authorizing such person or owner to operate such mobile home park. Applications for such health permits shall be secured from the County Health Department. 
(Prior code § 9-8.123)  
11.62.240 - Certificates of occupancy. 
Upon the completion of any mobile home park and prior to the use thereof, the owner or operator of the mobile home park shall make an application to the Building Department for a certificate of occupancy. The application shall be in writing upon the form provided by the Building Department and shall be filed not less than 10 days nor more than 20 days before the mobile home park is ready for use. The Building Department shall thereupon make a final inspection of the mobile home park referred to in the application, and, if the mobile home park is found to be in conformity with the requirements of this title and other laws of the City and State, the Building Department shall forward to the County Health Department a written certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.124)  
Article III. - Operation and Maintenance Regulations 
 
11.62.250 - Mobile homes—Renting and parking on private property. 
It is unlawful for any person to rent, or hold out for rent, any mobile home in a mobile home park which is owned by, or in the possession or control of, the owner or operator of the mobile home park or his or her agent. The rental paid for any such mobile home shall also be deemed to be rental for the space it occupies. In addition, such use of mobile homes shall conform to the provisions of the zoning regulations of the City. Individual rentals shall be limited no one-year time limits. It is unlawful for any person to place a mobile home on property not designated as a mobile home park by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.201)  
11.62.260 - Plot plans—Posting. 
The owner or operator of every mobile home park shall maintain in a conspicuous location in or adjacent to the mobile home park office a copy of the approved plot plan of the mobile home park with each site designated by a number or such other consecutive or systematic means of identification. 
(Prior code § 9-8.202)  
11.62.270 - Animals and fowl. 
Dogs, cats or other pets shall not be permitted to run at large in a mobile home park. Barnyard animals or poultry shall be permitted in any mobile home park subject to special animal permits. 
(Prior code § 9-8.203)  
11.62.280 - Fire protection and prevention. 
All mobile home parks shall have fire protection and prevention facilities developed in accordance with City standards. 
(Prior code § 9-8.204)  
11.62.290 - Public address systems. 
Public address systems or loudspeakers shall not be permitted in mobile home parks if audible outside the boundaries of the mobile home park. 
(Prior code § 9-8.205)  
11.62.300 - Supervision and maintenance. 
A.  Every mobile home park operated or maintained in the City shall have a caretaker on duty at all times who shall be responsible for maintaining within the mobile home park all of the provisions of this title governing the operation and maintenance of mobile home parks. 
B.  Each mobile home park shall maintain an office in which shall be kept a park register and the approved plot plan and permit to operate the mobile home park which shall be readily visible to anyone entering the office. 
C.  It shall be the duty of the owner or operator or the person in charge of the mobile home park to: 
1.  Keep a register of all persons staying in the mobile home park, together with their home addresses, the date of arrival, the license number of the mobile home and automobile, the name of the state in which the automobile and mobile home are licensed, the year for which they are licensed, the mobile home site to which they are assigned, and the date of departure; 
2.  Maintain the mobile home park in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition at all times; 
3.  Require that any and all plumbing fixtures in use in any mobile home be kept properly connected to the proper connections in the park plumbing system and ascertain that all sewer connections not in use are properly capped or plugged airtight; and 
4.  Require all garbage and rubbish to be deposited in proper containers and provide for the emptying, cleaning and replacing of containers as required. 
D.  All rental regulations and park standards shall be approved by the Planning Department and shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of this title as well as other applicable sections of this Code. 
(Prior code § 9-8.206)  
Article IV. - Enforcement 
 
11.62.310 - Right of entry. 
Any City official or acting City official is empowered to enter upon the premises of any mobile home park to inspect the structures, sites and facilities, including the register of the occupants, and to require compliance with all the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 9-8.207)  
11.62.320 - Abatement of nuisances. 
The enforcement agencies may petition any court having appropriate jurisdiction for relief in the abatement of any nuisance maintained in any mobile home park. 
(Prior code § 9-8.208)  
11.62.330 - Violations of provisions. 
Any person or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter; or disregard any lawful order of the Planning Commission, the Building Department, the Health Department, or the Fire Department with respect to a mobile home park; or contribute in any way to any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 06-889 § 14: Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-8.209) 
  
  
  
   
Chapter 11.64 - MOVED BUILDINGS 
Sections: 
 
11.64.010 - Location in City—Permits required. 
It is unlawful for any person to locate or establish upon any lot or parcel of land within the City any building or structure which has been moved from another location, within or without the City, without first having obtained a conditional use permit to do so, in addition to the moving permit required by Section 10.12.010 of this Code. Such conditional use permit shall be obtained from the Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions of this Code and the following provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-2.18 (part))  
11.64.020 - Applications. 
The following shall be filed with the secretary of the Planning Commission at the time the application is made: 
A.  The information required by Section 10.12.020 of this Code; 
B.  Plans and specifications for the proposed improvements at the new location, including the landscape treatment; 
C.  Photographs of all the elevations of the structure proposed to be moved, together with photographs of the new site and the buildings and structures adjacent thereto; 
D.  Such information and the fees required by Section 11.78.010 of this Code. When the fee for a conditional use permit required by this section is paid, the applicant shall not be required to also pay the moving permit fee required by Section 10.12.040 of this Code, although such moving permit shall still be obtained. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-2.18 (part))  
11.64.030 - Conditions. 
The Planning Commission may grant the requested permit upon such terms and conditions as it may deem necessary, including the following: 
A.  A report and clearance from a licensed pest control inspector that such building, after a reasonable inspection, is found to be free from termite infestation; and 
B.  A faithful performance bond in the amount of Two Thousand Five Hundred (2500) Dollars, which bond shall guarantee that the applicant will comply with all the conditions and changes required within six months after the date of the approval, conditional or otherwise, of the Planning Commission. Such time limitation may be extended by the Planning Commission for good cause provided an application is made to the Planning Commission prior to the expiration of such period. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-2.18 (part))  
11.64.040 - Basis for findings. 
In granting an application for a conditional use permit, the Planning Commission shall find: 
A.  That the building is in conformity with the type and quality of buildings existing in the area into which such building is proposed to be moved; 
B.  That such building is not more than two stories in height; 
C.  That the location of such building on the lot does not in any way adversely affect the buildings or uses on abutting properties; 
D.  That the percentage of lot coverage by all buildings and structures is not greater than that permitted by the district into which the building or structure is proposed to be moved; 
E.  That all yard and setback provisions are observed; 
F.  That, prior to occupancy, the building shall be brought up to the standards of the Building Code and laws of the City; and 
G.  That all the dedications and improvements required for streets and alleys necessary for access to the property upon which the building is to be located are provided in conformity with the standards of the City. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 8-2.18 (part))  
Chapter 11.65 - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS FOR DISABLED INDIVIDUALS 
 
11.65.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The intent of this chapter, pursuant to Fair Housing Laws, is to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in the application of the City's rules, policies, practices and procedures as necessary to ensure equal access to housing. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a process for individuals with disabilities to make requests for, and be provided, reasonable accommodation, when reasonable accommodation is warranted based upon sufficient evidence, from the various laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City, including land use and zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 15-948, § 1, 5-4-15)  
11.65.020 - Definitions. 
Applicant means a person, business, or organization making a written request to the City for reasonable accommodation in the strict application of land use or zoning provisions of this title. 
Director means the Director of Community Development. 
Disabled or handicapped person or individual means an individual who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more of that person's major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone who has a record of having such impairment, but not including an individual's current, illegal use of a controlled substance. 
Fair Housing Laws means the "Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988" (42 U.S.C. Section 3601, et seq.), including reasonable accommodation required by 42 U.S.C. Section 3604 (f)(3)(B), and the "California Fair Employment and Housing Act" (California Government Code Section 12900, et seq.), including reasonable accommodation required specifically by California Government Code Sections 12927(c)(1), 12955, and 65583(c)(3) as any of these statutory provisions now exist or may be amended from time to time. 
Reasonable accommodation, major means any deviation requested and/or granted from the strict application of the laws, rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures of the City, including land use and zoning regulations of this title, resulting in a physical modification to the property which cannot be restored or terminated within 90 days or less after the reasonable accommodation is terminated. 
Reasonable accommodation, minor means any deviation requested and/or granted from the strict application of the laws, rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures of the City, including land use and zoning regulations of this Title, which can be removed or terminated within 90 days or less after the need for the reasonable accommodation ends. 
(Ord. No. 15-948, § 1, 5-4-15)  
11.65.030 - Public notice of availability of accommodation process. 
The City shall prominently display at the Community Development Department public counter in City Hall a notice advising individuals with disabilities or their representatives that they may request a reasonable accommodation in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter. City employees shall direct individuals to the display whenever they are requested to do so or reasonably believe that individuals with disabilities or their representatives may be entitled to a reasonable accommodation. 
(Ord. No. 15-948, § 1, 5-4-15)  
11.65.040 - Requesting reasonable accommodation. 
A.  In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability, a disabled individual or representative may request reasonable accommodation, pursuant to this chapter, relating to the application of various land use, zoning, or building laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City. 
B.  If an individual or representative needs assistance in making a request for reasonable accommodation, or appealing a determination regarding reasonable accommodation, the Community Development Department will endeavor to provide the assistance necessary to ensure that the process is accessible to the applicant or representative. The applicant may be represented at all stages of the proceeding by a person designated by the applicant as his or her representative. 
C.  A request for reasonable accommodation with respect to the laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City shall be filed on an application form provided by the Community Development Department, shall be signed by the owner of the property, and shall include the following information: 
1.  A description of how the property will be used by the disabled individual(s); 
2.  The basis for the claim that the Fair Housing Laws apply to the individual(s) and evidence satisfactory to the City supporting the claim, which may include a letter from a medical doctor or other licensed health care professional, a disabled person license or placard, or other appropriate evidence that establishes that the individual(s) needing the reasonable accommodation is disabled/handicapped pursuant to the Fair Housing Laws; 
3.  The specific reason the requested accommodation is necessary to make particular housing available to the disabled individual(s); 
4.  Verification by the applicant that the property is the primary residence of the person for whom reasonable accommodation is requested; 
5.  A filing fee in an amount as determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council, but not to exceed the reasonable estimated costs to the City in processing the application. 
(Ord. No. 15-948, § 1, 5-4-15)  
11.65.050 - Decision on application. 
A.  The Director shall have the authority to consider and act on any application for a Minor Reasonable Accommodation. The Director shall issue a written determination within 30 days of the date of receipt of a completed application and may: (1) grant the accommodation request; (2) grant the accommodation request subject to specified nondiscriminatory conditions; (3) deny the request; or (4) refer the matter to the Planning Commission, which shall render a decision on the application in the same manner as it considers an appeal. Notice of the Director's consideration of a minor reasonable accommodation application shall be made in writing, 10 days prior to a decision and shall be mailed first class and postage pre-paid to the applicant and the adjacent property owners. 
B.  The Planning Commission shall have the authority to consider and act on any application for a major reasonable accommodation or any minor reasonable accommodation request referred to it by the Director. The Planning Commission shall consider an application at the next reasonably available public meeting after submission of an application for reasonable accommodation, after the submission of any additional information required pursuant to this Section, or after referral from the Director. The Planning Commission may: (1) grant the accommodation request; (2) grant the accommodation request subject to specified nondiscriminatory conditions; or (3) deny the request. Notice of the Planning Commission meeting to review and act on a major reasonable accommodation application, or minor reasonable accommodation application referred by the Director, shall be made in writing 10 days prior to the meeting and shall be mailed first class and postage pre-paid to the applicant and all property owners within a 300-foot radius of the project boundary. 
C.  All written determinations shall give notice of the right to appeal and the right to request reasonable accommodation on the appeals process, if necessary. The notice of determination shall be sent to the applicant by first class mail. 
D.  If necessary to reach a determination on any request for reasonable accommodation, the Director may request further information from the applicant consistent with this chapter, specifying in detail what information is required. In the event a request for further information is made, the 30-day period to issue a written determination shall be stayed until the applicant reasonably responds to the request. 
E.  If, based upon all of the evidence presented to the Director or the Planning Commission, the findings required in this chapter may reasonably be made, the Director, the Planning Commission, or City Council, as applicable, shall grant the requested reasonable accommodation. 
F.  A reasonable accommodation granted pursuant to this chapter shall not require the approval of any variance as to the reasonable accommodation. 
G.  The reasonable accommodation shall be subject to any reasonable conditions imposed on the approval that are consistent with the purposes of this chapter to further fair housing. Such conditions may generally include, but are not limited to the following restrictions: 
1.  That the reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to a particular individual(s); 
2.  That the reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to the specific use for which application is made; and/or 
3.  That any change in use or circumstances which negates the basis for the granting of the approval shall render the reasonable accommodation null and void and/or revocable by the City. 
(Ord. No. 15-948, § 1, 5-4-15)  
11.65.060 - Required findings. 
The following findings shall be made in order to approve a request for reasonable accommodation: 
A.  The housing that is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation shall be occupied as the primary residence by an individual protected under the Fair Housing Laws. 
B.  The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to one or more individuals protected under the Fair Housing Laws. 
C.  The requested reasonable accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City. 
D.  The requested accommodation will not require a fundamental alteration of the zoning or building laws, policies and/or procedures of the City. 
(Ord. No. 15-948, § 1, 5-4-15)  
11.65.070 - Appeals. 
A.  Within 10 days of the date the City issues a written decision on a reasonable accommodation application, any person aggrieved or affected by a decision on an application requesting the accommodation may appeal such determination in writing to the Planning Commission or City Council, as applicable. 
B.  All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal. 
C.  No such appeal shall be accepted unless there is, paid concurrently with the filing of such appeal, a filing and processing fee in a sum set forth by resolution of the City Council. Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, together with the filing and processing fee, the Secretary of the Planning Commission or City Clerk shall set the matter for a hearing before the Planning Commission or City Council, as applicable, at its next reasonably available public meeting. 
D.  The Planning Commission or City Council, as applicable, shall hear the matter and render a determination as soon as reasonably practicable, but in no event later than 60 days after an appeal has been filed, or after an application has been referred to it by the Director. All determinations shall address and be based upon the same findings required to be made in the original determination from which the appeal is taken. 
E.  An applicant may request reasonable accommodation in the procedure by which an appeal will be conducted. 
F.  An applicant requesting the accommodation may appeal an adverse determination or any conditions or limitations imposed by the Planning Commission's decision to the City Council in accordance with this section. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 15-948, § 1, 5-4-15)  
11.65.080 - Waiver of time periods. 
Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this chapter or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the city of the pending appeal. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the city, shall not constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on applications and shall not be a violation of any required time period set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-948, § 1, 5-4-15)  
Chapter 11.66 - PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
11.66.010 - Parking requirements generally. 
A.  Existing Spaces. Parking spaces maintained in connection with an existing and continuing building or structure, up to the number required by the provisions of this title, shall be continued and may not be counted as serving a new structure or addition; nor may any parking space be substituted for a loading space, nor may any loading space be substituted for a parking space. 
B.  New Spaces. At the time of the erection of any main building or structure, or at the time any such building or structure is enlarged or increased by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, floor area or seats, or before conversion from one use to another, there shall be provided for the total resulting building, structures, capacities or uses an off-street parking space consisting of an area not less than 9 feet wide and 20 feet long and with provisions for safe ingress and egress to a public street or alley. Provision for adequate vehicular back-up aisle for angled parking spaces shall be as follows: 
90 degree: 27 feet 
75 degree: 24 feet 
60 degree: 18 feet 
45 degree: 18 feet 
Parallel parking space shall consist of an area of not less than 10 feet wide and 24 feet long and shall be served by a parallel driveway with an aisle width of not less than 20 feet. 
1.  Dwellings. For the various types of dwellings, there shall be provided off-street parking spaces as follows: 
a.  Single-family: Two parking spaces in a private garage; and 
b.  Duplex and multifamily: For each one-bedroom dwelling unit, one and one-fourth spaces; for each two-bedroom dwelling unit, one and one-half spaces; and for each dwelling unit with three or more bedrooms, two spaces. 
There shall be provided at least two spaces in an enclosed private garage for each duplex or multifamily unit on the same lot with such unit. The remaining spaces required need not be covered and may be located on an adjacent lot but shall not be located in, or encroach upon, any required front, side or rear yard. 
In the event the spaces required for duplex and multifamily units do not compute to even-numbered spaces, for fractions one-half and over, the next numbered space upward shall be required and for fractions below one-half, the next numbered space downward shall be required. 
There shall be provided at least two parking spaces in an enclosed private garage for each duplex or multiple unit on the same lot with such unit. 
2.  Motels and Tourist Courts. For motels and tourist courts, there shall be provided at least one parking space on the same lot with, or the lot adjacent to, the main building for each individual sleeping or dwelling unit. 
3.  Hotels and Rooming Houses. For hotels, rooming houses, fraternity and sorority houses, and other similar structures, there shall be provided at least one parking space on the same lot with, or the lot adjacent to, the main building for each guest room, dwelling unit, or suite. 
4.  Places of Assembly. For clubs, churches, funeral chapels, assembly halls, theaters, auditoriums, stadiums, and similar places of assembly, there shall be provided at least one parking space on the same lot with, or the lot adjacent to, the main building for each six permanent seats in such building or structure, or at least one parking space on the same lot with, or the lot adjacent to, the main building for each 100 square feet of floor area used for amusement or assembly, whichever requires the most parking spaces. 
5.  Schools and Colleges. For schools and colleges, there shall be provided at least one parking space on the same lot with, or the lot adjacent to, the main building for each member of the staff, in addition to such spaces as may be required for places of assembly as provided in subsection (B)(4) of this section. 
6.  Hospitals, Etc. For hospitals, sanitariums, institutions, homes for the aged, rest homes, and similar other structures, there shall be provided at least one parking space on the same lot with, or the lot adjacent to, the main building for each two beds in such building. 
7.  C-1 Zones Uses. For all uses in the C-1 Zone, there shall be provided at least one parking space on the same lot with, or the lot adjacent to, the main building for each 70 square feet, or major fraction thereof, of gross floor area, excluding parking and loading space. 
8.  Medical and Dental Facilities. For medical and dental facilities (located in zones other than the C-1 Zone), there shall be provided a minimum of one parking space on the same lot with, or the lot adjacent to, the main building for each 160 square feet, or major fraction thereof, of gross floor area, excluding parking and loading space. 
9.  Business and Commercial Buildings. For commercial buildings (located in zones other than the C-1 Zone, except medical and dental facilities), there shall be provided a minimum of one parking space on the same lot with, or the lot adjacent to, the main building for each 250 square feet, or major fraction thereof, of gross floor area, excluding parking and loading space. 
10.  Industrial and Manufacturing Establishments. The parking requirements for industrial and manufacturing uses shall be as follows: 
a.  One space for every 500 square feet of floor area up to 30,000 square feet; 
b.  One additional space for every 650 square feet from 30,000 square feet to 50,000 square feet; 
c.  One additional space for every 750 square feet over 50,000 square feet; 
d.  Or, one space for every two employees, whichever number of spaces is greater; and 
e.  Notwithstanding the preceding, each site shall have a minimum of six parking spaces. 
11.  Warehouse Establishments. The parking requirements for warehousing uses shall be as follows: 
One space for every 1000 square feet of floor area, or one space for every two employees, whichever number of spaces is greater, and provided, further, that each site shall have a minimum of four parking spaces. 
On developments fronting on major or secondary highways and with a design allowing for commercial uses, the commercial parking standards shall apply to that portion of the fronting building so designed for commercial. 
12.  Other Uses. For uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking spaces shall be those to which a mentioned use is similar. 
13.  Administrative and Professional Offices. 
a.  Administrative and professional offices are defined as "professional uses which do not generate high parking demand and such other uses which do not require the general public to come to the place of business," including, but not limited to: 
i.  Attorney's offices; 
ii.  Certified public accountants; 
iii.  Insurance offices; and 
iv.  Advertising agencies. 
b.  The following uses shall not be permitted: offices for the retailing of goods and doctors, dentists, psychiatric, psychological, and other activities generating high parking demand. 
c.  The parking ratio for administrative and professional offices shall be on a scale of: 
i.  One space for every 250 square feet of floor area for the first 30,000 square feet; then 
ii.  One space for every 275 square feet up to 50,000 square feet; then 
iii.  One space for every 300 square feet over 50,001 square feet; 
iv.  Or, one space for every three employees, whichever number of spaces is greater. 
14.  Restaurants and/or Combination Restaurants and Places of Assembly. For full dinner house or sit down restaurants and places of assembly, at least one parking space on the same lot with, or the lot adjacent to, the main building for each four permanent seats in such building or structure, or at least one parking space on the same lot with, or the lot adjacent to, the main building for each six occupants based upon the occupant load of such building or structure as determined by the Building Official, whichever is greater. 
C.  Approval of Plans. Plans for all outdoor parking areas to be provided in A-P, C or M Zones to meet the requirements of this title shall be submitted to, and shall be subject to, the approval of the Commission. Such plans shall be prepared to scale and shall show how the improvements required by the provisions of Section 11.66.030 of this chapter shall be provided. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1807)  
11.66.015 - Design standards for driveways and parking spaces on residential zoned properties. 
A.  Required Dimensions and Access Requirements. 
1.  Each required parking space shall have the minimum dimensions of 9 feet in width by 20 feet in length, and shall be independently accessible from a street or alley, unless otherwise permitted by this title. 
2.  Each required garage parking space shall have minimum, unobstructed interior dimensions of 9 feet in width, 20 feet in length, and 8 feet in height. 
3.  When a garage does not have a direct, straight entry from a public street or alley, or private street, the driveway providing access to the entrance of the garage shall have a minimum 24-foot outside turning radius. 
B.  No Parking in Front or Street Side Yard Setbacks. No required parking spaces shall be located in required front and street side yard setbacks except on a residential driveway. 
C.  Standards for Driveways Located in R-1 Zones. Driveways located within R-1 (single-family residential) zones shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  All driveways, except circular driveways, shall provide access to parking spaces located outside the required setbacks. 
2.  Driveways shall be constructed of a prepared surface, such as concrete, brick, asphalt, or similar materials, as approved by the Director of Community Development. 
3.  Circular driveways shall be permitted only when the Director finds that a circular driveway is necessary to: 
a.  Allow vehicles to turn around and head into an arterial street, where lots front on a major or secondary arterial and no other vehicular access is available by way of a local or private street, or an alley; or 
b.  Allow for guest parking when no on-street parking is available; or 
c.  Provide access for persons with mobility impairments; or 
d.  Provide access for emergency or safety purposes. 
4.  A circular driveway may be permitted on a lot that has a minimum lot width of 90 feet, provided there is a front or street side yard building setback of no less than 30 feet in the yard where the driveway is located. 
5.  The following standards shall apply to circular driveways: 
a.  A maximum of two curb cuts shall be permitted per lot. 
b.  Circular driveways shall have a maximum width of 12 feet. 
c.  The Director shall require landscape screening where feasible. 
6.  Multiple Curb Cuts. In R-1 Zones, no more than one curb cut shall be permitted per lot, except that a second curb cut may be permitted for the following: 
a.  A circular driveway when permitted by this section; or 
b.  Access to a parking space located in a rear or interior side yard. Such a secondary driveway shall be a maximum of 10 feet in width and shall be constructed of a prepared material, provided, however, that the Director may approve an alternative material to mitigate the visual impact of additional hardscape improvements on the property. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 7)  
11.66.020 - General provisions for trip reduction. 
A.  Intent. The purpose of this section is to promote the use of alternative methods of transportation besides use of the single-occupant vehicle. These alternative methods are to be provided in new development so as to meet congestion management and air quality goals at minimal cost and disruption to citizens, business and industry. 
B.  Applicability. Prior to issuance of a building permit for any new construction project for which a site plan is submitted on or after January 1, 1994, provisions shall be made for all applicable trip reduction requirements of this section to be implemented. The requirements shall not be applied to existing development, except when new square footage is added. 
C.  Trip Reduction Measures. The following trip reduction measures shall be implemented: 
1.  Nonresidential Projects. 
a.  A bicycle rack or other secure bicycle parking facility shall be provided for every 30 parking spaces within a project and at least one bicycle rack capable of holding three bicycles shall be provided for all projects. Safe and convenient access thereto shall be provided from the public streets. 
b.  On-site pedestrian walkways and bicycle facilities shall be provided connecting each building in a development to the public streets. 
c.  A passenger loading area in a location close to the main building entrance shall be provided for projects with 100 or more parking spaces. The area devoted to loading and unloading of passengers shall be equivalent to a minimum of five parking spaces. 
d.  A minimum of one shower facility accessible to both men and women shall be provided for persons bicycling or walking to work for each project which meets the following thresholds: 
Use 	Threshold 
Commercial 	250,000 square feet 
Industrial 	325,000 square feet 
Office 	125,000 square feet 
Hotels and motels 	250 rooms 
 
e.  A minimum of one parking space for each 50 spaces required by this Code, located in close proximity to the building entrance, shall be reserved for use by potential carpool or vanpool vehicles for all new projects, with a minimum of one space to be provided. All preferential parking spaces for carpool or vanpool vehicles shall be signed or striped. Such spaces shall be accessible to vanpool vehicles. If a vanpool parking space is located within a parking structure, a minimum vertical clearance of no less than 9 feet shall be provided. 
f.  Transit facilities, such as bus shelters, bus pullouts, and bus pads, shall be provided if the Community Development Director, in consultation with local transit providers, determines they would be needed to serve the development. 
g.  On-site video conference facilities shall be provided for office buildings with a capacity of 1000 employees or greater. 
2.  Residential Projects. 
a.  For multiple dwelling and condominium developments containing 10 or more units: 
i.  A bicycle rack or other secure bicycle parking facility shall be provided for every 30 parking spaces. Each project is to include at least one bicycle rack capable of holding three bicycles. 
ii.  Sidewalks shall be provided from the public streets to each building within the complex. 
iii.  A passenger loading area in a location close to the building entrance shall be provided for projects with 100 or more parking spaces. The area devoted to loading and unloading of passengers shall be equivalent to a minimum of five parking spaces. 
iv.  Transit facilities, such as bus shelters, bus pullouts, and bus pads, shall be provided if the Community Development Director, in consultation with local transit providers, determines they would be needed to serve the development. 
b.  For residential developments containing 500 or more homes, a telecommuting center shall be provided or a contribution in an amount found to be acceptable to the Community Development Director shall be made toward development of one. 
D.  Exceptions to Trip Reduction Requirements. The City Council or Planning Commission may modify all or part of the trip reduction measures for new projects set forth above, if the following findings can be made: 
1.  One or more of the measures are not applicable due to special circumstances, including, but not limited to, the location or configuration of the project, the implementation of existing trip reduction measures and transportation demand management strategies, or other specific factors which make infeasible implementation, or reduce the effectiveness, of the prescribed measure(s); and 
2.  An alternative trip reduction and transportation demand management strategy will be implemented to reduce an equal or greater amount of trips as would have occurred as a result of imposition of the prescribed measures. (Implementation of the alternative strategy shall be a condition of project approval.) 
E.  Credit for Trip Reduction and Transportation Demand Management Programs/Facilities. 
1.  Existing trip reduction and transportation demand management programs/facilities in a development complex may satisfy all or part of the requirements of this section as pertaining to new construction within the complex, subject to the approval of the City Council or Planning Commission, as appropriate. The amount of credit given shall be determined through an assessment of how the existing facilities would meet the requirements of this section if based on the gross floor area of the entire complex. 
2.  Reduction in Required Number of Parking Spaces. The Planning Commission may determine that a reduction in the required number of parking spaces for a proposed use or uses is acceptable because implementation of the trip reduction and transportation demand management measures would eliminate some of the demand for parking. 
F.  Monitoring. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any new building or addition to an existing building, all facilities and improvements required by this section shall be constructed or otherwise provided. 
G.  Required Maintenance. All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required by this section shall be maintained in a state of good repair. 
H.  Enforcement. 
1.  The Community Development Director or his or her designated agent shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
2.  No person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate or otherwise fail to comply with any of the provisions of this section. The failure to implement the trip reduction measures made mandatory by this section shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1807.1)  
11.66.030 - Parking improvements. 
Parking spaces, other than those in a garage or carport: 
A.  Shall be paved and drained to the approval of the City Engineer; 
B.  Shall have adequate guards for the protection of other property and vehicles on the same lot; 
C.  Shall be provided with marked entrances, exits, aisles, and such other safety devices as may be required to ensure the safe movement of vehicles; 
D.  Shall have any light arranged so that the light shall be directed onto the parking area and away from any adjacent property; 
E.  When adjoining any lot in an R Zone, shall have a 6-foot-high masonry wall erected and maintained along such property line; provided, however, such wall shall be only 42 inches high from the front building line of the adjoining property to the front property line; and 
F.  When located across the street from an R Zone, shall have a 42-inch high masonry wall erected and maintained along the property line facing the R Zone; provided, however, used car sales shall not be required to provide any wall on a property line abutting any street. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1808)  
11.66.040 - Loading spaces. 
At the time of the erection or change of use of any main building, or part thereof, for manufacturing, storage, warehousing, food display and market, department store, hotel, hospital, laundry, dry cleaning, or other uses similarly involving the receipt and distribution by vehicles of materials and merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained at least one loading space not less than 10 feet in width, 22 feet in length, and 14 feet in height, with adequate ingress and egress from a public street or alley, if the main building has a gross floor area of more than 3000 square feet but less than 15,000 square feet, and there shall be one additional loading space for each additional 15,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof. No loading dock shall be closer than 25 feet to any street line. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1809)  
Chapter 11.67 - SHOPPING CART CONTAINMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
11.67.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The accumulation of abandoned, lost, stolen, wrecked, or dismantled shopping carts on public or private property is found to create conditions that promote blight and deterioration; negatively impact community image and property values; are aesthetically detrimental; and constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health, safety, and general welfare of residents. The accumulation of these shopping carts has the potential to interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic; therefore, the presence of abandoned, lost, stolen, wrecked, or dismantled shopping carts, or parts thereof, on public or private property is declared to constitute a public nuisance, which may be abated in accordance with this chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to eliminate the detrimental effects of abandoned, lost, stolen, wrecked, or dismantled shopping carts on public or private property by setting forth regulations for containing shopping carts on the premises to which they belong and minimizing the likelihood that they will be removed from retailers' premises and abandoned elsewhere in the community. Further, this chapter sets forth regulations encouraging the prompt retrieval of shopping carts by their owners and the impoundment and/or disposal of unclaimed shopping carts by the City. 
(Ord. No. 14-943, § 1, 8-4-14)  
11.67.020 - Definitions. 
Abandoned shopping cart or lost, stolen, or abandoned shopping cart means a shopping cart that was: (1) removed from the premises of a retail establishment by any person without the prior written consent of the owner of the shopping cart or the retailer otherwise entitled to possession of such cart; or (2) left unattended, discarded, or abandoned upon any public or private property other than the premises of the retail establishment from which the shopping cart was removed, regardless of whether such shopping cart was removed from the premises with or without the permission of the owner. For purposes of this Chapter, any shopping cart located on any public or private property other than the premises of the retail establishment from which such shopping cart was removed shall be presumed to be lost, stolen, or abandoned, even if in the possession of any person, unless such person in possession thereof is either (a) the owner, or an employee or authorized agent of the owner entitled to possession of the shopping cart; (b) an officer, employee or agent of a cart retrieval service hired by the owner to retrieve such carts; (c) enforcement personnel retrieving, storing, or disposing of said cart as provided herein and/or pursuant to the applicable provisions of the California Business and Professions Code; or (d) has written consent to be in possession of the shopping cart from the owner of said shopping cart. 
Enforcement personnel , as used in this chapter, means any Police Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, or other person employed or contracted by the City of Montclair. 
Laundry cart means a basket mounted on wheels and used in a coin-operated laundry or dry cleaning retail establishment by a customer or attendant for the purpose of transporting clothing and the supplies necessary to launder or otherwise process them. 
Owner means any owner, manager, or operator of any retail establishment. 
Parking area means a parking lot or other property provided by a retail establishment for use by customers for parking customer vehicles. The parking area of a retail establishment located in a multitenant complex or shopping center shall include the entire parking area used by the multitenant complex or shopping center. 
Premises means any building, property, or other area upon which any retail establishment business is conducted or operated in the City including the parking area provided for customers. 
Retail establishment means any legally established business engaged in the sale of any kind of merchandise that provides shopping carts for use by its customers regardless of whether such business is advertised or operated as a retail or wholesale business and regardless of whether the business is open to the general public, is a private club or business, or is a membership store. 
Shopping cart or cart means a basket that is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. The terms "shopping cart" or "cart" shall include "laundry cart." 
(Ord. No. 14-943, § 1, 8-4-14)  
11.67.030 - Applicability. 
With respect to the cart containment provisions of this chapter, the following shall apply: 
A.  Every new retail establishment providing shopping carts for use by its customers and commencing business on or after April 1, 2014, shall be subject to implementing a Mandatory Cart Containment Plan and Cart Retrieval Plan as described in this chapter prior to commencing business. 
B.  Every existing retail establishment providing shopping carts for the use of its customers and that had not implemented a Mandatory Cart Containment Plan and Cart Retrieval Plan as described in this chapter as of January 1, 2014, shall have until January 1, 2016, to implement said plan. 
(Ord. No. 14-943, § 1, 8-4-14)  
11.67.040 - Responsibility of owner. 
Owners of every retail establishment that offers the use of shopping carts by its customers shall develop, implement, and comply with the provisions set forth in this chapter and a written plan approved by the Director of Community Development to prevent customers from removing shopping carts from the premises of such retail establishment without authorization of the owner ("Mandatory Cart Containment Plan"). Two or more retail establishments located within the same multitenant complex or shopping center may collaborate and submit a single Mandatory Cart Containment Plan. 
(Ord. No. 14-943, § 1, 8-4-14)  
11.67.050 - Mandatory cart containment plan. 
Every owner who provides shopping carts for customers to use on the premises of any retail establishment shall develop, implement, and comply with the provisions of this chapter and a written plan ("Cart Containment Plan") approved by the Director of Community Development to prevent the removal of shopping carts from the premises of such retail establishment without authorization of the owner. The Cart Containment Plan shall, at a minimum, include the following elements: 
A.  Signs Affixed to Carts. In accordance with the applicable provisions of the California Business and Professions Code, every shopping cart made available for use by customers shall have a sign permanently affixed to it that: (1) identifies the owner of the cart, retailer, or both; (2) notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the premises; (3) notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the premises of the business, or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of state law; and (4) lists a valid telephone number and/or address for returning a cart that has been removed from the premises to the owner or retailer. 
B.  Notice to Customers. Written notice shall be provided to customers in English and Spanish that removal of shopping carts from the premises is prohibited by state law. Such notice may be provided in the form of fliers distributed on the premises, warnings printed on shopping bags, direct mail, website notices, or any other means demonstrated to be effective. In addition, conspicuous signs shall be placed and maintained on the premises near all customer entrances and exits and within the parking area warning customers that removal of shopping carts from the premises is prohibited by state law. 
C.  Daily Cart Confinement. All shopping carts located on the premises of a retail establishment (other than an establishment open for business 24 hours per day) shall be collected at the end of each business day by employees of the retail establishment and stored in a secure manner within an approved cart corral or storage area on the premises as designated in the Cart Containment Plan until the commencement of the next business day. All shopping carts located on the premises of any retail establishment open for business 24 hours per day, other than carts in use by a customer or patron, shall be collected by employees of the retail establishment and returned to an approved cart corral or storage area on the premises as designated in the Cart Containment Plan at least once per calendar day between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. on each day the retail establishment is open for business. The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to any shopping carts located within an enclosed building. 
D.  Physical Measures. Specific physical measures shall be implemented and maintained at all times by the owner to prevent, deter, or impede the removal of shopping carts from the premises. Such physical measures shall be specifically identified in the Cart Containment Plan and may include one or more of the following: 
1.  Disabling devices on the wheels of all carts, which are activated when the cart crosses an electronic barrier at the perimeter of the premises. 
2.  Physical barriers located at doors, around loading areas, or other defined perimeters that prevent the passage of carts beyond the barriers. The barrier may also be placed on the carts themselves so that the carts cannot pass through door openings or other defined perimeters. 
3.  Maintaining one or more security guards assigned the responsibility of preventing customers from removing shopping carts from the premises. 
E.  Employee Training. The owner of the retail establishment shall implement and maintain a periodic training program for its new and existing employees designed to educate employees concerning the requirements of this chapter and the provisions of state law prohibiting the unauthorized removal of shopping carts from the premises of the retail establishment. 
(Ord. No. 14-943, § 1, 8-4-14)  
11.67.060 - Mandatory cart retrieval plan. 
Every owner who provides shopping carts for customers to use on the premises of any retail establishment shall develop, implement, and comply with the provisions of this chapter and a written plan ("Cart Retrieval Plan") approved by the Director of Community Development for the retrieval of lost, stolen, or abandoned shopping carts that have been removed from the premises of the retail establishment. The Cart Retrieval Plan shall include the following elements: 
A.  Retrieval Personnel. The owner shall provide personnel for purposes of retrieval of lost, stolen, or abandoned shopping carts. Such personnel may be either employees of the retail establishment or one or more independent contractors hired by the owner to provide shopping cart retrieval services, or a combination of both. The Cart Retrieval Plan shall either: (1) identify the number of employees who will be assigned such cart retrieval duties and provide the number of total hours per week that each assigned employee will perform such services (in addition to any on-premises retrieval duties to which such employee may be assigned); or (2) include a copy of each contract with a cart retrieval service (excluding confidential financial information which may be redacted or obscured from the contract). The owner shall provide written authorization of the right to retrieve the owner's shopping carts to all retrieval personnel, whether they are employees of the retail establishment or an independent contractor. Such authorization shall be carried by every such person while performing cart retrieval services off-site on behalf of the owner of the retail establishment and shall be presented to any enforcement personnel upon request. 
B.  Prompt Retrieval of Carts. Retrieval personnel or services shall assure that all identified public streets, bus stops, and other public places are patrolled and each lost, stolen, or abandoned shopping cart owned or provided by the retail establishment that is found as a result of such patrols is immediately retrieved and removed from any public or private property, where accessible, upon which the cart is found. At the discretion of the Director of Community Development, the Cart Retrieval Plan shall: (1) identify the perimeter streets, bus stops, and public places to be patrolled as required by this Subsection; (2) the manner, frequency, and times of such patrols; and (3) such other information as reasonably required by the City to ensure that the owner is devoting sufficient resources to cart retrieval operations to comply with the provisions of this Section and the approved Cart Retrieval Plan. 
(Ord. No. 14-943, § 1, 8-4-14)  
11.67.070 - Plan submission and approval. 
A.  New or Relocated Retail Establishments. Every new retail establishment and any existing retail establishment relocating to a different location within the City shall submit Cart Containment and Cart Retrieval Plans, pursuant to Sections 11.67.050 and 11.67.060 herein, to the Director of Community Development and obtain approval of said plans from the City prior to providing any shopping carts for use by customers of the retail establishment. Each proposed plan shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount set forth by Resolution of the City Council. No proposed plan(s) shall be accepted for filing and processing by the Director of Community Development unless accompanied by the adopted application fee. 
B.  Existing Retail Establishments. Each existing retail establishment providing shopping carts for use by its customers shall submit Cart Containment and Cart Retrieval Plans, pursuant to Sections 11.67.050 and 11.67.060 herein, to the Director of Community Development no later than September 30, 2015. No such retail establishment existing on March 31, 2014, shall provide or continue to provide shopping carts for use by its customers commencing on January 1, 2016, without approved plans conforming to the requirements set forth in Sections 11.67.050 and 11.67.060 herein, provided, however, said deadline shall be extended for the period, if any, during which a plan is pending, or where an appeal of the denial of such plan is pending pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. Each proposed plan shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount set forth by resolution of the City Council. No proposed plan(s) shall be accepted for filing and processing by the Director of Community Development unless accompanied by the adopted application fee. 
C.  Plan Review and Approval. Upon the filing of any proposed plan pursuant to Sections 11.67.050 and 11.67.060 herein, the Director of Community Development shall review the proposed plan for compliance with the guidelines set forth in this Chapter. The Director shall approve or deny the proposed plan within 30 calendar days following receipt thereof. If the proposed plans comply with each of the applicable requirements of this chapter, the Director shall approve the plan; otherwise, the plan shall be denied. If the proposed plan is denied, the notice of decision provided to the owner shall state the grounds upon which the proposed plan was denied. The decision of the Director may be appealed pursuant to subsection E of this section. 
D.  Amendments by Owner. The owner of any retail establishment that has an approved plan conforming to the requirements of this chapter may, at any time, submit a proposed amendment to the approved plan to the Director of Community Development. Such amendment shall be processed in accordance with the procedure for a proposed plan as set forth in subsection C of this section. 
E.  Appeals. Pursuant to the timeframes and procedures set forth in Section 1.08.010 of the Montclair Municipal Code, any owner aggrieved by a decision of the Director of Community Development pursuant to this chapter may appeal such decision to the City Manager. No appeal shall be accepted for filing and processing unless accompanied by the appeal fee set forth by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 14-943, § 1, 8-4-14)  
11.67.080 - Cart corrals and storage areas. 
A.  Every new retail establishment commencing business on or after April 1, 2014, and providing shopping carts for use by its customers that can be transported outside the retail establishment's building shall provide/construct cart corrals and/or cart storage areas on the premises in which the retail establishment is located in a number and design satisfactory to the Director of Community Development and meeting the following minimum criteria: 
1.  For retail establishments providing 30 or fewer shopping carts for use by its customers, the owner shall provide a minimum of two portable cart corral(s) within the parking area. Said corrals shall be secured to the pavement for stability and to avoid obstruction of parking stalls. 
2.  For retail establishments providing more than 30 shopping carts for use by its customers, the owner shall construct permanent cart corrals and/or storage areas within the parking area and adjacent to the building utilizing materials complementary to the main building. Parking area cart corrals shall be enclosed on each side by a decorative masonry base between 12 and 18 inches in height, topped with a decorative iron or tubular steel fence providing an overall corral height (masonry plus fencing) of 42 inches. 
B.  Every existing retail establishment providing shopping carts for use by its customers that undergoes an expansion resulting in an increase in gross floor area of 25 percent or more shall be required to provide/construct cart corrals and/or cart storage areas on the premises in which the retail establishment is located in a number and design consistent with the guidelines set forth in this Section. 
(Ord. No. 14-943, § 1, 8-4-14)  
11.67.090 - Authority to impound, store, sell, or dispose of abandoned shopping carts. 
A.  The City may retrieve and impound any shopping cart left on public or private property, other than that of the retail establishment providing the shopping carts, where the shopping cart does not have affixed to it the identification signs required by Section 11.67.050 herein. The City shall deem discarded any shopping cart that lacks said identification sign and may retrieve and immediately dispose of any such shopping cart. 
B.  For any shopping cart left on public or private property other than that of the retail establishment providing the shopping carts, which does have affixed to it the identification signs required by Section 11.67.050 herein, the City shall provide notice to the owner of the shopping cart as required by Section 22435.7 of the California Business and Professions Code and may impound, store, sell, or otherwise dispose of an impounded shopping cart pursuant to the procedures set forth in said section of the California Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-943, § 1, 8-4-14)  
11.67.100 - Penalties. 
Any person or entity violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-943, § 1, 8-4-14)  
Chapter 11.68 - SEASONAL AND PROMOTIONAL OUTDOOR SALES 
Sections: 
 
11.68.010 - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is enacted by the City Council of the City of Montclair to address temporary outdoor sales on property where there is already a permitted use or the property is vacant. Such uses differ from outdoor display uses permitted by conditional use permit where the use of the property is permanent in nature and the sales items are permanently displayed. This chapter is to allow the special uses permitted in specific areas of the City where they may not be permitted otherwise. To regulate the uses permitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the City shall ensure the safety of people, aesthetics, and the proper function of such a use. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.500)  
11.68.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  The Director of Community Development may grant a seasonal outdoor use permit for the following uses: 
1.  Pumpkin sales lots; 
2.  Christmas tree sales lots; 
3.  Crops grown and sold on the same lot; and 
4.  Temporary special events limited to no more than three consecutive days. 
B.  The Director of Community Development may grant a promotional outdoor sales event permit as defined in Chapter 11.02 of this title to a bona fide business established having a permanent location within the City for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise on a developed site occupied by an establishment business licensed by the City and either: 
1.  The business conducting the sale is legally operating elsewhere in the City at a permanent location; or 
2.  The legally operating business conducting the sale does not currently exist in the City, in such case, it must be demonstrated that the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold are not sold by another business legally operating in the City. 
(Ord. 01-816 § 1; prior code § 9-6.501) 
(Ord. No. 18-978-U, § 4, 12-17-18)  
11.68.030 - Authorization. 
The Director of Community Development is authorized to grant seasonal outdoor use permits and promotional outdoor sales event permits for uses pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. In granting the permits, the Director may stipulate conditions in addition to those required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9-6.502)  
11.68.040 - Appeals. 
Any appeals shall be in accordance with Section 11.04.070. 
(Prior code § 9-6.503)  
11.68.050 - Application requirements. 
Prior to the issuance of a seasonal outdoor use permit and a promotional outdoor sales event permit, the applicant shall pay the applicable fees and/or deposit with an application, and also specify and include the following: 
A.  A site plan of the property to be used and the surrounding properties. Site plan shall indicate the location, size, height, and type of all structures, including signs, walls, fences, and all parking spaces; 
B.  The location, size, and dimensions of all yards and setbacks and all spaces between structures; 
C.  The elevations of all structures proposed for construction, showing the general design, architectural features and building materials; 
D.  The location of all lighting within the proposed development area, except that which is within any building. 
(Prior code § 9-6.504)  
11.68.060 - Time limits. 
A.  The following time limits shall apply to seasonal outdoor sales as defined in Chapter 11.02 of this title: 
1.  Only crops grown and sold on the same lot may be permitted for a period not to exceed one year and if the permit is not utilized within such time, this authorization shall become void. 
2.  Christmas tree and pumpkin sales lots may be permitted for a period not to exceed 75 days to include setup and cleanup under the time limitation, and if the permit is not utilized within such time, this authorization shall become void. 
B.  The following time limits shall apply to promotional outdoor sales as defined in Chapter 11.02 of this title: 
1.  A permit shall be for a period not to exceed 10 days and shall be permitted for not more than four times per calendar year per business address. 
2.  One additional special promotional outdoor sale permit may be granted by the Community Development Director within one calendar year for a center-wide participation basis if such center has five or more participating tenants. Such special center-wide permit, however, shall be limited to 72 hours. One temporary banner may be permitted to advertise such center-wide outdoor sales event coinciding within the 72-hour period. 
3.  The permits may not be granted consecutively but shall be separated by a time period of at least 30 days. 
C.  Once any portion of a seasonal outdoor use permit or a promotional outdoor sales event permit is utilized, the conditions thereof shall become immediately operative and shall be strictly complied with. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.505)  
11.68.070 - Revoking. 
The Director of Community Development is authorized to revoke any seasonal and promotional outdoor permit or special event permit when it is determined that requirements of this chapter or conditions of approval are not being met, or the permit was obtained by fraud or issued in error, or the use is creating a nuisance or safety hazard. 
(Prior code § 9-6.506)  
11.68.080 - Amortization. 
Promotional outdoor sales event permits, as defined in Chapter 11.02 of this title, shall apply to the following provisions: Any commercial or retail business that has previously utilized its privileges by having promotional outdoor sales events, prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be considered legal nonconforming and shall be allowed to exercise the above-said privileges so long as the business retains the same majority ownership interest as existed on October 1, 1988. At such time when there is a change of majority ownership interest, all commercial or retail businesses shall conform in accordance with the provisions of this title and all sections of this Code. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 8: prior code § 9-6.507)  
11.68.090 - Temporary structure and display area. 
A.  Temporary structures may be permitted for seasonal outdoor use permits in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  All structures shall not exceed a total of 10 percent of the entire lot or 400 square feet, whichever is less. 
2.  Any structure used for storage shall be used for equipment or supplies which are accessory to the crops being grown and sold. Such equipment or supplies shall be adequately screened from public view. 
3.  All structures shall conform to all Building Division procedures and regulations. 
4.  No structure or outdoor display shall be allowed within the public right-of-way. 
5.  No dwelling units, including those for caretakers or employees, are permitted in conjunction with seasonal outdoor uses or promotional outdoor sales events. Trailers, campers, and the like may be permitted for seasonal outdoor sales, such as Christmas tree lots, upon approval by the Director of Community Development. 
B.  For promotional outdoor sale events, no temporary structures shall be permitted during the sale period specified on the permit with the following exceptions: 
1.  A small canopy or umbrella with at least 50 percent of its sides opened, and the size of its roof covering not to exceed 1000 square feet in area or 30 percent of the defined outdoor sale area, whichever is less; 
2.  Outdoor sales display area shall not exceed 30 percent of the required total parking area for the business based upon building square footage; 
3.  Temporary structure per subsection (B)(1) of this section shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from street side property lines, if it does not obstruct visibility of the adjoining property. No part of any structure shall encroach onto the landscape area, walkway, fire lane, fire exit, or handicapped parking area; 
4.  Temporary structure shall meet all fire and building safety standards as required under Section 10.52.090 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.508)  
11.68.100 - Fees. 
A.  Each seasonal outdoor permit shall be required to have the following fees submitted with the application, as determined by fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council: 
1.  An annual permit fee; and 
2.  A refundable clean-up deposit. 
B.  Each promotional outdoor sales permit shall be required to have the following fees submitted with the application, as determined by fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council: 
1.  A permit and inspection fee per event; and 
2.  A refundable clean-up deposit for any temporary structure or tent over 200 square feet in area erected or placed on the property in conjunction with the promotional outdoor event; or 
3.  An additional deposit if, in the opinion of the Director of Community Development, such event could generate a large assemblage of people and/or vehicles which may, in turn, require additional inspection and/or monitoring by City personnel. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.509)  
Chapter 11.70 - SERVICE STATIONS 
Sections: 
 
11.70.010 - Minimum lot size. 
A.  A full-service or dispensing-only service station site shall consist of an area of not less than 22,500 square feet, and the following minimum dimensions shall apply: 
1.  One hundred fifty feet along a major street; and 
2.  One hundred thirty feet along a secondary or local street. 
B.  A mixed-use service station site shall consist of an area of not less than the following: 
1.  For strictly automobile/truck service-oriented uses (excluding auto parts stores) conducted in a single building, a mixed-use service station shall consist of an area of not less than 22,500 square feet, and the following minimum dimensions shall apply: 
a.  One hundred fifty feet along a major street; and 
b.  One hundred thirty feet along a secondary or local street. 
2.  If the mixed use involves a nonautomobile/ nontruck service-oriented use or two or more buildings, the site shall consist of an area of not less than 32,000 square feet. 
3.  Depending on the nature and intensity of the use, the Planning Commission may require additional lot area for the sites referred to in subsections B(1) and (2) of this section. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.101)  
11.70.020 - Pump islands. 
A.  Pump islands for a full-service or mixed-use service station shall consist of the following: 
1.  Pump islands shall be located not less than 20 feet from the street right-of-way (property line). 
2.  There shall be a maximum of four pump islands with not more than four meter cabinets per island. Two fuel-outlet hoses for each meter cabinet shall be permitted. 
3.  One oil display rack, permanent or mobile, which is architecturally compatible with the other equipment located on the pump island may be placed at each pump island. 
B.  Pump islands for a dispensing-only service station shall consist of the following: 
1.  Pump islands shall be located not less than 20 feet from the street right-of-way (property line). 
2.  There shall be a maximum of four pump islands with not more than four meter cabinets per island. Two fuel-outlet hoses for each cabinet shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.102)  
11.70.030 - Walls and fences. 
Masonry (brick, block, slumpstone, and the like) walls shall be required on interior property lines if the property lines are adjacent to or across an alley from any residential or professional zone. The height and color of the wall shall be determined by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.103)  
11.70.040 - Restrooms. 
A.  Requirement. A restroom for women and a restroom for men for use by customers and employees shall be provided in all service stations. 
B.  Screening. All restroom entrances shall be screened from view from adjacent properties and street rights-of-way by decorative structural screening. 
(Prior code §§ 9-6.104, 9-6.104.1)  
11.70.050 - Lighting. 
Top-mounted pole lights, generally mushroomed in character, shall be required and shall be so situated and shielded as not to direct or reflect lighting on adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. 
(Prior code § 9-6.105)  
11.70.060 - Parking. 
A.  For full-service service stations there shall be provided a minimum of one parking space for each employee, plus two for each service bay. All off-street parking spaces shall be striped and shall consist of one approved handicapped parking space, and the remainder shall be a minimum of 9 feet by 20 feet. 
B.  For dispensing-only service stations there shall be provided a minimum of one parking space for each employee, plus two for air and water servicing. All off-street parking spaces shall be striped and shall be a minimum of 12 feet by 20 feet including one approved handicapped parking space. 
C.  For mixed-use service stations there shall be provided for the basic service station use a minimum of one parking space for each employee, plus two for air and water servicing. All off-street parking spaces shall be striped and shall be a minimum of 12 feet by 20 feet and include one approved handicapped parking space. Parking for other uses on the same site shall be in conformance with the minimum standards provided for in this Code or as required by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.106)  
11.70.070 - Utilities. 
All electrical, telephone, C.A.T.V., and similar service wires or cables which provide direct service to the property being developed shall, within the exterior boundary lines of such property, be installed underground. The developer or owner shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation of such facilities. 
For the purposes of this section, appurtenances and associated equipment, such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed aboveground but in all cases shall be concealed from public view in a manner approved by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.107)  
11.70.080 - Architecture. 
Service stations shall be so designed that the architectural theme will reflect the most recent thinking in good service station design. "Ranch" or "neighborhood" types shall be acceptable, and other innovative designs may be permitted provided the same can be shown to be an asset to the area under consideration and will not cause other structures and property in the local environment to materially depreciate in appearance or value. To accomplish the desired architecture, the use of ornamental brick, stone, and the like on the exterior of the building shall be encouraged. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.108)  
11.70.090 - Service bays. 
A.  For full-service service stations, the following shall apply: 
1.  There shall be provided and used a minimum of three service bays in all cases. 
2.  The entrance to the service bays shall not be open to the street but shall be so designed to face the rear or interior side property line. 
3.  A masonry facade or raised planter (brick, stone, rock, or the like) shall be installed from the grade 36 inches high along the outside of that portion of the service station structure which constitutes a vertical wall at the opposite end of the service bay entrance. A pedestrian entrance may be permitted in such wall. 
4.  Windows in the exterior service bay wall constituting in excess of 10 percent of the total wall area shall not be permitted. The Planning Commission, without the benefit of a public hearing, may reduce the amount of permitted window area when in can be shown that such action will further the objectives of this title. 
B.  For dispensing-only service stations, no service bay shall be permitted. 
C.  For mixed-use service stations, the standards of a full-service service station shall be required if automotive service is provided other than fueling. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.109)  
11.70.100 - Trash areas. 
A fully enclosed (all sides) trash area shall be provided and constructed of a material which shall be in harmony with the architecture of the building. The height of all such enclosures shall be determined by the Planning Commission. 
(Prior code § 9-6.110)  
11.70.110 - Access. 
Each frontage may be permitted two drive approaches. However, on a frontage where no pump islands are proposed, access shall be limited to one location. No drive approach may encroach into a curb return. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.111)  
11.70.120 - Required services. 
All service stations shall provide air, water, and window cleaning equipment available for automotive safety. 
(Prior code § 9-6.111.1)  
11.70.130 - Truck services. 
A.  For full-service or dispensing-only service stations, no truck service shall be provided. 
B.  For mixed-use service stations, truck services may be provided if allowed in the zone and if approved by the Planning Commission and the subject site is so approved for the use. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.111.2)  
11.70.140 - Signs. 
No outdoor advertising sign or structure shall be permitted except as provided in subsections A and B of this section as follows: 
A.  Identification/price signs or structures shall be permitted as follows: 
1.  Identification signs or trademark symbols and price signs may be incorporated within freestanding walls or structures constructed of masonry, wood, or other suitable building material. Such signs and associated structures shall not exceed the following: 
a.  For full-service service stations, 60 square feet, 
b.  For dispensing-only service stations, 42 square feet, 
c.  For mixed-use service stations, 60 square feet. Such signs shall not exceed 10 feet in height, and in no case shall such signs or structures be permitted to project beyond the property line. Such signs shall be limited to one for each street frontage; or 
2.  Identifications signs or trademarks symbols may be located on or incorporated within the pump island canopy structure or on the building walls. Such signs shall not project above the top of the canopy structure, shall not exceed a maximum area of 20 square feet for each sign face, and each sign shall be limited in length to a maximum of 50 percent of the long dimension of the canopy on which the sign is located. 
B.  Flags, banners, spinners, and similar advertising devices shall not be permitted, except as provided in Section 11.72.270 of this title (temporary sign). 
C.  Hot or cold air balloons, portable or movable, revolving, flashing, and animated signs in addition to those listed under Section 11.72.120 of this title (prohibited signs), shall not be permitted. 
D.  The signs and structures permitted by the provisions of this section shall be subject to compliance with other provisions of this Code relating to sight distance, building, construction, nonconform-ance, and all other regulations of this Code, except variance proceedings. 
E.  Signs for mixed-use service stations shall be incorporated into the signs set forth in subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this section. An additional sign may be permitted by the Planning Commission for mixed-use service stations if the application of these standards is found to be a hardship and/or the area of the site is larger than the minimum required by this Code. 
F.  For full-service or mixed-use service stations, one poster sign not exceeding 18 square feet and not more than 6 feet in height may be permitted per street frontage for the listing of available services related to the service station operation, such as tire sales, mechanical services, repairs, and testing. The poster signs shall be located within a landscaped planter or next to the pump islands or main building. In lieu of the freestanding poster signs, the station may be permitted a similar sign mounted on the exterior building wall. The location, design and color of such sign shall be subject to the review and approval of the Community Development Director upon submittal of detailed plans. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.112)  
11.70.150 - Landscaping. 
Landscaped areas, a minimum of 15 feet in width, shall be required along all street frontages (except at drive locations), and all such planted areas shall be either bermed at a slope of 1:3 or contained within a planter backed up by an ornamental masonry wall (brick, stone, or the like) of not less than 18 inches, nor more than 24 inches in height. The material used for the construction of such raised planters shall be the same as that used on the exterior of the building, or other related material as approved by the Planning Commission. 
One specimen (24-inch box minimum size) on-site tree shall be provided per street frontage within the general area of the main structure in approved planters. All other trees shall be a minimum size of 15 gallons. A ground cover and such other plants as deemed necessary shall also be provided within such planter. 
Additional planters, a minimum 5 feet in width, are required along both the interior side and rear property lines. A minimum 15-gallon, 6-foot tree for every 75 square feet of said planter areas, plus ground cover and shrubs, shall be provided within each such planter. 
An automatic sprinkler system providing 100 percent irrigation to all planted areas shall be installed; hose bibs shall be provided at convenient locations. 
For mixed uses, the Planning Commission may require additional landscaping to meet general commercial standards. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.113)  
11.70.160 - Activities controlled in full-service service stations. 
The following activities shall be controlled in full-service service stations: 
A.  Heavy duty engine overhauling normally requiring more than one work day for completion; 
B.  Sales, displays, dispensing and servicing of nonautomotive-related services shall be prohibited, except that snack shops are permitted for the sale of candy, soft drinks, cigarettes and snack products, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The snack shop shall not exceed a floor area of 300 square feet and shall be located entirely within the enclosed service station building, 
2.  The snack shop shall be located in such a manner so as to safely separate patrons from auto service functions of the facility, and is subject to review under required building permit or snack shop improvements, 
3.  The snack shop may only operate as an accessory use to the service station, with operating hours limited to those of the station, 
4.  The snack shop shall not include the sale of alcoholic beverages unless approved by conditional use permit under the provisions of this title, 
5.  A decorative trash receptacle shall be provided near the snack shop entry and/or at pump islands, 
6.  Snack shops having an area or other factors in excess of these requirements may be approved, subject to a conditional use permit; and 
C.  The service station shall be allowed one display for accessories, wipers, tires, shocks or brakes to be located outside the main building. Such display shall be limited to a maximum area dimension of 3 feet by 4 feet. The intent is to permit one of the following: 
1.  A wiper storage case, 
2.  A shock absorber storage or additives case, or 
3.  Four single tires located at the discretion of the operator. In lieu of the maximum area dimension of 3 feet by 4 feet established for accessories, permitted tire displays shall be limited to a maximum of four outside the main structure; 
D.  Candy, soft drink, or food dispensers may be located outside the building if such displays are located in a specifically constructed area, such as an alcove, which is attached and located to the side of the service structure. Any such structure shall be architecturally compatible with other structures. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.114)  
11.70.170 - Prohibited uses in full-service service stations. 
The following uses shall be prohibited in full-service service stations: 
A.  Automobile body repair and painting shall not be permitted in any case; 
B.  Outdoor storage of products or parking, other than customer parking; 
C.  Outdoor storage of dismantled vehicles; 
D.  Vehicle impounding; and 
E.  All uses not listed as permitted. 
(Prior code § 9-6.114.1)  
11.70.180 - Activities controlled in dispensing-only service stations. 
No use shall be permitted outside of sales of gasoline except the sales of candy, soft drink, cigarette and snack products subject to the requirements for snack shops per Section 11.70.160(B) or when dispensed by an automatic machine per the requirements of Section 11.70.160(D). 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.114.2)  
11.70.190 - Prohibited uses in dispensing-only service stations. 
The following uses shall be prohibited in dispensing-only service stations: 
A.  Outdoor storage of products or parking, other than customer parking; 
B.  Outdoor storage of dismantled vehicles; 
C.  Vehicle impounding; 
D.  Tow services; and 
E.  All uses not listed as permitted. 
(Prior code § 9-6.114.3)  
11.70.200 - Activities controlled in mixed-use service stations. 
The following activities shall be controlled in mixed-use service stations: 
A.  The service station shall be allowed one display for accessories, wipers, tires, shocks, or the like to be located outside the main building. Such display shall be limited to a maximum area dimension of 3 feet by 4 feet. The intent is to permit one of the following: 
1.  A wiper storage case; 
2.  A shock absorber storage or additive case; 
3.  Four single tires located at the discretion of the operator. In lieu of the maximum area dimension of 3 feet by 4 feet established for accessories, permitted tire displays shall be limited to a maximum of four tires outside the main structure. 
B.  Candy, soft drink, or food dispensers may be located outside the building if such displays are located in a specifically constructed area, such as an alcove, which is attached to the outside of the service structure. Any such structure shall be architecturally compatible with other structures on the site. 
C.  Outdoor sales, displays, dispensing and servicing of nonautomotive-related services shall be prohibited, except candy, soft drink, cigarette and snack products dispensed by an automatic dispensing machine as provided in this chapter, or within a snack shop subject to the requirements provided in this chapter. 
D.  Retail off sale of alcoholic beverages shall be subject to conditional use permit requirements in accordance with provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.114.4)  
11.70.210 - Uses permitted in mixed-use service stations. 
The following mixed uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission if approved in the basic zone: 
A.  One additional business or business owner of the same parcel; 
B.  Heavy duty automotive engine overhauling requiring generally more than one work day; 
C.  Truck servicing not to exceed two axles; 
D.  Heavy duty engine overhauling normally requiring more than one work day for completion; and 
E.  Other uses the Planning Commission finds compatible to those permitted uses and to the general area. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.114.5)  
11.70.220 - Prohibited uses in mixed-use service stations. 
The following uses shall be prohibited for all service stations: 
A.  Any use limited to or prohibited in the M-l and M-2 Zones; 
B.  Any use requiring outdoor storage or parking other than customer parking; 
C.  Outdoor storage of dismantled vehicles; and 
D.  Automobile body repair and painting shall not be permitted tn any case. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.114.6)  
11.70.230 - All activities in structures. 
All activities, including the servicing of automobiles, shall be conducted within the service station building. 
(Prior code § 9-6.114.7)  
11.70.240 - Locational criteria. 
A conditional use permit shall not be granted for a gasoline service station at any location unless: 
A.  The parcel under construction is located along a major street as defined in the adopted Development Plan for Circulation and Transportation; 
B.  The maximum number of service stations per intersection does not exceed two. This provision shall not prohibit existing service stations, which are located at intersections where a greater service station density exists, from redeveloping so long as the minimum service station development standards are met; 
C.  The mixed uses are compatible to the area; 
D.  Such mixed uses have compatible traffic flow. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-6.115)  
11.70.250 - Zoning criteria. 
A.  Full-service service stations may be located in the C-1, C-2, C-3, MIP, M-1, and M-2 Zones. 
B.  Dispensing-only service stations may be located in the C-3 Zone only. 
C.  Mixed-use service stations may be located in the C-3, MIP, M-1 and M-2 Zones only. 
(Prior code § 9-6.116)  
Chapter 11.72 - SIGNS 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
11.72.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The regulation and control of the location, size, type and number of signs permitted shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. The purpose of this chapter shall be to safeguard and enhance property values; to protect public and private investments in building and open spaces; to preserve and improve the appearance of the City as a place in which to live and to work, and as an attraction to nonresidents who come to visit or trade; to encourage sound signing practices as an aid to business and for the information of the public, but to prevent excessive and confusing sign displays; to reduce hazards to motorists and pedestrians; and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by regulating and controlling all matters relating to signs. 
It is the intent of this chapter to provide sound and appropriate development standards and review process to ensure that all signage conforms to the Community Design Element of the adopted General Plan. It is further recognized that the City's policy for signs is one which advocates simple identification of the business name or center, rather than the advertising of business products or activities. 
(Prior code § 9-7.101)  
11.72.020 - Interpretation of provisions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter are not intended to abrogate any easements, covenants, government regulations or codes, court rulings, or other existing agreements which are more restrictive than the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Whenever the application of this chapter is uncertain, the question shall be referred to the Planning Commission for determination. The Planning Commission shall then authorize signing which best fulfills the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.305)  
11.72.030 - Administration and enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to enforce all the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.301)  
11.72.040 - Building permits required. 
Permits shall be required prior to the placement, installation, relocation, modification of the copy, or reconstruction of any sign in the City, unless expressly exempt by this chapter. A sign requiring a permit shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.302)  
11.72.050 - Design, construction and maintenance. 
A.  All signs, sign structures and materials will be designed, manufactured, assembled and constructed in compliance with all minimum State, federal and City regulations. 
B.  All signs and sign structures shall be maintained and kept in proper repair. The display surface of all signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted and free from rust and corrosion. Any cracked or broken surfaces, malfunctioning lights, missing sign copy or other unmaintained or damaged portion of a sign shall be repaired or replaced within 30 days following notification by the City. (Amended during 1999 codification; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.303)  
11.72.060 - Application for Precise Plan of Design (PPD) approval. 
A.  The following procedure shall be followed for new signs which exceed 50 square feet in sign area or for the remodeling of an existing sign which results in over 50 square feet in sign area or in the case of a new sign program for a multi-tenant complex: 
1.  Application for PPD approval shall be made on forms as prescribed by the Planning Division along with the necessary drawings, sample material board, and fees; 
2.  Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Division shall submit the sign proposal to the Development Review Committee for conformance with the intent and provisions of this chapter within 15 working days and shall then forward a written report and recommendation to the Planning Commission to approve, approve with modifications, or deny the sign request at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
B.  The following categories of signs shall be reviewed administratively for conformance with the intent and provisions of this chapter by the Director of Community Development, unless otherwise specified: 
1.  Monument signs not exceeding 50 square feet per single sign face and less than 8 feet in height; 
2.  New wall signs not exceeding 50 square feet in sign area; and 
3.  Temporary and special event signs under Section 11.72.270, on-site real estate or construction signs under Section 11.72.300, and certain off-site directional signs under Section 11.72.310 of this chapter, except those specifically exempt under Section 11.72.110 of this chapter. 
A decision to approve, approve with modification, or deny such sign requests shall be rendered and forwarded to the applicant within 15 working days from the date such application is deemed completed and fees paid. The decision of the Director of Community Development may be appealed to the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 11.72.090 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.304)  
11.72.070 - Fees. 
Application for sign approval, whether it is for Planning Commission review or for administrative review by the Planning Division, shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fees in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council. Separate fees for building and electrical permits shall also be paid prior to issuance of such permits. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.306)  
11.72.080 - Variances. 
If practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, or results inconsistent with the general purposes of this chapter would occur from its strict literal interpretation and enforcement, the Planning Commission may grant a variance therefrom upon such terms and conditions as it deems necessary. Such variances shall be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this chapter so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will ensure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties. 
To grant a variance, the provisions of Section 11.82.010 through and including Section 11.82.050 of this title shall be complied with. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.307)  
11.72.090 - Appeal. 
A decision of the Director of Community Development may be appealed to the Planning Commission within ten days of the Director's decision. The appeal shall be made on forms prescribed by the Planning Division and fees paid in accordance with the fee resolution. The submission of the application and fees shall constitute the filing of the appeal. The Planning Commission shall review the appeal at a regularly scheduled meeting according to the schedule of meetings and deadlines for submission of applications. The Commission shall either uphold, reverse or modify the Director's decision. If anyone is aggrieved or affected by the decision of the Planning Commission, they may appeal the decision to the City Council within 10 days from the decision of the Planning Commission. The appeal shall be submitted in accordance with the above appeal provisions. The City Council shall review the appeal and either uphold, reverse or modify the Commission's decision. The Council's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.308)  
11.72.100 - Enforcement, penalties and abatement. 
A.  Any person or entity violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
B.  The owner or other person entitled to possession of a sign which is removed, stored and/or destroyed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to the City for the cost of the removal, storage and/or destruction of such sign and for the City's court costs and reasonable attorney's fees. The City may recover the same through an action commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
C.  Any unauthorized or illegal sign within the public right-of-way or on private property that is found and declared to be a public nuisance or constitutes a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic may be removed immediately, stored and/or destroyed by the City at the expense of the owner or other person entitled to possession of such sign or any person, business or entity who benefits from such sign. The cost of removal, storage and/or destruction of such illegal signs shall be the actual costs or the standard cost pursuant to a fee schedule set by resolution of the City Council. 
D.  After removal of any such illegal sign pursuant to this section, the person, business, company or entity that owns the sign, placed it or who benefited from it shall be served with a statement of costs from the City. The notice of sign abatement from City right-of-way and the statement of costs shall be mailed by certified letter or hand delivered to the charged party. Notice shall be given that the determination verified in the statement of costs can be appealed by filing a written appeal with the City Manager as specified in Section 1.08.010. 
E.  Any person desiring to retrieve a sign removed by the City may do so upon payment of an administrative fine plus such storage fees as determined by a fee resolution of the City Council that may be adopted from time to time. In lieu of paying such administrative fine, such person may retrieve a sign upon signing a promise to appear upon a citation issued to him or her for violations of this section or other provisions of this chapter. If a person wishes to contest the fact that the sign was placed in violation of this section or other provisions of this chapter prior to paying the fine or signing the citation, he or she shall have the right to an administrative hearing before the City Manager, upon receipt of a written appeal by the City as specified in subsection D of this section. If the City Manager finds that the sign was lawfully placed, he or she shall return the sign without an administrative penalty or the issuance of a citation. 
F.  Any sign removed by the City shall be considered abandoned if it is not retrieved and no written appeal is filed with the City within 15 calendar days after the date of such notification by the City following the sign removal and may be disposed of by the City without liability therefor to any person. 
(Ord. 06-889 § 15; Ord. 01-812 § 1; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 9-7.309)  
Article II. - Special Categories of Signs 
 
11.72.110 - Exempt signs. 
The following categories of signs shall be exempt from Precise Plan of Design review and the permit requirements of this chapter. An electrical or building permit may, however, be required. 
These exceptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility of its erection and maintenance and its compliance with this chapter or any other law regulating the same and any fee pertaining thereto: 
A.  The changing of advertising copy or messages on announcement or bulletin boards, electronic message board signs, and similar signs specifically designed for the use of replaceable or changeable copy, unless electrical alterations are made; 
B.  Painting, repainting, cleaning, minor repairing and routine maintenance of existing sign structure without enlarging or increasing the size or height, or the design of the sign graphics and of the structure itself; 
C.  Nameplates, traffic control signs, window signs, directional signs and public information and regulatory signs required by law or by federal, State, County or City authority, as defined in this chapter and in accordance with all provisions of this chapter; 
D.  Permanent window or entryway signs not exceeding 4 square feet and limited to business identification, hours of operation, address, and emergency information only; 
E.  Service and delivery identification signs, not exceeding 2 square feet each and limited to one sign per delivery point, placed on the rear of the building; 
F.  Contractor or construction signs listing major contractors, financial institutions, developers and/or owners of property for the project, not exceeding 40 square feet in area and 8 feet in height, unless legally required by government contracts to be larger. All signs shall be located at least 10 feet from the property line. Such signs shall be promptly removed upon the completion of the project; 
G.  Future tenant identification or announcement signs may be placed on vacant or developing property, upon receiving Precise Plan of Design approval for such development, to advertise the future use of the property and related information. For parcels containing 10 acres or less, such signs shall be limited to one per street frontage, with a maximum of 40 square feet in area per sign face and a maximum of 8 feet in height. For parcels greater than 10 acres, one sign is permitted for every 600 feet of street frontage and is limited to 64 square feet in area per sign face and 15 feet in overall height. All such signs shall be located at least 10 feet from the property line. Any such sign shall be removed from the property upon completion of such project; 
H.  Real estate signs for the selling or leasing of industrial, office or commercial property at the ratio of one per street frontage not to exceed 24 square feet in area and 6 feet in overall height, provided that it is unlighted and is removed within 10 days after the close of escrow or the rental or lease has been accomplished; 
I.  Real estate signs for the selling, renting or leasing of residential property not exceeding 4 square feet in area or 6 feet in height, provided that it is unlighted and is removed within 10 days after the close of escrow or the rental or lease has been accomplished; 
J.  Interior signs within a structure not visible from the street or from outside of building; 
K.  Memorials, tablets, plaques, or directional signs for community historical resources, installed by a recognized historical society or civic organization; 
L.  Official and legal notices issued by the court, public body, person, or officer in performance of their official duties; 
M.  Official flags of the United States of America, the State of California, and other states of the United States, counties, municipalities and official flags for nations, and flags of internationally and nationally recognized organizations; 
N.  Signs of public utility companies providing warning or public information signs as required by law; 
O.  Safety signs on construction sites; 
P.  Convenience signs not exceeding 4 square feet in area. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.401)  
11.72.120 - Prohibited signs. 
All signs not expressly permitted are prohibited, including but not limited to the following: 
A.  Roof signs, including those attached to a mansard roof; 
B.  Flashing signs, except in time and temperature or electronic message board signs; 
C.  Animated signs, including human signs and air puppets; 
D.  Revolving or rotating signs; 
E.  Vehicle or mobile signs, including signs and banners affixed to vehicles; 
F.  Portable signs, including A-frames; 
G.  Painted-on wall signs, except as specifically permitted in this chapter and approved under a Precise Plan of Design; 
H.  Off-site signs, except temporary subdivision or directional signs as provided for in this chapter; 
I.  Hot or cold air balloons; 
J.  Inflatable signs, characters, animal or other figures, whether tethered or not; 
K.  Balloons, flags, pennants, streamers, spinners, festoons, windsocks, valances, or similar displays, unless specifically permitted by this chapter; 
L.  Signs placed within or over public right-of-way on public land or on utility poles, except as specifically permitted by this chapter; 
M.  Any temporary signs or banners unless specifically permitted by this chapter; 
N.  Signs resembling traffic signs or that constitute traffic hazards; 
O.  Signs constituting obscene material; and 
P.  Flags containing a business name, product or advertising copy. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 9 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.402)  
11.72.130 - Signs relating to inoperative activities. 
Signs pertaining to activities or businesses which are no longer in operation shall be removed from the premises or the sign copy shall be removed or obliterated within 60 days after the premises have been vacated. Any such sign not removed within the specified time shall constitute a nuisance and shall be subject to removal under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9-7.403)  
11.72.140 - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Intent. It is the intent of this section to recognize that the eventual removal or elimination of existing signs that are illegal or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter is as important as is the prohibition of new signs that would violate these regulations. The removal of such nonconforming sign is in keeping with the objectives of the Community Design Element of the adopted General Plan. 
B.  General Requirements. 
1.  All signs illegally erected or reconstructed and all signs deemed to be unsafe and posting a danger to the public or which could create a potential hazard, in the opinion of the Director of Community Development, shall be removed immediately by the sign company and/or property owner upon written notice issued by the City. 
2.  A nonconforming sign may not be: 
a.  Changed to another nonconforming sign except in the case of face change to the sign copy, subject to City approval; 
b.  Structurally altered to extend its useful life; 
c.  Expanded; 
d.  Reestablished after a business discontinues for 60 days; and 
e.  Reestablished after damage or destruction of more than 50 percent of its value, as determined by the Building Official. 
3.  No new sign shall be approved for a site, structure, building or use that contains nonconforming signs unless such nonconforming signs are removed or modified to conform with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Amortization Requirements. 
1.  Every sign or advertising structure which was legally erected but does not comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be amortized in accordance with the following schedule: 
Fair Market Value 	Time Period 
Under $500 	6 months 
$ 501—$1000 	1 year 
$1001—$2000 	2 years 
$2001—$3000 	3 years 
$3001—$4000 	4 years 
$4001—$5000 	5 years 
$5001 and over 	6 years 
 
2.  The value of nonconforming signs shall be determined by the Director of Community Development and the Building Official with the assistance of an independent sign appraiser in accordance with the latest material valuation schedules. The City shall conduct an inventory of existing illegal and nonconforming signs within 12 months after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter to determine such fair market value of signs. 
3.  Time period for amortization of nonconforming signs shall commence 12 months from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Any sign which becomes nonconforming, either by reason of amendment to this chapter or by annexation to the City, shall also be subject to the provisions of this chapter. The period of time within which such sign must be abated shall commence upon the effective date of such amendment or annexation. 
4.  Hardship Cases. 
a.  Under cases of extreme hardship and unusual circumstances, the Planning Commission, upon receipt of a petition from the sign/property owner, shall have the authority to allow the retention of a nonconforming sign if the Planning Commission specifically finds that extreme hardship and unusual circumstances exist. 
b.  The proponent of the request shall have the burden of clearly demonstrating that an extreme hardship and unusual circumstance does exist and warrants the retention of the sign. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing to determine the hardship case. The procedures for conducting the public hearing and application fees shall be regulated by the variance procedures and fees established by the provisions of this title. 
c.  The Planning Commission shall use the following findings for determining that an extreme and unusual circumstance exists: 
i.  The site has a unique character or feature that causes visibility problems; 
ii.  The sign does not create a traffic hazard; 
iii.  The sign does not create a visual blight to the community; 
iv.  The sign does not adversely affect adjacent properties; 
v.  The sign is properly maintained and structurally sound; and 
vi.  No other signing alternative or design would be feasible or be able to provide reasonable signing in accordance with this chapter. 
d.  If the Planning Commission finds that an extreme and unusual circumstance exists, but that the design or condition of the sign creates a visual blight, then the Planning Commission may grant a relief from the amortization of the nonconforming sign with the condition that the sign be remodeled to a more aesthetic design. If a business or shopping center, found to have the above hardship and which contains nonconforming signs, is remodeled, then the Planning Commission shall have the authority to request that the nonconforming signs be upgraded to match the design and architectural style of the remodeled buildings. The Planning Commission may establish other conditions of approval, including but not limited to time limit for use of such signs. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code §§ 9-7.501, 9-7.502)  
Article III. - Design Standards 
 
11.72.150 - Adherence required. 
The design standards set forth in this chapter shall be adhered to for all signs, unless otherwise indicated. 
(Prior code § 9-7.601)  
11.72.160 - Sign dimensions. 
The dimensions and height of the sign cabinet, if any, or other configuration of the dimensions of the sign area of each sign on the property shall be proportional to and visually balanced with the size and scale of the building. 
(Prior code § 9-7.602)  
11.72.170 - Sign location. 
A.  All signs shall be located on the same premises as the land use or activity identified by the sign, unless specifically permitted to be off-premises in this chapter. 
B.  Signs shall be located in accordance with the provisions set forth for each zoning or land use district in this chapter. 
C.  No sign shall be located closer to overhead utility lines than the distance prescribed by California law or by the rules duly promulgated by agencies of the State or by the applicable public utility. 
D.  No sign shall be located in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The required corner cut-off area as specified under Section 11.38.050(M) of this title shall apply. 
E.  No sign shall be located within, project, or protrude into any public right-of-way unless specifically permitted in this chapter. 
F.  No sign shall be installed in such a manner that visibility to signs on adjacent property is unreasonably obscured. 
(Prior code § 9-7.603)  
11.72.180 - Sign copy. 
Sign copy shall include minimal information identifying the business or primary land use of the property only. The name of the business or brief description of the use shall be the dominant message on the sign. Extraneous advertising such as phone numbers and website addresses shall be prohibited unless part of the registered trademark of the business. The use of a logo that does not exceed 20 percent of the total sign area may be permitted. Freestanding and monument signs shall include the address or address range of the property upon which it is located. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 9 (part): prior code § 9-7.604)  
11.72.190 - Sign color. 
Sign colors shall be compatible with the building architecture. Within shopping centers, sign color should compliment the color scheme for the center. The use of garish or fluorescent colors is considered inappropriate. 
(Prior code § 9-7.605)  
11.72.200 - Copy and background ratio. 
In the case of cabinet signs or monument or freestanding signs, the amount of sign copy, inclusive of logo and other graphics, shall not exceed 40 percent of the total sign face area, leaving a minimum 60 percent background. 
(Prior code § 9-7.606)  
11.72.210 - Illumination and motion. 
Internal illumination is preferred; if external illumination is used, concealed or decorative fixtures shall be subject to approval by the Director of Community Development. Monument signs shall be nonmoving, stationary structures (in all components) and illumination, if any, shall be maintained by artificial light that is stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times (nonflashing). 
(Prior code § 9-7.607)  
11.72.220 - Electrical components. 
Electrical components such as raceways, conduits, wiring, junction boxes, transformers and the like shall be concealed from public view by appropriate means so as not to distract the architectural design of the building or sign structure. 
(Prior code § 9-7.608)  
11.72.230 - Architectural style. 
Each sign should be designed to relate to the architectural style of the main building or buildings on the site and be compatible with the style or character of existing improvements upon the lot adjacent to the site. Incorporation of one or more of the predominantly visual design elements of such building(s), such as building materials, colors, or other design details shall be required. Sign panels on monument signs shall be constructed of an opaque material, color and/or finish consistent with that on the main building(s). Acrylic or Plexiglas sign panels shall be expressly prohibited. Sign copy on monument signs shall be individual, internally or halo-illuminated channel letters attached to, or routed into, the sign panel background. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 9 (part): Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.609)  
11.72.240 - Relationship to other signs. 
If there is more than one monument sign located on a lot, all such signs shall have designs that are well related to each other by the similar treatment or incorporation of not less than four of the following six design elements: 
A.  Type of construction materials as used in the several sign components (such as cabinet, sign copy, supports); 
B.  Letter style of sign copy; 
C.  Illumination; 
D.  Type or method used for supports, uprights or structure on which sign is supported; 
E.  Sign cabinet or other configuration of sign area; 
F.  Shape of entire sign and its several components. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.610)  
11.72.250 - Landscaping. 
Each freestanding or monument sign shall be located in a fully landscaped area equal in size to at least that of the sign area so as to provide a compatible setting and ground definition to the sign. The landscaped area shall be maintained on a regular basis. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 9-7.611)  
Article IV. - Sign Regulations 
 
11.72.260 - Permitted signs generally. 
Sign permits may be issued for signs included under this section provided that the signs are in compliance with all other applicable laws and ordinances. Signs and advertising devices not expressly permitted under the provisions of this chapter are generally prohibited. 
(Prior code § 9-7.701)  
11.72.270 - Temporary and special event sign permits. 
A.  A temporary sign permit may be issued by the Director of Community Development for a temporary period of time, as specified in this section, for various special and promotional events. The signs may be used to promote the sale of new products, a special promotion or event, new management, new hours of operation, a service, or to promote a special sale. In addition, grand openings; carnivals; festivals; special educational, cultural, civic, charitable, and religious programs; seasonal crops or tree sales; and other similar special events may be specifically granted the use of such temporary signs in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The time periods granted under temporary sign permits shall refer to calendar days unless otherwise indicated. 
B.  To apply for a temporary sign permit, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Division for review and approval a completed application along with the necessary drawings and filing fees as set forth by resolution of the City Council. The use of each sign shall be subject to the following limitations: 
1.  Each business shall be allowed one 45-day temporary sign permit for the sole purpose of announcing the grand opening of a new business or significantly new use as defined in Chapter 11.02 of this Title, provided that the privilege of utilizing such sign permit shall occur no later than 60 days from the initial occupancy of such business location. 
2.  Each business, nonprofit, or civic organization shall be allowed to display a temporary promotional banner for a maximum of 90 days per calendar year. Businesses and organizations may obtain a single permit for 90 consecutive days, or multiple permits for display periods of less than 90 days, except that permits shall not be issued for periods of less than 10 consecutive days. Should a business choose to display temporary promotional banners during multiple periods, the display periods shall be separated by a minimum of 21 calendar days. This "separation period" shall also apply between the display period for a grand opening banner as described in (1) above and any subsequent display period for a temporary promotional banner. 
3.  Temporary banners shall be made of durable materials and attached only to a building on the property upon which the advertised activity is located. The Director of Community Development may allow alternative placement of temporary banners in cases where their placement on a building would not be plainly visible to passersby. In no case shall a banner be placed higher than the roofline of the building to which it is attached. 
4.  No more than one temporary banner shall be permitted per street frontage on any property, up to a maximum of three signs. If a business with multiple street frontages is entitled to, and chooses to display multiple banners, they shall not be combined on the same building elevation, but displayed one per eligible frontage. The Director of Community Development may allow a temporary banner to be placed on a building elevation with no street frontage provided that the elevation faces an internal customer parking lot with a capacity of 100 vehicles or more. 
5.  The maximum allowable size of each banner shall be 50 square feet, except that businesses occupying a gross leasable area (GLA) of 50,000 to 100,000 square feet shall be allowed a banner up to 100 square feet in size; and businesses occupying in excess of 100,000 square feet of GLA shall be allowed a banner up to 200 square feet in size. 
6.  Provisions for special sign permits and advertising devices for new and used automobile, motorcycle, and watercraft dealerships shall be in accordance with Section 11.72.280 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11-924, § 1, 7-18-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-924, § 1, adopted July 18, 2011, repealed the former § 11.72.270, and enacted a new § 11.72.270 as set out herein. The former § 11.72.272 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code § 9-7.702 and Ord. No. 99-791.  
11.72.275 - Temporary promotional banners and/or graphics at 5200 Montclair Plaza Lane. 
Notwithstanding the criteria for temporary promotional banners set forth in Section 11.72.270 of this chapter, temporary banners and graphics shall be permitted to be displayed on the former Broadway/Macy's building at 5200 Montclair Plaza Lane subject to the criteria set forth below. The purpose of this Section is to provide the owner and leasing agent at Montclair Plaza flexibility in promoting the completed interior renovations and the planned major expansion on the property. 
A.  Location. A temporary banner permit may be issued by the Director of Community Development for temporary banners and graphics on the "basketweave" architectural portions of the north, east, and south elevations of the building. Banners and graphics may cover all or part of each elevation. In no event shall banners and/or graphics be installed below or above the "basketweave" architectural portion of the building. 
B.  Application. The property owner or leasing agent shall submit to the Planning Division for review and approval a completed application along with the necessary drawings and filing fees as set forth by resolution of the City Council. The temporary banners/graphics shall be subject to the following: 
1.  One permit shall be required for the location, whether the applicant chooses to install one or multiple banners/graphics on the building. 
2.  Temporary banners/graphics shall be made of durable materials and attached securely to the building. Worn or deteriorated banners/graphics, as determined by the Director of Community Development, shall be removed or replaced within 72 hours of notification to the applicant. 
C.  Content. The copy and graphic content of the banner(s) shall be limited to promoting existing and future retailers and activity within Montclair Plaza and the area commonly known as "North Plaza," located on the north side of Moreno Street between Fremont Avenue and the property currently occupied by Target. 
D.  Duration. A permit for temporary banners/graphics issued pursuant to this Section shall not be a subject to a time limit; however, all temporary banners and graphics shall be removed no later than April 30, 2013, or the commencement of demolition of the subject building, whichever occurs first. 
E.  Sunset Date. This section shall sunset on June 30, 2013, unless extended prior to that date. 
(Ord. No. 12-929, § 1, 5-7-12)  
11.72.280 - Special sign permits for automobile dealerships. 
The Planning Commission may grant special sign permits to new or used automobile dealerships, as defined in this title, upon consideration of the uniqueness and the regional characteristic of the use and their contribution to the community. 
For the purpose of this section, a "new automobile dealership" means a factory-authorized agency with exclusive franchise agreement to market, display, sell or lease certain new automobiles and related products to the general public and is licensed by the California Department of Motor Vehicles and approved by the City under a conditional use permit to conduct such business activities. Such dealership typically encompasses at least 2 acres of outdoor display area, permanent showrooms, offices, auto parts store, and auto service area. 
A used automobile dealership typically refers to an auto agency licensed by the California Department of Motor Vehicles, and approved by the City under a conditional use permit, to market, display, sell, auction or lease pre-owned or used vehicles to the general public upon a certain physical location having an outdoor display area and/or showroom. 
A.  Permitted Signs for New Auto Dealerships. Other provisions of sign regulations pertaining to commercial uses notwithstanding, each new auto dealership may be allowed one freestanding sign to identify one or more lines of automobiles in accordance with the limitations as to size and height as specified in this section. The Planning Commission shall have the discretion of approving an auto-center identification sign for multiple users in lieu of the individual dealership signs. 
1.  Freestanding Signs. For new auto dealerships with a minimum lot area of 2 acres, a freestanding sign up to a maximum of 25 feet in height and 80 square feet in sign area may be permitted with approval of a PPD by the Planning Commission. For new automobile dealerships with frontage along the I-10 Freeway which are designed with primary freeway-orientation, consideration may be given for a freestanding sign with maximum height up to 45 feet and sign area up to 200 square feet for identification of the auto complex and product lines. Freeway-oriented freestanding signs shall be located at least 600 linear feet apart unless the applicant can demonstrate that a lesser distance would not adversely impair visibility or create hazardous conditions to freeway motorists. 
For new auto dealerships with less than 2 acres in lot area, the provisions of Section 11.72.440 of this chapter (Permitted signs in commercial zones) shall apply. 
2.  Building Signs. Building signage shall be limited to individual channel letters and logos of appropriate proportion and scale to the building mass and setbacks from the public street or freeway. One wall sign per street elevation will be allowed. 
3.  Temporary Sign Permits. Notwithstanding other provisions regulating temporary signs and advertising devices listed under subsection (A)(4) of this section, new auto dealerships may be allowed the option of displaying one temporary banner attached to the light poles on the same lot if the building is set back at least 75 feet from the street frontage and further provided that the banner is no higher than 20 feet from finished grade. For a dealership that abuts the freeway frontage, no banner shall be displayed closer than 50 feet from the freeway right-of-way. 
Dealerships may also be permitted to utilize temporary promotional signage devices affixed to exterior light poles. Such devices may include "snow cone" or fan-type banners, festoons, bunting, "Olympic" style banners, and pole-mounted flags. Such pole-mounted advertising devices must be of an attractive design and meet the following criteria: 
a.  A temporary sign permit must be obtained from the Planning Division prior to installation. A site plan and graphic representation of the proposed advertising devices is required for approval. 
b.  Pole-mounted advertising must be of a durable material and utilize a consistent design and color. 
c.  Advertising copy may be included, but must also include copy which identifies "Montclair," in an effort to strengthen the City's auto sales identity. 
d.  Pole-mounted advertising may be utilized on an ongoing basis so long as continuously maintained and/or replaced as necessary. Such advertising devices must be removed within 10 calendar days of City notification that said devices have become unmaintained, by reason of damage, discoloration, fading, improper attachment, deterioration, or are determined to be out of compliance with applicable City standards. 
e.  Pole-mounted advertising devices shall be limited to a maximum of 50 percent of the dealership's light poles, notwithstanding that each dealership shall be permitted at least two such devices. 
f.  Pole-mounted advertising devices may not project into or over the public right-of-way and may not be located so as to block reasonable vehicular or pedestrian visibility. 
g.  Pole-mounted advertising devices may not exceed a maximum area of 80 square feet each and a maximum height of 30 feet as measured from grade. 
4.  Special Weekend and Public Holiday Promotions. Auto dealerships may be permitted to display certain advertising signs and devices commencing at 12:00 noon Friday through 12:00 noon the following Monday, and from 8:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m. on public holidays officially observed by the City, including the following: 
a.  Banners of up to a maximum size of 50 square feet each and of no more than one per street frontage, except that larger banners may be approved on a case-by-case basis by the Planning Division if it can be demonstrated that the building size/length justifies a larger banner; 
b.  Balloons of no more than 36 inches in diameter, provided that no helium-filled balloons shall be displayed in such manner that is higher than 50 feet, measured from finished grade; 
c.  Small antenna flags attached to the vehicles within the display lot. 
5.  All signs not expressly permitted shall be prohibited in accordance with Section 11.72.120 of this chapter. 
B.  Permitted Signs for Used Auto Dealerships. 
1.  Freestanding Signs. Other provisions of sign regulation pertaining to commercial uses notwithstanding, each used auto dealership with a minimum 200-foot primary street frontage may be allowed one freestanding sign per parcel with a maximum height of 10 feet and a sign area not to exceed 60 square feet. For dealerships with less than 200 feet of primary street frontage, one freestanding sign not to exceed 8 feet in height and 50 square feet in area may be allowed per parcel or development. 
2.  Building Signs. Building signs shall be permitted in accordance with Section 11.72.440 of this chapter. 
3.  Temporary Sign Permits. Used auto dealerships may be permitted to display temporary signs and advertising devices in accordance with subsection (A)(3) of this section. 
4.  Special Weekend and Public Holiday Promotions. Special weekend and public holiday promotions may be permitted in accordance with provisions under subsection (A)(4) of this section. 
5.  All signs not expressly permitted shall be prohibited in accordance with Section 11.72.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.703)  
11.72.290 - Freeway-oriented signs. 
For commercial or office developments with frontage abutting the I-10 Freeway within the City, consideration may be given for additional freestanding and/or building signage in the following manner, subject to PPD approval by the Planning Commission, and provided that no sign shall be placed in such a manner that is inconsistent with any federal, State or local laws regulating freeway advertising. 
A.  Freestanding Sign. 
1.  For commercial or office developments having a minimum of 5 acres in lot area and a minimum of 600 feet of freeway frontage, one freeway-oriented freestanding sign up to 250 square feet in sign area and 45 feet in height may be permitted if the development is regional in nature and if such sign is located at least 600 feet from another freeway-oriented freestanding sign on the same side of the Freeway. The Planning Commission may reduce the distance separation requirement if the applicant can demonstrate that a lesser distance would not adversely impair visibility or create hazardous conditions to freeway motorists. 
2.  Sign panels shall be limited to identification of the center or complex and a maximum of six major tenants occupying a minimum floor area of 30,000 square feet each. Tenants with lesser floor area but which are nationally recognized may be allowed, subject to City approval. 
3.  For development located within an adopted specific plan area, other design criteria, requirements and limitations for freeway-oriented signs shall also be complied with. 
B.  Wall Signs. Individual channel letter wall signs and/or corporate logos may be permitted on the freeway-oriented building elevation in the commercial or office zones, subject to the following limitations: 
1.  Letter heights (maximum): 
a.  Tenants with 20,000 square feet or more—36 inches, 
b.  Tenants with 15,000 to 19,999 square feet—30 inches. 
c.  Tenants with 12,000 to 14,999 square feet—24 inches; 
d.  Tenants with 11,999 square feet or less—18 inches; 
2.  Length of sign shall not exceed 60 percent of leasehold width; 
3.  Only one freeway-oriented wall sign shall be permitted per tenant, regardless of size or exposure; 
4.  Freeway-oriented wall signs shall not be permitted for tenants in buildings which do not back up to freeway frontage except as otherwise herein provided; 
5.  Freeway-oriented wall signs may be permitted for tenants who have over 30,000 square feet in floor area in the same development or building which does not otherwise qualify for freeway signage, subject to the approval of the building owner and the City; 
6.  For developments located within an adopted specific plan area, other design criteria, requirements and limitations for freeway-oriented signs shall also be complied with. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.704)  
11.72.300 - Temporary on-site subdivision signs. 
Temporary on-site subdivision directional signs and flags, except those specifically exempt under Section 11.72.110(I) of this chapter, advertising residentially zoned real property which has been subdivided for the purpose of sale may be permitted, subject to the following limitations (nonresidential real estate signs shall be subjected to Section 11.72.110 and other provisions of this chapter): 
A.  The property owner and developer involved shall first obtain a sign permit from the Community Development Department prior to installation. 
B.  The construction of any such sign shall be in strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other laws of the City. 
C.  The signs shall be located on the premises which they advertise. 
D.  One sign shall be permitted on each main street frontage of the property being subdivided for all phases of any residential subdivision, up to a maximum of three such signs. 
E.  No sign shall exceed 96 square feet in area and 12 feet in height. 
F.  Such signs shall be for the identification of a subdivision, price information, and the developer's name, address, and telephone number. 
G.  A maximum of four flags up to 20 feet in height announcing the availability of tract homes for sale may be permitted for each major street entrance up to a maximum of 12 flags per subdivision. The flags shall not contain any advertising messages. 
H.  Such signs shall be removed within 10 days from the date of the final sale of the land and/or residences or within 24 months, whichever comes first. Extensions of the 24-month time limit may be approved by the Director of Community Development in case of hardship, upon submittal of a written request prior to the expiration date. 
I.  All signs and flags shall be maintained in good repair at all times. 
J.  A refundable cash deposit pursuant to the fee schedule adopted by the City Council shall be made for each sign application. Such deposit shall be made at time of permit issuance, to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and timely removal of such sign. The deposit shall be refunded to the applicant upon sign removal by the applicant. If the City is forced to remove any signs, the cost of such removal shall be deducted from the deposit. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.705)  
11.72.310 - Temporary off-site subdivision signs. 
Temporary off-site subdivision directional signs, subject to a CUP, directing prospective purchasers to a subdivision having lots, houses or units for sale may be erected and maintained provided such signs do not create hazardous traffic conditions. Such sign shall be subject to the following limitations: 
A.  The proposed subdivision or property for sale shall be located within the City or within the City's sphere of influence area. 
B.  The property owner and developer involved shall first obtain a sign permit from the Community Development Department prior to installation. 
C.  A sign may be placed on private property only with written consent of the property owner; such consent shall be filed with the Community Development Department prior to issuance of permit. 
D.  The construction of any such sign shall be in strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other laws of the City. 
E.  No more than two off-site signs shall be permitted. A minimum distance of 600 feet shall be maintained from other on- or off-site signs advertising the same project. 
F.  No sign shall exceed 120 square feet in area and 16 feet in height. 
G.  Such signs shall be for the identification of a subdivision or project for sale, price information, the developer's name, address, and telephone number and directions to the project site. 
H.  Such signs shall be removed within 10 days from the date of the final sale of the land and/or residence or within 24 months, whichever comes first. Extension of the 24-month time limit may be approved by the Director of Community Development in case of hardship upon submittal of a written request prior to the permit expiration date. 
I.  All signs shall be maintained in good repair at all times. 
J.  A refundable cash deposit pursuant to the fee schedule adopted by the City Council shall be made for each sign application. Such deposit sign shall be made at time of permit issuance to ensure compliance with this chapter and timely removal of such sign. The deposit shall be refunded to the applicant upon sign removal by the applicant. If the City is forced to remove any signs, the cost of such removal shall be deducted from the deposit. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.706)  
11.72.315 - Temporary off-site subdivision directional kiosks. 
Temporary off-site subdivision directional kiosks (real estate directories) directing prospective purchasers to a housing subdivision or subdivisions having lots, houses, or units for sale may be erected and maintained on private property or in the public right-of-way by an association of builders or developers, provided such kiosks do not create hazardous traffic conditions as determined by the Public Works Director or City Engineer. Such kiosks shall be subject to the following limitations: 
A.  The subdivision(s) identified for sale on individual display panels on a kiosk shall be limited to subdivisions located within City limits and subdivisions no more than one-half mile outside of City limits as measured from the subdivision to the nearest City boundary reference point. 
B.  The association of builders or developers shall obtain a sign permit from the Community Development Department prior to installation. The design and location of a kiosk is subject to approval of the Community Development Department. 
C.  A kiosk may be placed on private property with written consent of the property owner, and only after such written consent has been filed with the Community Development Department and a permit has been issued. Written consent provided by the property owner and approved by the Community Development Department cannot exceed 24-months in duration. As a condition of issuance of a permit, the permittee shall provide proof of an indemnity agreement naming the property owner as additional insured or proof that the property owner has declined indemnification. 
D.  A kiosk may be placed on public property within the parkway area of the public right-of-way, subject to the further issuance of an encroachment permit by the Public Works Director or City Engineer pursuant to Section 9.16.040. No kiosk shall be permitted in the median area of the public right-of-way. As a condition of issuance of an encroachment permit, the Public Works Director or City Engineer shall require execution of an indemnity agreement and a posting of proof of liability insurance naming the City as additional insured, in a form approved by the City Attorney. 
E.  The construction of any such kiosk shall be in strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other laws of the City including requirements necessary for permits and associated fees. 
F.  No more than six kiosks shall be permitted on any arterial street within the City limits as defined by the City's General Plan. A minimum distance of 1,000 feet shall be maintained from other on- or off-site signs or kiosks advertising any of the same subdivision(s). The Community Development Department shall also establish distance restrictions from other on- or off-site signs to prevent visual blight. 
G.  No kiosk shall: (1) display panels cumulatively exceeding forty square feet in area; (2) no kiosk shall exceed eight feet in overall height and five feet in overall width; and (3) the bottom edge of the lowest display panel shall not be lower than four feet above ground. 
H.  Kiosks shall be used only for the identification of subdivision(s) by name with an arrow for directional purposes. Such kiosks may also include the name of the builder or developer of each subdivision(s). 
I.  Kiosks and/or individual display panels installed thereon shall be removed within 10 days from the date of the final lot, house, or unit sale of the subdivision(s) identified thereon, or within 24-months after issuance of the sign permit provided for in paragraph "B" of this Section, whichever comes first. Extension of the 24-month time limit may be approved by the Community Development Department upon submittal of a written request by the permittee, or written consent of the property owner, prior to the sign permit expiration date, such extension not to exceed 6-months from the date of the sign permit expiration date. 
J.  All kiosks shall be: (1) regularly updated to reflect subdivisions with lots, houses, or units still available for sale; and (2) maintained in good repair and free of graffiti at all times. The permittee shall repair any damage to public and/or private property, including repairs to irrigation systems, caused by installation, maintenance, or removal of the kiosk. 
K.  Any installed kiosk which fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter and all other laws of the City, may, upon 48-hour notice to the permittee and the permittee's failure to correct the non-compliance within 7 calendar days, be deemed a public nuisance and may be removed by the City. 
L.  A refundable cash deposit of $500.00 shall be required for each kiosk application. Such deposit shall be made at time of permit issuance to ensure compliance with this chapter and timely removal of such kiosk. The deposit shall be refunded to the permittee upon kiosk removal by the permittee and repair of any damage caused to public and/or private property, including repairs to irrigation systems, caused by removal of the kiosk. If the City removes any kiosk due to failure of the permittee to comply with provisions of this Chapter, or if City repairs any damage to public property resulting from permittee's failure to repair damage caused by installation, maintenance, or removal of the kiosk, the deposit provided for herein shall be forfeited in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 17-966, § 1, 4-3-17)  
11.72.320 - Other off-site directional signs. 
Other off-site signs, utilized to direct pedestrians or motorists to certain locations with simple directions such as places of assembly, civic functions, public parks, park-and-ride lots, transit stations, business districts and other public or quasi-public facilities in any zones may be permitted, subject to the approval of the Director of Community Development. 
A.  Such signs shall not exceed 4 square feet in area nor 8 feet in height. 
B.  A maximum of four such signs may be permitted for each destination provided they are located at least 600 feet apart, unless a lesser distance is approved by the Director of Community Development upon making the finding that the reduction in distance separation would not adversely impair visibility or create a hazardous condition to the public. 
C.  Signs may be placed on private property only with prior written consent from the property owner; such consent shall be filed with the Community Development Department. 
D.  Signs may be placed on public rights-of-way or public property only with prior written approval from the City Engineer. 
E.  A maximum of two such signs may be permitted for each street corner. The Director of Community Development may require the two signs to share one common sign post. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.707)  
11.72.330 - Announcement or bulletin board signs. 
A.  Churches, schools, and other public and institutional uses may maintain a freestanding announcement or bulletin board sign not to exceed 8 feet in height or 50 square feet in sign area within a landscaped planter subject to PPD review and approval by the Director of Community Development. 
B.  Commercial entertainment uses, such as movie theaters, playhouses, bowling alleys or skating rinks, may be granted an announcement or bulletin board sign, subject to size and height limitation of the zoning district on which the property is located and subject to PPD review and approval by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.708)  
11.72.340 - Window signs. 
A.  No sign placed in or upon the window of any structure utilized for nonresidential purposes shall be placed so as to obscure visibility of the transparent area of any window, except in the following manner: 
1.  For uses in A-P, C-2, C-3, M-I-P, M-1 or M-2 Zones, up to a maximum 25 percent of the total window area; 
2.  Holiday and seasonal window decorations shall be exempt from this requirement, provided that the sign is removed within 10 days from the end of such event or holiday; 
3.  Window signs shall be temporary in nature and shall not remain in the same location or condition longer than 90 consecutive days. 
B.  No signs, other than holiday or seasonal window decorations, shall be placed in or upon the window of any structure utilized for residential purposes. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.709)  
11.72.350 - Neon sign—Exterior. 
Neon tubing may be permitted as a sign material in exterior monument, freestanding, and wall signs provided that it is not flashing or creating moving motion, subject to the following limitations: 
A.  Neon tubing designed as outlines of the building in office or commercial zones shall be treated as an architectural element of the building and shall require PPD review and approval by the Planning Commission. 
B.  Within shopping centers, neon signs may be allowed only as part of a master sign program. 
C.  All components of the exterior neon sign shall be regularly maintained to be in good working order. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.710)  
11.72.360 - Neon sign—Interior. 
Neon tubing may be permitted as a sign material for interior window signs, subject to the following limitations: 
A.  Permitted in C-2, C-3 and MIP Zones only; 
B.  No more than 25 percent of the window area shall be utilized; 
C.  A combination of generic names and graphic symbols may be used; however, the total combined sign area shall not exceed 8 square feet. The maximum window sign coverage per Section 11.72.340 of this chapter shall apply to all interior neon signs if they are located within 3 feet from the window panes. 
(Prior code § 9-7.711)  
11.72.370 - Electronic message center displays. 
Electronic message centers (EMCs) are programmable digital signs or message boards that utilize computer-generated messages, text and/or images, or some other means of changing copy. EMCs shall be allowed in specific locations and subject to the criteria set forth in this section, subject to approval of a conditional use permit (CUP) by the Planning Commission. The criteria in this section shall be for freestanding EMCs. Building- and wall-mounted EMCs are prohibited. 
A.  Locational Criteria. EMCs shall be permitted on developed parcels within the City with a legally established land use and/or business, subject to the following locational criteria: 
1.  Non-Freeway-Oriented Signs. Non-freeway-oriented EMCs are subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Shall be located on parcels having a minimum of 200 feet of lineal frontage on any of the following public arterial streets: Holt Boulevard, Mission Boulevard, Central Avenue, and Monte Vista Avenue; and 
b.  Shall be located on a parcel or adjoining parcels under common use and/or ownership cumulatively totaling a minimum of three acres. If a parcel, or adjoining parcels, is being leased, the lease must have a minimum of five or more years remaining on the term of the lease, calculated from the date a complete application is received by the City, and as evidenced by a copy of an executed lease agreement; and 
c.  Shall not be located within 200 lineal feet of any other permitted EMC, or within 50 lineal feet of any existing freestanding identification (monument) sign located on a separate parcel which is not associated with the subject site. 
2.  Freeway-Oriented Signs. Freeway-oriented EMCs are subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Shall be located on parcels, commercial businesses, regional centers, auto centers, or contiguous shopping centers occupying a minimum of seven acres with a minimum of 700 lineal feet of continuous frontage along the Interstate 10 right-of-way; and 
b.  Shall be located on a parcel or adjoining parcels under common use and/or ownership cumulatively totaling a minimum of three acres. If a parcel, or adjoining parcels, is being leased, the lease must have a minimum of five or more years remaining on the term of the lease, calculated from the date a complete application is received by the City, and as evidenced by a copy of an executed lease agreement; and 
c.  Shall not be located within 1,200 lineal feet of any other permitted EMC; and 
d.  Shall be located within 50 feet of the freeway right-of-way line of Interstate 10. 
3.  EMCs on City-Owned Property. The City may construct and maintain civic signs for community entrance, identification, direction, and information, which are located on City-owned property or off premises in the public right-of-way, including but not limited to electronic, digital, programmable, and/or illuminated signs. 
B.  EMC Structure Height and Display Size Limits. 
1.  Non-freeway-Oriented EMCs shall be subject to the following maximum dimensions/limits: 
a.  Maximum height: 14 feet above adjacent finished grade or adjacent sidewalk elevation. 
b.  Maximum area of EMC display: 60 square feet. 
2.  Freeway-oriented EMCs shall be subject to the following maximum dimensions/limits: 
a.  Maximum height: 65 feet above adjacent finished grade for the structure to which an EMC is attached. In addition, the top of the EMC display screen shall be a maximum of 50 feet above adjacent finished grade to ensure safe readability to motorists on Interstate 10. 
b.  Maximum area of EMC display: 260 square feet. 
The height and EMC display size limits are summarized in the following table: 
EMC Structure Height and Display Size Limits 
Location/Type 	Number of EMCs 	EMC Display 	Structure Height* 
Non-Freeway-Oriented 	1 	60 s.f. max. 	14'-0" max. 
Freeway-Oriented 	1 	260 s.f. max. 	65'-0" max. 
*Measured from adjacent finished grade or adjacent finished sidewalk or roadway. 
 
C.  Illumination and Display Requirements. 
1.  Maximum Illumination. No EMC sign display shall exceed a maximum illumination level of 0.3 foot-candles (fc) above ambient light level when measured at the recommended distance, based on the EMC size. All signs shall be equipped with an automatic dimmer control or other mechanism that automatically controls the sign's brightness to continually comply with this requirement. If brightness levels exceed the above standard, an adjustment shall be made within one (1) business day upon notice of non-compliance from the City, or the sign shall be immediately turned off until the adjustment is completed. 
a.  Pixel Pitch (Resolution). All EMC display components shall be full color with a minimum pitch resolution of 20-millimeter spacing or better. 
b.  Pixel Calibration. Pixel-to-pixel, module-to-module pixel calibration. 
2.  Measurement Criteria. The illuminance of an EMC shall be measured with an illuminance meter set to measure foot-candles accurate to at least two decimals. Illuminance shall be measured with the EMC off, and again with the EMC displaying a white image. Measurements shall be taken after sunset with the site fully illuminated by installed site lighting. All measurements shall be taken perpendicular to the face of the EMC at the distance determined by the total area of the EMC display as set forth in the table below: 
EMC Sign Area 
(square feet) 	Distance 
(feet) 	EMC Sign Area 
(square feet) 	Distance 
(feet) 	EMC Sign Area 
(square feet) 	Distance 
(feet) 
10 	32 	65 	81 	140 	118 
15 	39 	70 	84 	150 	122 
20 	45 	75 	87 	160 	126 
25 	50 	80 	89 	170 	130 
30 	55 	85 	92 	180 	134 
35 	59 	90 	95 	190 	138 
40 	63 	95 	97 	200 	141 
45 	67 	100 	100 	220 	148 
50 	71 	110 	105 	240 	155 
55 	74 	120 	110 	260 	161 
60 	77 	130 	114 	— 	— 
 
a.  Illumination Limits. The difference between the "off" and "solid white" image measurements using the EMC measurement criteria shall not exceed 0.3 foot-candles on either side of the sign. If the measurement of illumination levels on each side of the sign is different, the side of the sign facing residentially-zoned properties shall take precedent. 
b.  Dimming Capabilities. All EMC displays shall be equipped with a sensor or other device that automatically determines the ambient illumination and is programmed to automatically dim the EMC display according to ambient light conditions, or that can be continuously adjusted to comply with the 0.3 foot-candle measurements. 
c.  Initial Certification. At least one week prior to initial operation of the EMC, the applicant shall submit written documentation from the manufacturer of the sign to certify to the City that the EMC is properly equipped with an automatic dimmer control or other mechanism that automatically controls the sign's brightness to continually comply with the brightness levels specified in this ordinance. 
D.  Architectural and Siting Standards. All EMCs shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  Design. The EMC shall be designed to complement the design of the primary building on the property, including colors and materials. The design of the EMC shall include the following elements: 
a.  A full/solid base structure (with no exposed poles or supports) extending the full width of the EMC; and 
b.  A display screen framed by no less than six inches on all sides; and 
c.  A minimum clearance of four feet between the bottom edge of the display screen and adjacent finished grade. 
d.  Except for the name of the center or the primary business, no other individual sign faces of other businesses or entities shall be attached to the EMC structure. 
2.  City Identification Required. Freeway-Oriented EMCs shall incorporate and identify the "City of Montclair" as a permanent element in the overall design of the structure supporting the EMC display. 
3.  Street Address Required. Non-freeway-oriented EMCs shall display the numerical street address of the property/business in a location on the support structure. Numerical characters shall be individual, internally or halo-illuminated characters attached to, or routed into, the base and no less than eight inches in height. Numerals shall be permanently affixed to or displayed on the support structure a minimum of 24 inches above finished grade. 
4.  Setbacks. EMCs located on private property shall observe the following setback requirements: 
a.  A minimum of five feet from the adjacent public right-of-way or private street sidewalk. Where no sidewalk exists, no portion of the EMC display or associated support structure shall be closer than ten feet from the adjacent curb face; and 
b.  A minimum of ten feet from side property line of adjacent property; and 
c.  A minimum of 25 lineal feet away from any vehicular driveway; and 
d.  A minimum of 10 lineal feet away from any pedestrian path-of-travel from the public sidewalk to any building on the subject property or adjacent property. 
5.  Line of Sight. All EMCs shall be sited on the subject parcel in a location offering optimal visibility to motorists and shall not be located in such a manner to obstruct the sight lines of motorists or pedestrians entering or leaving the subject property or adjacent properties. Further, EMCs located at an intersection shall be sited outside of the required corner cut-off area as set forth in Chapter 11.38 of this title. 
6.  EMC Display Orientation. EMCs may be single-faced or double-faced. Double-faced EMCs shall be oriented perpendicular to Interstate 10 or the street to which they are adjacent, or, if located at an intersection of two streets, shall be oriented diagonally (perpendicular to the adjacent radius of the intersection) so as to be easily visible to motorists on the street segments adjacent to the property. Single-faced EMCs may only be installed at an intersection of two streets or at the end of a cul-de-sac. Single-faced EMCs at an intersection shall be oriented diagonally (generally parallel with the adjacent radius of the intersection) so as to be easily visible to motorists on the street segments distant from the property and so that the back side of the sign is not directly visible to a public right-of-way. 
7.  Landscaping. EMCs shall be placed within a landscaped area to provide sufficient protection from unintentional damage by vehicles on the property. Landscape material shall not obstruct the EMC display, business identification sign, and/or numerical address at the time of landscape installation or at maturity. It is further recommended that non-living landscape materials, such as decomposed granite, gravel, mulch, or the like, be used in lieu of live plant materials for a distance extending 24 inches around the base of the monument structure. 
8.  Durability. All EMC displays shall be silicone-sealed for adequate weather protection, shall have integral protective louvers (injection molded or aluminum) to ensure optimal daytime visibility and minimize vandalism, and carry a minimum five-year warranty from the manufacturer. Detailed plans demonstrating compliance with said construction standards and evidence of said warranty shall be submitted at the time of plan check prior to issuance of building permits. 
9.  Maximum Number. No more than one EMC shall be permitted per qualifying parcel, including parcels with multiple street frontages. Parcels with an EMC shall not be entitled to a monument sign on the same street frontage to identify the name(s) of the business(es) on the property. Any existing pylon or monument sign on a qualified site and on the same street frontage as a proposed EMC, which would be in conflict with the requirement of this section, shall be required to be permanently removed as a condition of approval. 
10.  Compliance with Regulations. All EMCs shall comply with all regulations related to electronic displays imposed by federal and state agencies. 
E.  EMC Operational Standards. 
1.  Digital images shall contain static messages only. Scrolling or flashing messages are prohibited. 
2.  EMCs shall display each static message for a minimum of four seconds. 
3.  The only permissible transitions between static messages shall be a "cut" (an instant change from one image to the next) or a "dissolve" or "crossfade" (gradual fade from one image to the next). 
4.  EMCs shall display a single message at any one time. Split screens shall not be permitted. 
5.  Hours of Operation. No restrictions on the hours of operation for approved freeway oriented EMC displays. For non-freeway-oriented signs, hours of operation shall be determined by the Planning Commission on a case by case basis depending on the size of the EMC, the proposed location, and proximity of the EMC to residential properties or other sensitive land uses. 
6.  Representatives of the Community Development Department shall have the right to inspect the EMC on a periodic basis to ensure that it is operating in compliance with this section. 
7.  Subject to the property owner's consent, a noncommercial message of any type may be substituted for any duly permitted or allowed commercial message or any duly permitted or allowed noncommercial message, unless otherwise prohibited by law. 
F.  EMC Maintenance Standards. 
1.  Paint and other finishes on the EMC display and support structure shall be maintained in good condition. Damaged or substandard finishes shall be repaired within 14 days of notification by the City. 
2.  Mineral deposits and stains shall be removed on a regular basis. Vandalism, graffiti, or damaged surfaces shall be repaired immediately. All repairs shall demonstrate high quality workmanship (e.g., straight, level, plumb, square, etc., as the situation requires) and restore the exterior materials and finishes of the EMC or EMC structure to its original appearance, subject to approval of the Community Development Director. 
3.  The owner of the EMC shall maintain an ongoing written maintenance agreement with a qualified licensed sign maintenance contractor. The Community Development Department shall be provided documentation of such an agreement upon request. 
G.  Malfunction. EMC signs shall be designed and equipped to immediately discontinue the display of images or text if sign malfunctions. If, at any time more than 25 percent of the digital display lights malfunction or are no longer working, the owner of an EMC shall turn off the display until repairs are made. The owner of an EMC sign shall provide to the City of Montclair, the name and number of a contact person that is on call at all times and who is able to turn off the digital sign promptly if a malfunction occurs. 
H.  Enforcement/Penalties. Noncompliance with any of the provisions of this section or the conditions of approval of an EMC shall be grounds for revocation of any issued conditional use permit as provided in Section 11.78.100(A). Prior to initiating revocation proceedings, the City shall provide written notice of such violation(s) to the owner of the EMC and a reasonable timeframe, not to exceed 30 days from the date of written notice, to cure the noncompliant conditions. 
Any person or entity violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 16-957, § 2, 10-17-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-957, § 2, adopted October 17, 2016, repealed the former § 11.72.370, and enacted a new § 11.72.370 as set out herein. The former § 11.72.370 pertained to electronic message board sign and derived from prior code § 9-7.712 and Ord. No. 99-791.  
11.72.380 - Political signs. 
A.  Intent. The intent and objective in establishing the regulation of political signs is to identify the compatibility between the utilization of political signs and the protection of the right to privacy of individuals and the quiet and undisturbed enjoyment of property. 
It is recognized that there have been abuses in the placement of political signs within the City, including trespassing upon private property; placement without permission from the property owner; placement in such a fashion as to make it difficult to remove them; littering caused by dislodged political signs; sight distance hazards to traffic because of size and location; distracting appearance; aesthetically displeasing impact; unnecessary proliferation; and other reasons, all of which are determined to be contrary to the best interests of the community and in opposition to the public health, safety and welfare. 
The reasonable regulation of political signs will obviate many of the objections that have been raised to the unregulated placement of such signs. 
It is recognized that, to the extent that placement of political signs is not contrary to the intent and purpose stated in this subsection, it is in the best interests of the City and its inhabitants to allow political expression, and for that reason, it is best to avoid the total prohibition of such signs. 
The responsibility for the placement of political signs should lie with the candidate for public office, the proponents and opponents of ballot issues, and the various committees connected therewith. It is recognized that political signs are printed by or at the direction of such persons and committees, and the ultimate responsibility for the distribution of such signs and where they are placed lies with them. 
B.  Placement and Installation. The placement of political signs in the City shall, in all respects, comply with the following: 
1.  Prior to the placement of any political sign within the City, the candidate for public office, the proponents or opponents of ballot issues, or the various committees connected therewith shall file with the Community Development Department an application for the posting of such signs and shall agree, in writing, to the voluntary removal of all such signs within 10 calendar days from the conclusion of the election and shall reimburse the City for all costs associated with the removal, storage and/or destruction of such signs. 
2.  No political sign shall be installed or displayed sooner than 60 days preceding the election for which the permit has been issued. 
3.  No political sign shall exceed 8 square feet in total area, except that a double-faced sign, not exceeding 8 square feet on each side, shall be permitted. 
4.  No political sign shall exceed an overall height of 4 feet, except if such sign shall be within an enclosed building or structure. 
5.  No candidate for public office, proponent, opponent of ballot issues, and/or the various committees connected therewith shall have more than one political sign per parcel. 
6.  No political sign shall be lighted, either directly or indirectly. 
7.  No political sign shall be placed without the permission of the property owner. In the case of vacant property, permission shall be obtained from the property owner, and the candidate for public office, proponent or opponent of ballot issues, and/or the various committees connected therewith shall affix to the rear of such political sign a copy of a declaration of having the property owner's permission, including the name and address of the property owner. Such declaration shall be provided on forms supplied by the City and shall be signed by the candidate for public office, proponent or opponent of ballot issues, or the designated representatives of same. 
8.  No political sign shall be placed or affixed to a tree, fence, post, utility pole, equipment, nor any structure by any means. 
9.  No political sign shall be posted on any public property or in the public right-of-way. 
10.  All political signs shall be properly maintained and kept in good repair at all times. 
11.  All political signs shall be removed within 10 days after the date of the election. 
12.  No political sign shall be posted in violation of any other provision of this Code. 
C.  The City Manager shall have the right to remove all signs placed contrary to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.713)  
11.72.390 - Billboards. 
A.  Minimum Standards. Billboards as defined within this title are subject to a CUP and shall comply with the provisions for off-site signs as follows: 
1.  The sign shall not exceed 120 square feet in area in any case, and such area may be reduced to any amount by the Planning Commission when it is evident a sign lesser in area would be more compatible to a given locality; 
2.  Visual clearance of 6 feet shall be provided under such sign, and the total height of such sign shall not exceed 16 feet above the ground level; 
3.  All signs shall be set back so as to comply with the setback regulations for the zone in which the signs are located; 
4.  All lighted signs shall be so controlled as not to permit the light used therein to be directed on the public right-of-way or adjacent property; 
5.  No such sign shall be so placed as to be viewed primarily from any freeway within the City; 
6.  Minimum distance between any proposed and existing billboard shall be 1000 feet; 
7.  Reconstruction or alteration of any billboard which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be prohibited; 
8.  Permitted zones for billboard erection include: M-1 (Limited Manufacturing) and M-2 (General Manufacturing); and 
9.  There shall be a maximum of one freestanding sign, including billboard, per legal parcel. 
B.  Any billboard which is lawfully existing and maintained on August 1, 1985, within an area shown as agricultural or residential within the adopted general plan and/or general zoning map shall be allowed to remain in existence for the period of time set below, following the enactment of this section on August 1, 1985: 
Fair Market Value 
on Date of Notice of 
Removal Requirement 	Minimum Years Allowed 
Under $1,999 	2 
$2,000 to $3, 	3 
$4,000 to $5,999 	4 
$6,000 to $7,999 	5 
$8,000 to $9,999 	6 
$10,000 and over 	7 
 
C.  Any billboard located in any territory annexed to the City shall comply with the provisions of this section. The period within which such billboard shall be removed shall commence upon the effective date of annexation. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.714)  
11.72.400 - Signs for the sale of motor vehicle fuels. 
A.  Every person, firm, co-partnership, association or corporation offering for sale or selling any gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel to the public from any place of business in the City shall post or display a sign which is clearly visible from any street or highway adjacent to such place of business and which indicates the actual price per gallon, including all taxes, at which the grades of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel are currently being offered for sale or sold. 
B.  No person, firm, co-partnership, association or corporation shall advertise, either in connection with the sign required by the provisions of subsection A of this section or otherwise, any grade of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel which is not immediately available for sale to the public on the business premises. 
C.  Any sign posted or displayed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of Article 8 of Chapter 7 of Division 8 (Sections 20880, et seq.) of the Business and Professions Code of the State and shall be in compliance with the provisions of this Code regulating the size and construction of signs. 
D.  All signs placed on property designed for service stations shall be in accordance with all the provisions set forth in Section 11.70.140 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.715)  
11.72.410 - Signs for drive-in business. 
In addition to all the provisions of this chapter, sign regulations for drive-in business shall conform to the provisions of Section 11.50.070 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.716)  
11.72.420 - Permitted signs in residential zones. 
A.  Single-Family and Duplex Residential Districts. Permitted signs in single-family and duplex residential districts include: 
1.  One nameplate not exceeding 1 square foot indicating the name and/or address of the occupant; 
2.  One real estate sign for the selling, renting or leasing of property, such sign not to exceed 4 square feet in area, or 5 feet in height, provided that it is unlit and is removed within 10 days after the close of escrow or the rental or lease has been accomplished; 
3.  For planned residential developments where 10 or more lots or homes are involved, the Planning Commission has the option of approving one neighborhood identification sign per major street frontage or project entry of no more than 20 square feet and no more than 5 feet in height; 
4.  One temporary yard or garage sale sign per street frontage, not exceeding 4 square feet in area and 5 feet in height, may be allowed on the same property for which a permit has been issued to conduct such event, advertising the sale of noncommercial, generally used household items or crops which are grown on the same premises. The display of such sign shall run currently with the effective date of the permit. Such sign shall not be placed on nor attached to any public property, within a public right-of-way, or in any way attached to any utility poles, structures, or street trees; and 
5.  All signs not expressly permitted shall be prohibited, including but not limited to those listed under Section 11.72.120 of this chapter. 
B.  Multiple-Family Residential (R-3) Districts. 
1.  Permitted signs: 
a.  One lighted or unlighted wall sign for the purpose of identification which contains the name and/or address of the apartment or planned residential development only; 
b.  One lighted or unlighted monument sign for the purpose of identification which contains the name and/or address of the development only. All monument signs shall be located within a landscaped area having dimensions at least the same area of the sign. Freestanding signs shall be located at least 15 feet from the curb face; 
c.  One lighted or unlighted sign for each street frontage not exceeding 6 square feet to advertise the lease, rental or sale of the property; 
d.  One nameplate not exceeding 1 square foot for each dwelling unit, indicating the name and/or address of the occupant; 
e.  Developments with frontage on more than one street may be permitted one additional wall sign and/or one additional monument sign within the allowable sign area based on the applicable lot frontage; 
f.  One tenant/unit directory sign, not to exceed 20 square feet, may be permitted for each street frontage; and 
g.  Temporary yard or garage sale signs in accordance with subsection (A)(4) of this section. 
2.  Aggregate Area of Signs Permitted. The maximum combined area of the signs defined in subsection (B)(1)(a) and (b) of this section shall not exceed the following: 
a.  Less than 100 feet of frontage, 20 square feet; 
b.  100 to 150 feet of frontage, 30 square feet; and 
c.  Over 150 feet of frontage, 40 square feet. 
3.  Permitted Height. Monument signs shall have a maximum height of 5 feet inclusive of supporting structures. 
4.  Prohibited Signs. All signs not expressly permitted shall be prohibited, including but not limited to those listed in Section 11.72.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.717)  
11.72.430 - Permitted signs in Administrative Professional (AP) Zone. 
A.  Permitted signs: 
1.  One wall sign per primary street frontage, up to 60 percent of the length of the building fascia, consisting of individual channel letters and/or corporate logos of proportional scale and size to the building mass indicating the address and/or name of the building, occupant, or principal uses to which the building is being put; 
2.  One monument sign per street frontage, located within a landscaped planter, subject to the following limitations (maximum signs area and height): 
a.  Frontage of 199 feet or less, 24 square feet/5 feet high, 
b.  Frontage of 200 to 399 feet, 36 square feet/7 feet high, 
c.  Frontage of 400 feet or more, 48 square feet/8 feet high; 
One unlit sign not exceeding 24 square feet to advertise the lease, rent or sale of the premises; 
4.  One nameplate not exceeding 1 square foot indicating the name, address and/or business of each occupant, located at or near the main building entrance; 
5.  A master sign program shall be provided for multiple-use complexes which specifies the letter styles and sizes, colors, illumination, materials, construction method, logos or corporate symbols and location of each tenant's sign; 
6.  Window signs which conform to the provisions of Section 11.72.340 of this chapter. 
B.  Aggregate Area of Signs Permitted. The maximum total area of the signs defined in subsection (A)(1) of this section shall not exceed 1 square foot for each 2 linear feet of primary lot frontage, up to a maximum of 150 square feet. 
C.  Prohibited Signs. All signs not expressly permitted shall be prohibited, including but not limited to those listed in Section 11.72.120 of this chapter. 
D.  Freeway-Oriented Signs. For development with freeway frontage, provisions for freeway-oriented signage under Section 11.72.290 of this chapter shall apply. 
E.  Limitations to Signs. In reviewing any sign proposal through the PPD process, the Planning Commission shall have the discretion of limiting the number of monument or freestanding signs on any parcel or development to no more than one. In the case of a reduced setback to a freestanding building, the Planning Commission shall have the discretion of not granting any monument or freestanding sign to any such parcel or development. In making such determination, the Planning Commission shall find that such limitation would serve the architectural integrity of the development and that other signing on the same development or the building or site design itself adequately provides the necessary public identification. 
F.  Administrative Review. For a monument or wall sign not exceeding 50 square feet in sign area, the plan shall be reviewed by the Director of Community Development in accordance with provisions under Section 11.72.060(B) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.718)  
11.72.440 - Permitted signs in commercial zones. 
A.  For businesses not within a shopping center: 
1.  One wall sign on each building elevation fronting on a main street or main public entry, up to 60 percent of the length of the building fascia. Up to a maximum of 150 square feet in sign area may be permitted. Individual channel letters shall be required. The height of letters shall be in proportion and scale to the building mass in accordance with the design standards specified in Article III of this chapter; 
2.  One monument sign per street frontage, located within a landscaped planter, subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Monument signs up to 24 square feet in sign area and 6 feet in height may be allowed if the property has a frontage of 75 feet or less along the main street, 
b.  Monument signs up to 48 square feet in sign area and 8 feet in height may be allowed if the property has a frontage of more than 75 feet and up to 200 feet along the main street, 
c.  Monument signs up to 60 square feet in sign area and 10 feet in height may be allowed if the property has a frontage of more than 200 feet along the main street; 
3.  The maximum aggregate sign area permitted under subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section shall not exceed 1 square foot per linear foot of primary street frontage; 
4.  In reviewing any sign proposal through the Precise Plan of Design process, the Planning Commission shall have the discretion of limiting the number of monument or freestanding signs on any parcel or development to no more than one. In the case of a reduced setback to a freestanding building, the Planning Commission shall have the discretion of not granting any monument or freestanding sign to such parcel or development. In making such determination, the Planning Commission shall find that such limitation would serve the architectural integrity of the development and that other signing on the same development or the building or site design itself adequately provides the necessary public identification; 
5.  For monument or wall signs not exceeding 50 square feet in sign area, the plan shall be reviewed by the Director of Community Development in accordance with the provisions in Section 11.72.060(B) of this chapter. 
B.  For a multitenant shopping center: 
1.  Master sign program shall be provided to include: 
a.  Specifications for location and allowable area for individual tenant signs or exhibits on the building, 
b.  Specifications for letter styles, dimensions, colors, materials, construction method, logo or corporate symbol provisions, 
c.  Design, size and location of the multiuse center or complex identification sign. If a multiuse identification sign is to include tenant identification, then criteria as to the method of tenant qualification, colors, design standards, etc., shall be provided, 
d.  Method of tenant sign approval which shall include provisions for landlord approval prior to City approval of such sign; 
2.  One building sign for each elevation fronting on a major street or main entry, up to 60 percent of the length of the building fascia or leasehold, whichever is less; 
3.  Individual illuminated channel letters are encouraged for all wall signs. The height of the letters shall be in proportion and scale to the building fascia and size subject to Planning Commission review and approval; 
4.  One monument sign per street frontage, not to exceed two per development, provided that they are located at least 200 feet apart and are located on different frontages. The Planning Commission shall have the discretion, however, of consolidating the two monument signs entitled to by corner parcel onto one street frontage, upon making the finding that such action would not adversely impair visibility or create a hazardous condition to pedestrians or motorists. The maximum allowable sign dimension for each sign is as follows: 
a.  For a center with a major street frontage of 75 feet or less, 24 square feet in area and 6 feet in height, 
b.  For a center with a major street frontage of 76 feet to 200 feet, 48 square feet in area and 8 feet in height, 
c.  For a center with a major street frontage of 201 feet or more, 60 square feet in area and 10 feet in height; 
5.  The maximum aggregate sign area permitted under subsections (B)(2) and (4) of this section shall not exceed 1.5 square feet per linear foot of primary street frontage; 
6.  The sign area of the monument sign shall be limited to the identification of the center, the street address and/or major tenants only; 
7.  The sign program shall be designed in accordance with the design standards as specified under Article III of this chapter; 
8.  In reviewing any sign proposal through the PPD process, the Planning Commission shall have the discretion of limiting the number of monument or freestanding signs on any parcel or development to no more than one. In the case of a reduced setback to a freestanding building, the Planning Commission shall have the discretion of not granting any monument or freestanding sign to such parcel or development. In making such determination, the Planning Commission shall find that such limitation would serve the architectural integrity of the development and that other signing on the same development or the building or site design itself adequately provides the necessary public identification; 
C.  One unlighted sign per business not to exceed 2 square feet shall be placed on the rear of the building for service and delivery identification; 
D.  One on-site directional sign per drive approach not to exceed 6 square feet in area and 4 feet in height; 
E.  Window signs which conform to the provisions of Section 11.72.340 of this chapter; 
F.  All other signs that are not exempt from sign permit review but are not prohibited by this chapter shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission for conformance with the provisions of this chapter; 
G.  For commercial development with freeway frontage, the provisions for freeway-oriented signage under Section 11.72.290 of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 9 (part); Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.719)  
11.72.450 - Permitted signs in Manufacturing Industrial Park (MIP), Limited Manufacturing (M-1) and General Manufacturing (M-2) Zones. 
A.  For single-tenant occupancy: 
1.  One wall sign on each building elevation fronting on a main street up to 40 percent of the length of the building fascia. A maximum of 50 square feet per sign may be permitted; 
2.  One monument sign per street frontage, located within a landscaped planter, subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Monument signs up to 24 square feet in sign area and 6 feet in height may be allowed if the property has a frontage along the main street of 150 feet or less, 
b.  Monument signs up to 48 square feet in sign area and 8 feet in height may be allowed if the property has a frontage along the main street of 151 feet or more; 
3.  The maximum aggregate sign area under subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section shall not exceed 1 square foot per each 2 linear feet of primary street frontage; 
4.  In reviewing any sign proposal through the PPD process, the Planning Commission shall have the discretion of limiting the number of monument or freestanding signs on any parcel or development to no more than one. In the case of a reduced setback to a freestanding building, the Planning Commission shall have the discretion of not granting any monument or freestanding sign to such parcel or development. In making such determination, the Commission shall find that such limitation would serve the architectural integrity of the development and that other signing on the same development or the building or site design itself adequately provides the necessary public identification. 
B.  For a multitenant complex: 
1.  A master sign program shall be provided to include: 
a.  Specifications for location and allowable area for individual tenant signs or exhibits on the buildings, 
b.  Specifications for letter styles, dimensions, colors, materials, construction method, logo or corporate symbol provisions, 
c.  Design size, and location of the multiuse center or complex identification sign. If a multiuse identification sign is to include tenant identification, the criteria as to the method of tenant qualifications, colors, design standards, etc., shall be provided, and 
d.  Method of tenant sign approval which shall include provisions for landlord approval prior to City approval of such sign; 
2.  One building sign for each elevation fronting on a major street, up to 40 percent of the length of the building fascia or leasehold, whichever is lesser. Maximum height of the wall sign shall be 24 inches; 
3.  One building sign for each building which does not front on a major street, up to 40 percent of the length of the building fascia or leasehold, whichever is lesser. Maximum height of the sign shall be 18 inches; 
4.  One monument sign per street frontage, not to exceed two per development, provided they are located at least 300 feet apart and are located different frontages. The Planning Commission shall have the discretion, however, of permitting the two monument signs that are allowed on a corner parcel to be located on one street frontage upon making the finding that such action would not adversely impair visibility or create a hazardous condition to pedestrians or motorists. The maximum allowable sign area and height for each sign is as follows: 
a.  For complexes with a street frontage of 150 feet or less, 24 square feet in area and 6 feet in height, 
b.  For complexes with a street frontage of 151 to 450 feet, 48 square feet in area and 8 feet in height, 
c.  For complexes with a street frontage of 451 feet or more, 60 square feet in area and 10 feet in height; 
5.  The monument sign area shall be limited to the identification of the business park complex, the street address and no more than two tenants; 
6.  In reviewing any sign proposal through the PPD process, the Planning Commission shall have the discretion of limiting the number of monument or freestanding signs on any parcel or development to no more than one. In the case of a reduced setback to a freestanding building, the Planning Commission shall have the discretion of not granting any monument or freestanding sign to such parcel or development. In making such determination, the Commission shall find that such limitation would serve the architectural integrity of the development and that other signing on the same development or the building or site design itself adequately provides the necessary public identification; 
7.  The sign program shall be designed in accordance with the design standards as specified under Article III of this chapter; 
C.  One unlighted sign per business not to exceed 2 square feet shall be placed on the rear of the building for service and delivery identification; 
D.  One on-site directional sign per drive approach not to exceed 6 square feet in area and 4 feet in height; 
E.  Window signs which conform to the provisions of Section 11.72.340 of this chapter; 
F.  All other signs that are not exempt from sign permit review but are not prohibited by this chapter shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission for conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-7.720)  
Chapter 11.73 - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
11.73.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to establish standards for the review, siting and development of wireless telecommunications facilities on public and private property throughout the City. A primary intent is to ensure that wireless networks are implemented with the fewest possible facilities, in the least visible manner and with the least disruptive impact on the City's neighborhoods. This shall be accomplished through collocation of multiple wireless providers at approved locations, requiring creative, stealth facility designs and prohibiting facilities within, and immediately adjacent to, the City's least intensive zoning districts. The regulations set forth in this Chapter are intended to protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to promote and enhance the aesthetic qualities of the community as set forth in the goals, objectives and policies of the General Plan, while concurrently allowing for the orderly and efficient development of a wireless telecommunications infrastructure in accordance with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (the "Act"). 
(Ord. 02-829 § 1 (part))  
11.73.020 - Applicability. 
This Chapter applies to all wireless telecommunications facilities existing and proposed to be located within the corporate boundary of the City of Montclair, except wireless telecommunications facilities in the public right-of-way which are subject to Chapter 9.105. Such facilities include personal wireless services as defined by the Act and licensed by the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC"), including, but not limited to, the types commonly known as cellular, personal communications services ("PCS"), specialized mobile radio ("SMR"), enhanced specialized mobile radio ("ESMR"), paging, land-based repeaters for satellite broadcast services, micro-cell antennas, and other similar systems that exist now or may be developed in the future and exhibit technological characteristics similar to those listed. This Chapter does not apply to satellite dishes, amateur radio facilities, and receiving antennas for AM and FM radio and television, which may be governed by other laws including, but not limited to, Chapter 11.46 of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 02-829 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 19-980, § IV, V, 3-18-19)  
11.73.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
ANSI means the American National Standards Institute. 
Act means the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
Alternative tower structure means clock or bell towers, steeples, spires, monoliths, light poles, artificial trees and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of an antenna or antenna arrays. 
Antenna means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building structure, pole or alternative tower structure and used in communication that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies, wireless telecommunications signals or other communications signals. 
Antenna array means a set of one or more antennas. 
Applicant means the person, consultant or firm applying for the permit and also refers to the wireless telecommunications service provider. 
BTS means Base Transceiver Station. 
CUP means Conditional Use Permit. 
Cell means the coverage area through which wireless receiving and transmitting equipment from a particular cell site successfully propagates. 
Cell site means a parcel of real property on which a wireless telecommunications facility is located. 
City shall mean the City of Montclair, California, a municipal corporation. 
Code means Montclair Municipal Code. 
Collocation means the use of a single wireless telecommunications facility or common site by two or more service providers or applicants, or use by one provider or applicant for two or more wireless technologies. Also referred to as "site sharing." 
Director means the Director of Community of Development of the City of Montclair or his or her designee. 
EMF means electromagnetic frequency. 
ESMR means Enhanced Specialized Mobile Radio. 
Electromagnetic interference means the distortion, disruption, or blockage of the clear reception or transmission of any radio, television, communications, data or other type of electronic communications media. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, the agency responsible for licensing and regulating wireless telecommunications service providers. 
Facade-mounted antenna means an antenna directly attached or affixed to any faced or wall of a building. 
Facility means any component of the wireless telecommunications installation, including any towers, antenna, antenna array, and any structure or device used to contain ancillary equipment for a wireless telecommunications facility, such as cabinets, BTS units, shelters, additions to existing structures, pedestals, air conditioning and heating units, electrical supply, telephone connection, back-up power supply, service roads and other similar devices and access accommodations serving the site. 
GPS means Global Positioning System. 
Height means the vertical distance as measured from the finished grade of the parcel on which the structure is located to the highest point of the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. The measurement shall be taken from finished grade immediately adjacent to such tower or structure, and said finished grade shall not be artificially or unnecessarily raised to achieve a taller height for the tower or structure. 
IEEE means the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers. 
Lattice tower means an open steel frame structure used to support equipment that is part of a wireless telecommunications facility. 
Monopalm means a stealth tower structure resembling a palm tree constructed and designed for the sole purpose of supporting and concealing a wireless telecommunications antenna or antenna array. 
Monopine means a stealth tower structure resembling a pine tree constructed and designed for the sole purpose of supporting and concealing a wireless telecommunications antenna or antenna array. 
Monopole means a structure comprised of a single spire for the sole purpose of supporting a wireless telecommunications antenna or antenna array. 
PCS means Personal Communications Service, as defined in the Act and FCC regulations. 
PPD means Precise Plan of Design. 
Parabolic means a curved or cone-shaped structure. 
Pre-existing facilities means any wireless telecommunications facility for which a conditional use permit or building permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this Chapter, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed, so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
RFR means radiofrequency radiation. 
Roof-mounted means an antenna or antenna array directly attached or affixed to the roof of an existing building, tower or structure other than a lattice tower, monopole, monopalm or monopine. Also known as a freestanding roof-mounted antenna. 
SMR means Specialized Mobile Radio. 
Service provider means a wireless telecommunications provider as defined in Section 3 of the Act, and is a company or organization, or agent for a company or organization that provides wireless telecommunications services. 
Stealth means communications facilities, towers and individual antennas incorporating innovative camouflaging techniques to blend said improvements into the surrounding environment and obscure or conceal such communications facilities, towers and individual antennas from view. Examples of stealth facilities include architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, facade-mounted antennas designed and/or painted to create the appearance of an architectural element on a building, and antennas concealed within an alternative tower structure. 
Support facilities means the equipment contained in cabinets, small structures or otherwise located on site that support and are integral to the operation of the wireless telecommunications facility. Such facilities may include equipment cabinets and shelters, base transceiver stations, additions to existing structures, pedestals, air conditioning and heating units, electrical supply, telephone connection, back-up power supply, service roads and other similar improvements. 
Wireless telecommunications facility means a facility supporting antennas and other ancillary support equipment designed for the purpose of sending and/or receiving radiofrequency signals. Such facilities may include panel, omnidirectional, whip and parabolic antennas, equipment cabinets and shelters, base transceiver stations and other types of similar support facilities. 
(Ord. 02-829 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 19-980, § VI, 3-18-19)  
11.73.040 - Conditional use permit required. 
A CUP processed in accordance with Chapter 11.78 of the Montclair Municipal Code shall be required for all wireless telecommunications facilities within the City, with the exception of facade- or building-mounted applications that are totally integrated within the architecture of the building and completely indiscernible as viewed from all directions, which shall be reviewed through the PPD process. Applications for facilities subject only to the PPD process shall be subject to all applicable regulations of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 02-829 § 1 (part))  
11.73.050 - Primary land use required. 
Wireless telecommunications facility shall be permitted only as an accessory use on real property that is presently developed with a legal, conforming primary land use. Applications for facilities on undeveloped parcels shall not be considered unless the application is filed concurrently with an application for development of a conforming land use on the parcel. A variance application requesting that development of the primary land use on the parcel be permitted to deviate from any of the City's development standards solely to accommodate a wireless telecommunications facility on the same parcel shall not be considered. 
(Ord. 02-829 § 1 (part))  
11.73.060 - Application requirements. 
In addition to complying with the standard application submittal requirements for a CUP as provided for in Chapter 11.78 of the Montclair Municipal Code, the applicant shall also provide the following: 
A.  Description of Services 
1.  A description of the location, type, capacity, field strength or power density and calculated geographic service area of the proposed facility. In instances of applications that generate public controversy, the City retains the right to contract with qualified consultants, at the applicant's expense, to review and assess the data submitted in conjunction with the application. 
2.  Documentation certifying that the applicant is in compliance with, and has obtained all applicable licenses, permits and/or authorizations required by the FCC. 
3.  Location of all existing, proposed and anticipated wireless telecommunications facilities in the applicant's network within the City and within one mile of the City's corporate boundary in all directions. 
4.  A description of how the proposed facility integrates with, and is a necessary part of, the applicant's network. 
5.  Radiofrequency propagation maps illustrating the following: 
a.  Current radiofrequency coverage of the applicant's existing network without the proposed facility. 
b.  Proposed radiofrequency coverage of the applicant's network including the proposed facility. 
6.  A description of the radiofrequency range proposed to be used at the site by the applicant, along with written correspondence from the Montclair Police Department and Montclair Fire Department stating that the proposed radiofrequency range will not conflict with the public safety communications systems in use by each agency. 
7.  If the proposal does not include collocation on an existing facility, written documentation of all efforts made to co-locate at another site and justification for the decision not to co-locate. 
B.  Design 
1.  A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed facility, on-site land uses, zoning and General Plan designation, adjacent land uses, zoning and General Plan designations within a 150 feet radius of the parcel boundaries upon which the facility is proposed to be located (including uses outside the corporate boundary of the City of Montclair), adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed facility, and other structures, topography, parking and other information deemed by the Director to be necessary to assess compliance with this Chapter. 
2.  Legal description of the parcel. 
3.  The setback distance between the proposed facility and the nearest residential unit or residentially zoned property. 
4.  A detailed landscape plan indicating species, quantities and container sizes. 
5.  Method of fencing, finished color and method of camouflaging the facility. 
6.  A notarized statement from the applicant indicating that the facility will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future service providers. 
7.  Color photos of the site as it presently exists and color photo-simulations (or similar graphic representation) of the site with the proposed facility from a minimum of three view angles. 
(Ord. 02-829 § 1 (part))  
11.73.070 - Permitted locations. 
CUP applications for wireless telecommunications facilities that are deemed complete shall be accepted for sites located within the following zoning district designations within the City of Montclair, except that such facilities shall not be located within 200 feet of any residence: 
R-1 (Single-Family Residential), only on properties occupied by public schools, public parks, conservation basins and reservoirs; 
AP (Administrative Professional); 
C-3 (General Commercial); 
MIP (Manufacturing Industrial); 
M-1 (Limited Manufacturing); 
M-2 (General Manufacturing); 
"Auto Mall," "Business Park," "Commercial," "Commercial/Office" and "Industrial" land use areas of the Holt Boulevard Specific Plan; and 
"Business Park" and "Commercial/Business Park" land use areas of the Turner Montclair Center Specific Plan. 
(Ord. 02-829 § 1 (part))  
11.73.080 - Prohibited locations. 
Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be expressly prohibited within the following zoning district designations: 
A-1 (Limited Agricultural); 
R-1 (Single-Family Residential), except specific locations contained in Section 11.73.070 of this Part; 
R-2 (Two-Family Residential); 
R-3 (Multiple-Family Residential); 
C-2 (Restricted Commercial); 
"Planned Development" and "Residential" land use areas of the Holt Boulevard Specific Plan; and 
"Commercial" land use area of the Turner Montclair Center Specific Plan. 
(Ord. 02-829 § 1 (part))  
11.73.090 - Development standards. 
The following development standards shall be applicable to all new wireless telecommunications facilities: 
A.  Building permits shall be obtained for all new wireless telecommunications facilities and all modifications to existing facilities. 
B.  Height. With the exception of installations on legal, conforming pre-existing structures, the facility shall not exceed the maximum height permitted in the underlying zoning district or Specific Plan, provided, however, that the Planning Commission may consider a zone variance only within the R-1 and AP zoning districts to allow a taller structure if the goals of this Chapter would be better served by granting such a variance. 
C.  Setbacks. Freestanding towers, guy wires, accessory buildings and other ancillary improvements associated with the facility shall observe the minimum setbacks of the underlying zoning district or Specific Plan, provided, however, that the Planning Commission may consider a zone variance to reduce the required setback if the goals of this Chapter would be better served by granting such a variance. 
D.  Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to all wireless telecommunications facilities, provided, however, that the Planning Commission may consider a reduction in the minimum separation requirement if the goals of this Chapter would be better served by granting such a variance. 
Type of Facility 	Minimum 
Required 
Separation 
Freestanding ? Freestanding 	750 feet 
Freestanding ? Facade/roof-mounted 	500 feet 
Facade/roof-mounted ? Facade/roof-mounted 	500 feet 
 
E.  Minimal Visual Impact. All wireless telecommunications facilities shall utilize all practical means to minimize the number of facilities in the City of Montclair and reduce or conceal their visual impact, including: 
1.  Most Diminutive Technology. Applicants shall use the smallest components necessary to provide service within their respective networks. Further, as new wireless technology is developed utilizing smaller components, applicants shall be required to upgrade their facilities to incorporate the most current technology. 
2.  Most Efficient Technology. Applicants shall use the most efficient components available, meaning those that allow the applicant to most effectively provide network service from the fewest number of sites. 
3.  Stealth Design. All wireless telecommunications facilities within the City shall be designed to be visually compatible within the context of its surroundings, including scale, character, colors and materials. Artificial "trees" (such as monopalms and monopines) may be permitted, but are not encouraged. In such cases, the City reserves the right to require landscape screening including, but not limited to, the installation of live trees having a height equivalent to 75 percent of the height of the artificial "tree." 
4.  Security Fencing. Wireless telecommunications installations and their support facilities shall be protected by security fencing (decorative masonry, wrought iron, tubular steel or similar enhanced fencing as approved by the Planning Commission) not less than six feet in height, provided, however, that the Planning Commission may waive such requirement as it deems appropriate. 
5.  Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the installation of landscaping surrounding wireless telecommunications facilities, provided, however, that the Planning Commission may waive such requirements if they are impractical or not applicable (such as a facade- or roof-mounted installation): 
a.  Freestanding facilities (including equipment buildings, shelters and other accessory installations) shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant species that effectively screens the view of the installation from the public right-of-way and neighboring properties. The minimum width of the landscape buffer shall be 6'-0?. 
b.  A detailed landscaping plan shall accompany all applications for wireless telecommunications facilities, including tree and plant species, quantities and container sizes. All trees shall be minimum 24-inch box size and double-staked; however, specimen trees may be required to enhance the setting or stealth appearance of the facility. 
c.  Existing mature trees on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. 
d.  All new and retained landscaping shall be irrigated by an automatic irrigation system providing 100 percent coverage, and all landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, orderly, disease- and weed-free condition. 
6.  Accessory Structures. Equipment buildings and structures associated with wireless telecommunications facilities shall not exceed 350 square feet of gross floor area nor be more than 10 feet in height. Such accessory structures shall contain an enhanced exterior design, such as walls of decorative masonry, exposed aggregate panels or stucco, and gable, hip or mansard roofs. 
7.  Security Lighting. Illumination shall be kept to a minimum in all instances and should only be activated by a motion sensor where practical. All luminaires shall be 90-degree cut-off design with flat lenses. The use of wall packs, barnlighters and other similar, unshielded wide area lighting shall be prohibited. 
F.  Operational Plan. All applications for wireless telecommunications facilities shall include written documentation that the facility will be operated in compliance with the following: 
1.  Maintenance. All facilities, landscaping and other related improvements shall be maintained in good working order and free from trash, debris, graffiti, and designed to discourage vandalism. Any damaged or vandalized equipment shall be repaired or replaced within 72 hours of notice by the City. Damaged, dead or decaying plant material shall be removed and replaced within seven calendar days of notice by the City. 
2.  Maintenance Hours. Routine maintenance of equipment and emergency repairs caused by power outages, equipment failure or malfunction may be conducted at any time, provided that the noise level limitations specified in Chapter 6.12 of the Code are observed. Major equipment change-outs or overhauls that have the potential to exceed the maximum noise levels specified in Chapter 6.12 of the Code shall occur only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(Ord. 02-829 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 19-980, § VII, 3-18-19)  
11.73.100 - Collocation of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
The City strongly encourages the wireless telecommunications industry to work cooperatively with one another in the placement of wireless facilities to successfully achieve the goals of this Chapter. Applications for facilities capable of accommodating collocation of multiple service providers at a single location are encouraged and will be considered more favorably than facilities designed to accommodate only a single service provider. 
(Ord. 02-829 § 1 (part))  
11.73.110 - Required findings for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
All wireless telecommunications facilities permitted by this Chapter shall be subject to the following findings. These are in addition to any applicable findings in Title 11 of the Montclair Municipal Code associated with a Conditional Use Permit, Precise Plan of Design or Variance. 
A.  There is adequate space on the property for the wireless telecommunications facility without conflicting with existing buildings or other improvements on the property, reducing required parking or landscaping, or otherwise compromising applicable development standards. 
B.  The design and placement of the wireless telecommunications facility will not adversely impact the use of the property, buildings and structures located on the property, or the surrounding area or neighborhood. 
C.  The wireless telecommunications facility as proposed is consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and complies with all other applicable requirements of Title 11 of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 02-829 § 1 (part))  
11.73.120 - Conditions of approval. 
Conditions of approval shall be imposed on all CUPs granted pursuant to this Chapter to ensure compliance with the intent of this Part, the required standards and findings, and the protection of the public health, safety, general welfare and aesthetics. The permit shall not become effective until all applicable conditions of approval have been met. All conditions of approval shall be observed throughout the duration of the permit. 
Conditions shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Approval of the CUP shall be valid for one year from the date of Planning Commission action. If building permits are not issued within this time frame or a time extension granted, then the approval shall automatically expire without further City action. 
B.  The wireless telecommunications facility shall be constructed in substantial compliance with plans reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. 
C.  No advertising, signs or lighting shall be incorporated or attached to the antenna array or support facilities, except as required by the City's Building Division or federal regulations. 
D.  All electrical and utility connections serving the facility shall be placed underground in accordance with the requirements of the Montclair Municipal Code. 
E.  The applicant shall submit to the City certification of continued use of the approved facility on an annual basis at the time of business license renewal for as long as the facility remains in operation. The certification shall indicate that the facility is operating as approved and that the facility complies with the most current FCC safety standards. Facilities that are no longer in operation shall be completely removed within 90 days after the date cessation of operation. 
F.  If no annual certification is provided, the CUP or the facility may be revoked by the Director. Prior to revoking a permit, the Director shall provide the owners of record written notice of their failure to provide the annual certification and an opportunity for a hearing. 
G.  Notice of change of ownership of the facility shall be provided in writing to the Director within 30 days of said change. 
H.  Within 90 days of commencement of operations, applicants shall provide a preliminary report and field report prepared by a qualified engineer that shows the operation of the facility to be in conformance with the standards established by ANSI and IEEE for safe human exposure to electromagnetic fields (EMF) and radiofrequency radiation (RFR). 
I.  All future changes and modifications to an approved facility, such as the addition of panel, whip, dish, omnidirectional, GPS or test antennas, shall require prior review and approval by the City. 
J.  Prior to issuance of a building permit for the facility, the applicant shall: 
1.  Ascertain and comply with all requirements of the Building and Engineering Divisions and the Montclair Fire Department. 
2.  Remit to the City a deposit or post a bond in an amount to be determined by the Director for the purpose of removing the subject facility and all associated support equipment in the event the facility becomes abandoned, the CUP is revoked by the Director, or the applicant does not or is unable to remove the facility. 
3.  Submit a copy of the lease with the property owner. If the lease is extended or terminated, notice and evidence thereof shall be provided to the Director. Upon termination or expiration of the lease, the CUP for the facility shall become null and void and the facility shall be completely removed within 90 days. 
K.  If, as a result of the operation of the subject facility, existing or future residential, commercial or industrial properties near the site experience interference difficulties with electronic equipment (such as radios, televisions, telephones, home computers, etc.), or if public safety personnel experience interference with communications systems, the applicant shall be solely and fully responsible to correct any and all problems upon proof of such interference. 
L.  All graffiti and other forms of vandalism and damage shall be removed and/or repaired within 72 hours of notice by the City. 
M.  To ensure compliance with the conditions of the approval, a final inspection is required from the Building and Planning Divisions upon completion of construction and all improvements. The applicant shall contact the City to schedule an appointment for such inspections. 
N.  The applicant shall agree to defend, at its sole expense, any action brought against the City, its agents, officers, or employees because of the issuance of this approval; or in the alternative, to relinquish such approval. The applicant shall reimburse the City, its agents, officers, or employees for any court costs and attorney fees that the City, its agents, officers, or employees may be required by a court to pay as a result of such action. The City may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense of any such action, but such participation shall not relieve applicant of its obligations under this condition. 
(Ord. 02-829 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 11.74 - YARD SALES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-931, § 1, adopted June 4, 2012, repealed the former Chapter 11.74, §§ 11.74.010—11.74.040, and enacted a new Chapter 11.74 as set out herein. The former Chapter 11.74 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code § 9-4.1817 and Ord. No. 99-791. 
 
11.74.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
This chapter is intended to set forth guidelines under which yard sales may be conducted on properties legally developed with single- and multifamily residential uses. Yard or rummage sales that are conducted on property legally developed with private educational institutions or houses of worship shall be required to obtain a special event permit subject to the guidelines set forth in Chapter 11.68 of this title. Yard sales shall be prohibited on undeveloped properties or properties developed with land uses not specified above, except as provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 12-931, § 1, 6-4-12)  
11.74.020 - Permit required. 
A.  Every property owner or tenant desiring to exhibit, for sale purposes, identifiable or tangible personal property at a yard sale, moving sale, or estate sale shall, prior to conducting said sale, obtain a yard sale permit from the Community Development Department. Applications for yard sale permits shall be made on application forms furnished by the Department. At the time of application submission, applicants shall present a valid photo identification indicating they are a resident of the subject property. The yard sale permit application fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  The property owner or tenant of the subject property where an approved yard sale is being conducted shall be present for the entire duration of said yard sale. 
(Ord. No. 12-931, § 1, 6-4-12)  
11.74.030 - Frequency of yard sales. 
Properties legally developed with single- or multifamily residential uses shall be permitted to conduct yard sales a maximum of four times per calendar year for a maximum duration of three consecutive days. Sales shall be permitted only on the first full weekends of the months of February, May, August, and November. As used in this chapter, "weekend" is defined as being from dawn Friday morning until dusk Sunday evening. Further, "first full weekend of the month" is defined as the first weekend where all three days are within the month in which a yard sale is allowed. For example, if January 31 were to fall on a Friday, then the February yard sale weekend would occur on the subsequent full weekend falling within the month of February (February 7 through 9). 
(Ord. No. 12-931, § 1, 6-4-12)  
11.74.040 - Moving and estate sales. 
A.  Moving Sales. Residents of single-family dwellings who have sold, or entered into a contract to sell their home, shall be entitled to one moving sale per calendar year in addition to the four yard sales described in this chapter. Moving sales shall be for a maximum duration of three consecutive days with no restriction on days of the week. At the time of permit application, applicants shall provide proof that a real property sale agreement has been entered into or consummated for the subject property. The existence of a "for sale" sign on the subject property is not adequate substantiation for a moving sale. 
B.  Estate Sales. The family of a resident or residents of a single-family dwelling who has/have passed away is entitled to conduct one estate sale per calendar year in addition to the four yard sales described in this chapter. Estate sales shall be for a maximum duration of three consecutive days with no restriction on days of the week. At the time of permit application, applicants shall provide sufficient proof that the deceased person(s) lived at the subject property and shall also provide a copy of a death certificate indicating that the person(s) has/have passed within the previous six months. 
Single-family residential properties meeting the criteria described herein shall be entitled to either one moving sale or one estate sale in the same calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 12-931, § 1, 6-4-12)  
11.74.050 - Community-sponsored yard sales. 
Yard sales that are sponsored or cosponsored by the City, a City department, and/or the Montclair Chamber of Commerce may occur on property developed with land uses other than those specifically identified in Section 11.74.010 herein. Said community-sponsored yard sales shall be permitted only on the four weekends identified in Section 11.74.030 herein. The property owner or business hosting the event on its property shall obtain a special event permit pursuant to Chapter 11.68 of this title. Individual yard sale permits as described herein shall not be required of vendors participating in a community-sponsored yard sale. Community-sponsored yard sales shall comply with all other criteria and guidelines contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-931, § 1, 6-4-12)  
11.74.060 - Merchandise criteria. 
All merchandise offered for sale at yard, moving, and estate sales shall meet the following criteria: 
A.  Merchandise shall be limited to household goods that were previously purchased, made, or grown onsite by the property owner or tenant conducting the sale. The sale of new merchandise or large quantities of commercially-obtained merchandise is not permitted. 
B.  Merchandise shall not be stacked, hung, piled, or otherwise displayed so as to adversely affect the residential appearance and/or property values of the surrounding neighborhood. 
C.  Merchandise shall not be stacked or piled at a height greater than five feet above natural grade and shall be displayed in a reasonably neat and orderly manner. 
D.  Merchandise shall not be stacked, hung, piled, or otherwise displayed in a manner that may reasonably impede the accessibility of emergency personnel to the residence. 
E.  Merchandise shall not be displayed on fences and walls or hung from trees or other appurtenances. 
F.  The display of merchandise shall not extend into the public right-of-way. 
G.  Property owners or tenants shall not be permitted to "sublet" their yard to outside individuals, companies, groups, entities, etc., for the express purpose of conducting a yard sale pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-931, § 1, 6-4-12)  
11.74.070 - Inclement weather. 
In the event of inclement weather lasting longer than one day on a designated yard sale weekend, the Community Development Director may, at his or her discretion, allow permitted yard sales to occur on the subsequent weekend. Similar postponements of approved moving or estate sales shall be at the discretion of the Community Development Director. No additional permit or fees shall be required for a sale postponed solely because of inclement weather. 
(Ord. No. 12-931, § 1, 6-4-12)  
11.74.080 - Signs. 
Two City-issued "Yard Sale" signs will be distributed with each yard sale permit. A maximum of two additional signs (for a maximum total of four signs per yard sale location) may be purchased from the Community Development Department. Signs shall only be placed, displayed, or affixed as follows: 
A.  Permitted Sign. Only "Yard Sale" signs issued by the City shall be permitted to be displayed. 
B.  Copy. Signs shall contain the City logo, the words "Yard Sale," and the street address of the event. Applicants may add other relevant or helpful information, such as a directional arrow. Homemade "Yard Sale" or directional signs shall be prohibited. 
C.  Placement. 
1.  Signs may be attached to wooden, metal, or plastic stakes and placed in a landscaped area on private property with the permission of the property owner or in a landscaped parkway adjacent to private property with the permission of the adjacent property owner. 
2.  Signs shall not be attached to utility, streetlight, traffic signal, or regulatory sign poles in the public right-of-way, or to improvements on private property other than that where the yard sale is being conducted. Such placement of signs shall be prohibited and subject to removal by City staff. 
3.  Signs shall not be attached to trees on public or private property, regardless of method of attachment. 
4.  Signs shall not be placed in the landscaped center medians of any street. 
D.  Removal. At the conclusion of the yard sale, applicants shall be responsible for removing all signs and methods of attachment or display. Violators may be subject to citation and fine. 
(Ord. No. 12-931, § 1, 6-4-12)  
11.74.090 - Inspections and enforcement. 
Yard, moving, and estate sales are subject to inspection by Code Enforcement, Building, Police, Fire, and other City officials at all times during the operation to ensure compliance with this title. Violations of any parts of this Title may require immediate correction by the property owner(s) or tenant(s) conducting the sale. Failure to correct such violations may result in immediate cessation of the sale, citation, fine, and/or prohibition from conducting a yard sale at the subject location for up to a one-year period. 
(Ord. No. 12-931, § 1, 6-4-12)  
Chapter 11.75 - UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES 
 
11.75.010 - Purpose. 
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform regulations for the installation of underground utilities. For purposes of this chapter, any person, entity, agency, or property owner responsible for building on or remodeling, developing, or redeveloping any property within the City of Montclair is hereinafter referred to as "developer." Property upon which the work is taking place is hereinafter referred to as "property." 
(Ord. No. 11-923, § 1, 7-5-11)  
11.75.020 - Statutory authorization. 
The California Public Utilities Commission's Rule 20 sets policies and procedures for the conversion of overhead power lines and other equipment to underground facilities. 
(Ord. No. 11-923, § 1, 7-5-11)  
11.75.030 - Undergrounding of utilities required. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to subdivisions and residential, commercial, industrial, and mobilehome park development, redevelopment, remodeling, and building additions. No developer shall construct a new structure or structures; or modify, remodel, or add to any existing structure; or add an additional attached or detached dwelling structure upon any parcel of land unless: 
All of the existing utility lines including, but not limited to, electrical, street lighting, data/communication/telephone, and cable television within the street frontage of the property or limits of the subdivision are placed underground and one of the following conditions has been complied with: 
A.  All utility lines and/or services including, but not limited to, electrical, data/ communication/telephone, and cable television that provide direct service to the existing structure and/or the new structure on the parcel of land, have been installed underground. 
B.  The existing main utility lines are located to the rear or side of the parcel of land on which the existing structure and/or new structure is constructed unless located in a public right-of-way. 
C.  The modification, remodeling, or addition is to an existing structure and no structure(s) is/are being added and the area of the work to be performed is equal to or less than 50 percent of the total square footage of the existing structures upon the parcel. 
D.  An exception of the foregoing requirements has been granted in accordance with the provisions of Section 11.75.050. 
When utility undergrounding is required, no poles, wires, guy wires, pole supports or appurtenances, except as noted in Section 11.75.035, shall be permitted to remain within the property frontage or parkways. Development on corner lots will require undergrounding through the adjacent intersection. 
(Ord. No. 11-923, § 1, 7-5-11)  
11.75.035 - Appurtenances permitted to be placed above ground. 
For the purposes of this chapter, appurtenances and associated equipment, such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted or pad-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and streetlights (with underground service) may be placed above ground if permitted by and in accordance with the rules of the California Public Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. No. 11-923, § 1, 7-5-11)  
11.75.040 - In-lieu utility undergrounding payment 
If the width of the frontage of property is equal to or less than 600 feet, developer may opt to pay an in-lieu undergrounding payment to City. If property includes two or more street frontages, the 600-foot limitation shall apply to each street individually. The in-lieu undergrounding payment shall be determined as the product of the width of the property along each street and a cost per foot set forth by a resolution of the City Council. In-lieu payments collected by the City may be used for utility undergrounding anywhere within the City. 
(Ord. No. 11-923, § 1, 7-5-11)  
11.75.050 - Exceptions to undergrounding requirements. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not include or apply to the following: 
1.  Primary electrical energy transmission facilities operated at nominal voltages in excess of 20,000 volts. 
2.  Facilities necessary to the transmission or reception of radiated wireless communication media. 
3.  Temporary facilities to supply electrical power or communication services for construction purposes. 
4.  Temporary facilities to supply electrical power to communication services interrupted by damage or destruction of existing underground facilities. 
B.  Where the enforcement of the provisions of this section would result in severe economic hardships requiring underground expenditures or in-lieu utility undergrounding payments that are substantially disproportionate to the improvement being remodeled or erected and served, property owners may make an application for exception from the provisions of this section in the following manner: 
1.  An exception application shall be filed with the City Manager for consideration. An exception application filing fee shall be submitted concurrent with the exception application, said fee being set by City Council Resolution. The fee shall be paid to the City at the time of filing. No application shall be considered filed unless the established fees have been paid to the City. 
2.  Such application shall include all information necessary to properly apprise the City Manager of the circumstances existing that require such an exception. 
3.  Within 30 working days after the filing of such application, the City Manager shall consider the application and shall make his/her findings regarding the acceptance or rejection of the exception application. Failure of the City Manager to respond within 30 working days shall be deemed denial of the application. 
4.  The exception application may be further appealed to the City Council by submitting the application to the City Clerk to agendize for City Council consideration. An exception appeal application filing fee shall be submitted concurrent with the exception application, said fee being set by City Council Resolution. The fee shall be paid to the City at the time of filing. No appeal application shall be considered filed unless the established fees have been paid to the City. The City Council's decision to uphold or overturn the City Manager's decision shall be deemed final. 
(Ord. No. 11-923, § 1, 7-5-11)  
Division IV. - Entitlements  
Chapter 11.76 - ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENTS 
Sections: 
 
11.76.010 - Purpose and authorization. 
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide for the granting of administrative adjustments or minor exceptions to the development standards of this Code by the Community Development Director in those cases where such minor deviations or exceptions are warranted by practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, or results that without the administrative adjustment may be inconsistent with the general intent of this Code. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1930)  
11.76.020 - Qualifications for administrative adjustment. 
The Community Development Director may grant an administrative adjustment for the following requests upon receipt of a complete application in accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter: 
A.  Fence, wall or hedge over 42 inches in height within or on the required side yard on the street side of a reversed corner lot as prescribed under Section 11.38.050(N)(1) of this title; 
B.  Fence or structure over 6 feet in height to enclose a tennis court or other game area located within the rear one-half of the lot as prescribed under Section 11.38.050(N)(2) of this title; 
C.  Fence, wall or hedge not greater than 8 feet in height on or within all rear and side property lines and on or to the rear of all front yard setback lines in special circumstances prescribed under Section 11.38.050(N)(4) of this title; 
D.  Construction of patios on residential lots within small-lot (SL) zoned areas, open on at least two sides and having a minimum rear yard setback of 5 feet; 
E.  Other minor deviation from the required yard areas, building coverage, open space, building separation, building height and size of accessory structure by not more than 10 percent of the minimum or maximum requirements of the development standards under any residential zones; 
F.  Keeping of exotic animals within residential zones as specified under provisions of Section 11.18.030(C)(5) of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1931)  
11.76.030 - Initiation of proceedings. 
A.  The applicant for an administrative adjustment shall have on file with the Department of Community Development a complete application on a form furnished by the City, including all appropriate scaled drawings and detailed description of the request to be considered. 
B.  In the case of an administrative adjustment request for the keeping of exotic animals within residential zones as qualified under Section 11.76.020(F) of this chapter, the applicant shall also submit a signed statement by the County Health Officer that the keeping of such animals will not be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the abutting property owners and that the keeping of such animals is not in any way inconsistent with any federal, State or local laws regulating and protecting rare, endangered or extinct species. 
C.  An administrative adjustment review fee shall also be accompanied with the application in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1932)  
11.76.040 - Administrative review. 
A.  Within 10 working days from the acceptance of the application for administrative adjustment which is deemed complete, the Director of Community Development shall conduct a full review of the request to ensure compliance with the general intent of this Code and that the necessary findings can be met. Such review may include site inspection, notification of and consultation with abutting property owners, various City departments or outside agencies. 
B.  The Director of Community Development shall notify the applicant of the decision, in writing, within 40 days from the acceptance of a completed application. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1933)  
11.76.050 - Findings required to grant administrative adjustment. 
No administrative adjustment shall be granted unless the Director of Community Development makes the following four findings: 
A.  Because of special circumstances applicable to the subject property, that the strict application of the zoning provisions is found to deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by properties in the vicinity under an identical zone classification; 
B.  That such administrative adjustment is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and under the exact zone classification; 
C.  That the granting of the administrative adjustment will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare; and 
D.  That the granting of the administrative adjustment is not contrary to the adopted General Plan. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1934)  
11.76.060 - Conditions of approval. 
A.  The Director of Community Development may attach conditions of approval deemed necessary to mitigate the appearance or potential impact of any structures or uses as permitted under the administrative adjustment procedure and to safeguard the public safety, health and welfare. 
B.  In the case of approval for keeping of exotic animals, additional conditions shall be imposed subjecting the adjustment to automatic revocation should the animals become a valid and verified nuisance due to noise, odor etc., or if the animal(s) becomes a danger to the neighborhood. 
(Prior code § 9-4.1935)  
11.76.070 - Time limit. 
A.  A time limit of six months, or a shorter period if deemed necessary by the Director of Community Development, shall be imposed on each administrative adjustment granted by the Director after the effective date thereof. If the privilege is not utilized within such time, this authorization shall be void and any privileged permit granted hereby shall be deemed to have lapsed. The Director, however, shall have the authority to extend the time limit for a maximum of an additional 60 days for good cause upon submittal of written request and time extension fee equaling one-half of the original filing fee for administrative adjustment at least 10 days prior to the expiration date. 
B.  The privileges of an administrative adjustment shall lapse and become null and void if the adjustment is abandoned for a period of six months or more. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1936)  
11.76.080 - Appeal. 
A.  Any aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the Director of Community Development in conjunction with approval, conditional approval, or denial of an administrative adjustment application to the Planning Division within 10 days after the Director's decision in accordance with the provisions of this title and said appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal fee, which shall be one-half of the original filing fee. 
B.  Any such appeal shall stay the administrative adjustment proceedings until resolution by the Planning Commission. 
C.  The Planning Commission, upon receipt of the appeal, shall conduct a hearing within 40 days. The appellant and the abutting property owners shall be notified of the hearing at least 10 days prior to the hearing date. 
D.  The Planning Commission may, upon conducting its own investigation of the evidence presented at the hearing, affirm, reverse, or modify in whole or in part any decision or requirement of the Director of Community Development. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1937)  
11.76.090 - Reinitiating process (limitation). 
No application concerning the administrative adjustment provisions of this chapter for the same property, which application has been recommended for denial by the Director of Community Development and/or the Planning Commission on appeal, shall be received or processed by the City within 12 months after such denial. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1938)  
Chapter 11.78 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-933, §§ 4, 6, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed the former Chapter 11.78, §§ 11.78.010—11.78.030 and 11.78.040—11.78.120, and §§ 4—6 of Ord. No. 13-933 enacted a new Chapter 11.78 as set out herein. The former Chapter 11.78 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code §§ 9-4.1910—9-4.16; Ord. No. 99-791; Ord. No. 02-828; Ord. No. 05-868, 2005; Ord. No. 06-871 and Ord. 06-873. 
 
11.78.010 - Purpose and authorization. 
This chapter is intended to provide the flexibility and procedures necessary for certain uses and activities that are not allowed as a matter of right within a zoning district by reason of uniqueness, size, scope, or possible negative effect on public facilities or surrounding uses but may be permitted after special consideration and public review of each request in order to ensure conformity and compatibility with the goals and objectives of the adopted General Plan and zoning code, subject to a conditional use permit (CUP) or administrative conditional use permit (ACUP). In granting such permits, the Planning Commission (CUP) or Director of Community Development (ACUP) may stipulate conditions, in addition to those required by the provisions of this title, which would tend to safeguard the health, safety, and property value in the area. 
(Ord. No. 13-933, § 4, 6-17-13)  
11.78.020 - Qualifications. 
A conditional use permit may be granted by the Planning Commission or an administrative conditional use permit may be granted by the Director of Community Development, for those uses stated in Sections 11.78.030 through 11.78.050 of this chapter and other uses identified in this title requiring approval of a conditional use permit or administrative conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 13-933, § 4, 6-17-13)  
11.78.030 - Permitted uses. 
In addition to those uses specifically identified in Chapters 11.22 through 11.30 of this Title as requiring a conditional use permit, the Planning Commission may grant a conditional use permit for any use listed in this Section as a permitted use subject to a conditional use permit: 
A.  Residential Uses. 
1.  Assisted living facilities (AP, C-2, C-3); 
2.  Convalescent care (AP, C-2, C-3); 
3.  Conversions of apartments to condominiums (R-3); 
4.  Student housing, dormitories, group quarters (AP, C-2, C-3). 
B.  Commercial Uses (Animal Services). 
1.  Animal hospitals, boarding facilities, and kennels (MIP, M-1, M-2); 
2.  Animal shelters (M-1, M-2); 
3.  Feed and tackle supplies with outdoor storage (C-3, M-1, M-2); 
4.  Pet sales and supplies - retail (MIP). 
C.  Commercial Uses (Alcoholic Beverage Sales). The uses identified in this subsection shall also be subject to the applicable requirements of Chapter 11.42 of this title. 
1.  Off-sale alcoholic beverages within an overall floor area of less than 15,000 square feet, except those retail businesses specifically identified in Section 11.78.035(B)(1) of this chapter as requiring an administrative conditional use permit (C-2, C-3); 
2.  Off-sale alcoholic beverages within an overall floor area of 15,000 square feet or greater (C-2); 
3.  On-sale alcoholic beverages in conjunction with a bona fide eating establishment (C-2, C-3, MIP); 
4.  Microbrewery with on-site tasting (C-3); 
5.  Microbrewery in conjunction with a bona fide eating establishment (C-2, C-3). 
D.  Commercial Uses (General Merchandise). 
1.  Antiques — retail (MIP); 
2.  Auction houses (MIP, M-1, M-2); 
3.  Carpet and floor covering stores — retail (MIP, M-1, M-2); 
4.  Cigar/cigarette/electronic cigarette/smoke shops (C-2, C-3), subject to the following criteria: 
a.  Such establishments shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet, measured property line to property line, from any public or private school serving students in grades Pre-K through 12; and 
b.  Such establishments shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet, measured property line to property line, from one another; 
5.  Commercial plant nursery — wholesale (MIP, M-1, M-2); 
6.  Construction equipment sales with outdoor storage (C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2); 
7.  Construction equipment sales without outdoor storage (MIP); 
8.  Convenience stores (C-2, C-3); 
9.  Firearms, ammunition and related products as a stand-alone use — retail (C-3, MIP, M-1); 
10.  Furniture, office and home furnishings (MIP); 
11.  Garden supply, hardware/home improvement center, plant nursery with outdoor display area (C-2, C-3, MIP); 
12.  Hobby, toy and game shops with more than four personal computers for customer use (C-2, C-3); 
13.  Newsstands — staffed (C-2, C-3); 
14.  Sporting goods and equipment with firearms and/or ammunition sales (C-2, C-3); 
15.  Swap meets, marketplaces, concession malls (C-3); 
16.  Thrift stores and second-hand merchandise stores (C-3; BP and C within HBSP). 
E.  Commercial Uses (Lodging Facilities). 
1.  Bed and breakfast facilities (AP, C-2, C-3); 
2.  Hotels and motels (AP, C-2, C-3). 
F.  Commercial Uses (Medical/Health Services). 
1.  Hospitals (AP). 
G.  Commercial Uses (Motor Vehicle/Watercraft Sales and Service). 
1.  Automobile/watercraft body and painting as a primary use (MIP, M-1, M-2); 
2.  Automobile, motorcycle, RV and watercraft sales and service - new and/or used with outdoor display (C-3, MIP); 
3.  Automobile rental agencies with on-site parking for rental vehicles (C-2, C-3, MIP); 
4.  Car washes (C-2, C-3, MIP); 
5.  Commercial parking lots, garages and structures as a primary use (AP, C-2, C-3); 
6.  Fueling/service stations with or without ancillary uses, such as minimart, auto repairs, car wash, or quick-serve food establishment (C-2, C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2); 
7.  Limousine, charter bus, shuttle or taxicab service with on-site fleet vehicle storage (AP, C-2, C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2); 
8.  Quick lube facilities (C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2); 
9.  Truck, trailer, moving van, and equipment rentals (C-2, C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2). 
H.  Commercial Uses (Personal Services). 
1.  Cemeteries, crematories, mausoleums, columbaria (M-1, M-2); 
2.  Coin laundries (C-2, C-3); 
3.  Fortune telling, palm or card reading (C-3); 
4.  Funeral homes and mortuaries (C-3, MIP); 
5.  Pawn shops (C-3); 
6.  Tattoo, dermagraphics, or body piercing as a primary use (C-3, MIP); 
7.  Massage establishments (C-3, MIP; C within HBSP; C-3 and MIP within NMSP). 
I.  Commercial Uses (Recreation/Entertainment). 
1.  Banquet halls as a stand-alone use (C-3, MIP, M-1); 
2.  Billiards and pool halls (C-2, C-3); 
3.  Cyber cafés, internet access, and electronic game arcades (C-2, C-3); 
4.  Golf courses and driving ranges (C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2); 
5.  Hookah establishments as a stand-alone use (C-3); 
6.  Indoor amusement facilities, batting cages, bike/skate parks, bowling centers, go-kart facilities, karaoke establishments, recreation/sports/gyms/health clubs, roller/ice hockey facilities, and skating rinks (C-2, C-3, MIP) 
7.  Outdoor amusement parks and facilities, bike/skate parks, go-kart facilities, miniature golf, recreation/sports/health clubs, skating rinks, batting cages, roller/ice hockey facilities, miniature and remote control car tracks, and remote control hobby facilities (C-2, C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2); 
8.  Public assembly, auditoriums, and meeting halls (C-2, C-3, MIP); 
9.  Theaters (live stage and motion picture) and concert halls (C-3, MIP). 
J.  Commercial Uses (Religious Institutions). 
1.  Houses of worship (AP, C-2, C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2); 
2.  Monasteries and religious group quarters as a primary use (C-3, MIP). 
K.  Community Uses (Special Uses) 
1.  Certified farmers' markets (R-1, on property developed with civic or public uses only when sponsored or co-sponsored by the City; R-1, on property developed with religious or public educational uses; C-3) 
2.  Wireless telecommunications facilities (AP, C-2, C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2) 
L.  Educational/Instructional/Day Care Uses. 
1.  Colleges (AP, C-3, MIP); 
2.  Elementary, middle and high schools — private (AP, MIP); 
3.  Preschools and children's day care facilities (AP, C-2, C-3). 
M.  Manufacturing and Industrial Uses. 
1.  Automobile wrecking yards, salvage and junkyards (M-2); 
2.  Chemical manufacturing and processing (M-2); 
3.  Concrete batch plants (M-2); 
4.  Detergent and soap manufacturing (M-2); 
5.  Explosives and fireworks manufacturing and storage (M-2); 
6.  Laundries and dry cleaners — commercial (M-1, M-2); 
7.  Lumber and wood products with outdoor storage (MIP, M-1, M-2); 
8.  Metal or iron work fabrication (M-1, M-2); 
9.  Outdoor business operations with permitted manufacturing/industrial use (MIP, M-1, M-2); 
10.  Recycling/transfer facilities and material recovery facilities (M-2); 
11.  Research, development, and testing of products with outdoor operations (M-1, M-2); 
12.  Rock, sand, gravel, and mineral extraction and recycling (M-2); 
13.  Stone, clay, and glass manufacturing (M-2); 
14.  Tire retreading (M-2); 
15.  Vehicle battery manufacturing (M-2); 
N.  Warehouse and Storage Uses. 
1.  Building materials with outdoor storage (MIP, M-1, M-2); 
2.  Lumber/contractor storage yard as a primary use (MIP, M-1, M-2); 
3.  Outdoor storage as a primary use (M-1, M-2); 
4.  Outdoor storage as an ancillary use to a permitted use in a building (MIP, M-1, M-2); 
5.  Outdoor storage for gardening/landscape companies and contractors (MIP, M-1, M-2); 
6.  Self-storage, mini-storage warehouse facilities (C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2). 
(Ord. No. 13-933, § 4, 6-17-13; Ord. No. 13-935, § 2, 7-7-14; Ord. No. 14-942, § 2, 5-19-14; Ord. No. 14-946, § 1, 10-6-14; Ord. No. 15-951, § 2, 7-6-15)  
11.78.035 - Permitted uses—Administrative review. 
The Director of Community Development may grant an administrative conditional use permit (ACUP) for any use listed in this section as a permitted use only in the zoning districts noted and subject to conditions related to the use, construction, implementation, operation, and automatic revocation as the Director may deem appropriate and necessary for the general welfare of the community, provided the use is deemed to be exempt from the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA): 
A.  Residential Uses. 
1.  Caretaker quarters (C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2); 
2.  Residential care facilities — seven or more persons (AP, C-2, C-3); 
B.  Commercial Uses (Alcoholic Beverage Sales). 
1.  Off-sale beer and wine (ABC Type 20) as an incidental use to a retail business and where display of alcoholic beverages constitutes an aggregate of four square feet or less of the public area of the demised tenant space and subject to the applicable requirements of Chapter 11.42 of this title (C-2, C-3). 
C.  Commercial Uses (Temporary and Special Uses). 
1.  Collocation of an additional carrier on an existing wireless telecommunications facility, provided the collocation would not result in any of the following (AP, C-2, C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2): 
a.  An increase in height of the existing facility; 
b.  A substantial change to the visual appearance of the existing facility; 
c.  An increase in the area of the ground lease space that results in a reduction of required landscape area or required parking. 
2.  Fruit, vegetable, and flower stands — product grown on-site (MIP, M-1, M-2); 
3.  Mobile recycling and reverse vending units (C-2, C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2); 
4.  Outdoor seating in conjunction with an approved restaurant/food use — eight seats or more (C-2, C-3, MIP); 
5.  Temporary parking lots (AP, C-2, C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2); 
6.  Temporary structures in conjunction with carnivals, farmers' markets, fairs, circuses, and religious gatherings (C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2); 
7.  Temporary use of storage and sea containers in conjunction with a legally established use (MIP, M-1, M-2); 
8.  Temporary use of structures, trailers, and facilities in conjunction with a legally established use (AP, C-2, C-3, MIP, M-1, M-2). 
9.  Temporary use of undeveloped/vacant property by contractors performing public infrastructure work and/or repairs. 
D.  Educational/Instructional/Day Care Uses. 
1.  Adult day care (C-2, C-3; C-2, C-3 and MIP within NMSP; BP and C within HBSP); 
2.  Adult vocational classes, trade schools, computer training, traffic and driving schools (AP, C-2, C-3; C-3 and MIP within NMSP; BP, C and CO within HBSP); 
3.  Children's tutorial classes (AP, C-2, C-3; C-3 and MIP within NMSP; BP, C and CO within HBSP); 
4.  Music, art, dance, gymnastics, martial arts instruction, personal fitness, Pilates, talent/acting studio, and yoga — greater than 2,000 square feet (AP, C-2, C-3, MIP; C-3 & MIP within NMSP; BP, C & CO within HBSP). 
(Ord. No. 13-933, § 5, 6-17-13)  
11.78.040 - Nonconforming structures and uses. 
A.  Nonconforming Structures. All structures, including main buildings, accessory structures, walls, fences, signs, and other structures, that do not comply with height, setback, density, and/or lot coverage standards specified by this title, or for which the number of parking spaces provided is less than required, or any residential structures within any commercial or industrial zone, except as may be permitted by this title, are hereby deemed to be nonconforming structures; and the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Enlargement and Extension. No enlargement, extension, or expansion shall be made to a nonconforming structure unless otherwise permitted by this title. Building additions to a single-family residence in the R-1 Zone shall be permitted, provided that the addition observes the setbacks currently required by this title and that all other development standards of the underlying zone can be met. 
2.  Building additions to Single-Family Residences Without Required Covered Parking. In the R-1 Zone, single-family residences without required covered parking pursuant to Chapter 11.66 of this title may be expanded as follows: 
a.  The floor area of the main residential structure is not increased by more than 25 percent or 500 square feet, whichever is less, over a period of five years or less. 
b.  The new construction shall not occupy the only available area(s) suitable for required parking and access thereto. 
3.  Construction of Accessory Structures and Second Dwelling Units On R-1 Lots Without Required Covered Parking. The construction of a detached accessory structure pursuant to Chapter 11.19 of this title, or an attached or detached second dwelling unit pursuant to Chapter 11.23 of this title, on a lot in the R-1 Zone developed with a single-family residence upon which required covered parking is not provided shall be prohibited unless the required covered parking is constructed prior to, or concurrently with, said accessory structure or second dwelling unit. A certificate of occupancy for an accessory structure or second dwelling unit shall not be issued by the Building Official until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the structure providing the required covered parking. 
4.  Maintenance and Repairs. General maintenance and necessary repairs that are not structural in nature may be made to legal nonconforming structures in all zoning districts. Structural repairs to a legal nonconforming structure may be authorized by the Building Official if it is determined that said repairs are necessary to protect the health and safety of the occupants, public at-large, or adjacent property and the cost does not exceed 50 percent of the replacement cost of the legal nonconforming structure. Improvements required to strengthen unreinforced masonry structures shall be permitted without replacement cost limitations, provided that such work is limited strictly to compliance with seismic safety standards. 
5.  Abandonment of Nonconforming Structures. Any nonconforming building, structure, sign, or improvement that has been vacated or not utilized for a continuous period of 180 days or more shall be deemed to have lost its nonconforming status and shall, at the discretion of the Director of Community Development, be demolished, removed, or modified to such extent that it would be in conformance with the current development standards for the zone in which the building, structure, sign, or improvement is located. Additionally, any sign that became nonconforming on March 21, 2001, pursuant to Ordinance No. 94-733 and the criteria set forth in Section 11.72.140 of this Title, or any sign that has been subsequently determined to be nonconforming, shall not be refaced or reestablished to identify a different business than was identified on the previously legal nonconforming sign. 
6.  Replacement of Nonconforming Structures. Any nonconforming single-family residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional structure that is involuntarily damaged by fire or other catastrophic event may be restored or reconstructed to its original condition provided that the cost of such restoration/reconstruction does not exceed 50 percent of the replacement value of the structure as determined by the Director of Community Development and that the restoration shall commence within one year from the date the damage occurred. 
7.  Replacement of Nonconforming Multifamily Structures. Any non-conforming multifamily residential dwelling unit that is involuntarily damaged or destroyed by fire or other catastrophic event may be restored subject to the provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 65852.25. 
8.  Relocation of a Nonconforming Structure. A nonconforming structure shall not be moved to any other lot or to any other portion of the lot on which it is located unless, as a result of the move, the structure would then conform to the regulations of the zoning district. 
9.  Nonconforming Historic Structures. Repairs, alterations, and additions necessary for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation, or continued use of a nonconforming historic structure may be made when authorized by the Director of Community Development and Building Official or their designees, provided that: 
a.  The structure has been designated as having significant historical or architectural significance by the City Council, State of California, or federal government or was constructed in, or prior to, 1940; 
b.  Any unsafe conditions are corrected; and 
c.  The use(s) therein shall be in conformance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Nonconforming Uses. Nonconforming uses are those that were legally established but that are not currently listed as permitted or conditionally permitted in the zoning district in which they are located or those that currently require a conditional use permit but at the time of their initiation did not require a conditional use permit. The following provisions shall apply to legal nonconforming uses: 
1.  No nonconforming use shall be expanded or moved in whole or part to any portion of the lot or parcel upon which it is located or other structure other than that occupied by such use at the time it was established. 
2.  No nonconforming use shall be changed to a different nonconforming use. 
3.  If a nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned for a continuous period of 180 days or more, such use shall be deemed to have lost its nonconforming status and shall not be reestablished. 
4.  Adult-oriented businesses. The amortization of nonconforming adult-oriented businesses shall be subject to the provisions set forth in Section 11.40.060 of this title. 
C.  Permits or Certificates of Occupancy Prohibited. When any nonconforming structure or use is no longer permitted pursuant to the provisions of this title, no building or sign permit or certificate of occupancy shall thereafter be issued for further continuance, alteration, or expansion. Any permit or certificate of occupancy issued in error shall not be construed as allowing the continuation of the nonconforming structure or use. 
D.  Removal of illegal nonconforming structures and uses. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or implied so as to allow for the continuation of illegal nonconforming structures and uses. 
E.  Burden of Proof. The burden of proof regarding nonconforming structures and uses shall be with the property owner to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development. 
(Ord. No. 13-933, § 6, 6-17-13)  
11.78.050 - Buildings within planned rights-of-way. 
The Director of Community Development may grant an administrative conditional use permit as follows: 
A.  For temporary structures within planned rights-of-way when the property owner applying for such permit signs an agreement with the City to remove any such temporary building or structure at his/her expense whenever so requested by the City for street widening or opening; or 
B.  Upon evidence that the entire property of the owner, of which the area of the planned right-of-way forms a part, cannot reasonably be used for a permitted use and yield a reasonable return to the owner without a new or improved structure within such planned right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 13-933, § 6, 6-17-13)  
11.78.060 - Initiation of proceedings. 
A.  Any property owner or his/her authorized representative desiring a conditional use permit or administrative conditional use permit may file an application for such permit with the Planning Division on forms furnished by the City. Additional submittal requirements as designated by Planning Division staff shall accompany said application form in order to constitute a complete application. The additional submittal requirements may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  A legal description of the subject property; 
2.  A site plan, floor plans, elevations, and other appropriate drawings illustrating existing and proposed buildings or facilities; 
3.  A narrative describing the nature of the proposed use, hours of operation, estimated occupancy, and other relevant information; 
4.  A reference to the specific provisions of this title that are applicable to the conditional use permit or administrative conditional use permit sought; 
5.  A filing fee, the amount of which is determined by resolution of the City Council; 
6.  Conditional use permit justification form; 
7.  Environmental assessment form; 
8.  Names and mailing addresses, printed on mailing labels, of all owners of real property within 300 feet of the external boundaries of the subject property, as shown on the latest adopted, publicly available tax roll of the County of San Bernardino. 
B.  No application for the same general purpose concerning the same property, which application has been recommended for denial by the Planning Commission or denied by the Director of Community Development, Planning Commission, and/or City Council on appeal, shall be received or processed by the Planning Division within 12 months after such denial except by the consent of at least four members of the Planning Commission present at a regular meeting of the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 13-933, § 6, 6-17-13)  
11.78.070 - Hearing. 
A.  Upon the acceptance of a completed application for a conditional use permit (CUP) or administrative conditional use permit (ACUP), Planning Division staff shall forward the application to the Development Review Commit-tee for review and comments and shall communicate to the applicant said recommendations and comments from the Development Review Committee. If no major changes are recommended, then the City Planner shall, in the case of a CUP, set a date for a public hearing before the Planning Commission. For an ACUP, the City Planner shall forward the application to the Director of Community Development for consideration and action. If major changes to the proposal are recommended or required, then the submitted plans shall be returned to the applicant for revision and resubmittal. When the necessary corrections have been made, the application shall be deemed complete. For CUPs, the City Planner shall set a date for a public hearing; for ACUPs, the application shall be forwarded to the Director for consideration and action. 
B.  For conditional use permits, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall give notice of such requested CUP and of the time and place of such public hearing as follows: 
1.  By one publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in the City at least 10 days, but no more than 15 days, prior to the date set for the public hearing; and 
2.  By mailed notice not less than 10 days prior to the date set for the public hearing to all owners of real property within a radius of 300 feet of the external boundaries of the property described in the application, using the last known name and mailing address of such owners as shown on the most recent available tax roll for the County of San Bernardino. Notice may be given to property owners within a greater radius at the discretion of the Planning Commission or the Director of Community Development. 
3.  The Planning Commission shall cause to be made by its own members, or members of staff, such investigation of facts bearing upon such application set for hearing including an analysis of precedent cases as in the opinion of the Planning Commission will serve to provide the necessary information to enable the Commission to act. 
4.  A copy of the staff report shall be made available to the applicant and to the general public upon request prior to the hearing. 
5.  At the time and place so fixed and noticed, the public hearing shall be conducted before the Planning Commission. The Commission shall consider all pertinent oral and written evidence and information prior to adoption of a formal and numbered resolution granting or denying such conditional use permit. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at the hearing; the names and addresses of persons testifying; and copies of all notices, affidavits of newspaper publication(s), and records of action taken shall be a part of the permanent case file. 
C.  For administrative conditional use permits, the Director of Community Development shall give notice of such requested ACUP as follows: 
1.  By mailed notice not less than 10 days prior to the date set for a final decision by the Director to all owners of real property within a radius of 300 feet of the external boundaries of the property described in the application, using the last known name and mailing address of such owners as shown on the most recent available tax roll for the County of San Bernardino. Notice may be given to property owners within a greater radius at the discretion of the Director of Community Development. 
2.  The Director of Community Development shall conduct an investigation of facts bearing upon such application including an analysis of precedent cases as, in the opinion of the Director, will serve to provide the necessary information to enable him/her to act. 
3.  The Director of Community Development shall consider all pertinent oral, written, and electronic communications received by Planning Division staff related to the subject application prior to granting or denying such administrative conditional use permit. A summary of all pertinent communication received by staff, copies of all notices, affidavits of newspaper publication(s), and records of action taken shall be a part of the permanent case file. 
(Ord. No. 13-933, § 6, 6-17-13)  
11.78.080 - Findings, conditions, and time limits. 
A.  Findings. The Planning Commission, prior to approval of a request for a conditional use permit, shall adopt a resolution stating that the evidence presented shows that each of the findings below have been made. In the case of an administrative conditional use permit, the Director of Community Development shall prepare an approval letter stating the evidence presented shows that each of the following findings have been made: 
1.  That the use is essential or desirable to the public convenience and public welfare; 
2.  That granting the permit will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare and to other property in the vicinity; 
3.  That the use conforms to good zoning practices and development standards; and 
4.  That the use is not contrary to any of the objectives of the adopted General Plan. 
B.  Finding of Public Convenience and Necessity. 
1.  In the event that a CUP is granted for a business establishment engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages for on- or off-site consumption and that establishment is located in a census tract where there is "undue concentration" pursuant to Section 23958.4 of the Business and Professions Code, then the Planning Commission shall also make a finding of Public Convenience and Necessity in addition to the findings in subsection A of this section. 
2.  In the event that an ACUP is granted for a business establishment engaged in the sale of beer and wine as an incidental use as defined in this Title and that establishment is located in a census tract where there is "undue concentration" pursuant to Section 23958.4 of the Business and Professions Code, then the Director of Community Development shall also make a finding of Public Convenience and Necessity in addition to the findings in subsection A of this section. In the alternative, the Director, at his/her sole discretion, may refer the application to the Planning Commission to make the required Finding of Public Convenience and Necessity. 
C.  Conditions. 
1.  The Planning Commission may grant the requested conditional use permit, or the Director of Community Development an administrative conditional use permit, in whole or in part upon such items and conditions as he/she/it may deem necessary to safeguard and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare, the existing and possible future uses on adjoining land in the neighborhood, the proper handling and regulation of traffic, and to ensure the eventual development of the property with respect to which the permit is granted. 
2.  Prior to the issuance of any building or occupancy permit, the owner and anyone applying on his/her behalf shall agree, in writing, to meet and abide by all the conditions and requirements imposed on the conditional use permit or administrative conditional use permit. 
D.  Time Limit. 
1.  Each determination of the Planning Commission or Director of Community Development granting a conditional use permit or administrative conditional use permit shall be conditioned upon the privileges being utilized within six months after the effective date thereof unless a shorter or longer time period is established by the Planning Commission or Director; and if they are not utilized or preliminary construction work is not begun within such time and/or progressing adequately to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development, this authorization shall become void and any privilege or permit granted shall be deemed to have lapsed. The Planning Commission, however, shall have the authority to extend the time limit required for a conditional use permit for good cause and in the case of unavoidable delay upon submittal of a written request and the required time extension filing fees by the applicant at least 10 days prior to the expiration date. Similarly, the Director shall have the authority to extend the time limit required for an administrative conditional use permit for good cause and in the case of unavoidable delay upon submittal of a written request and the required time extension filing fees by the applicant at least 10 days prior to the expiration date. 
2.  As a condition for granting an extension of time, the Planning Commission (CUP) or Director of Community Development (ACUP) may revise existing conditions or impose additional conditions to ensure that the project will be in compliance with City standards in effect at the time such extension is granted. 
3.  Once any portion of the conditional use permit or administrative conditional use permit is utilized, the other portions thereof shall become immediately operative and shall be strictly complied with. 
4.  When a land use for which a conditional use permit or administrative conditional use permit was granted is discontinued for a period of six continuous months, such use shall not be reestablished unless a new CUP or ACUP, as applicable, is approved for the subject use. Further, if any land use legally established without the benefit of a CUP or ACUP is discontinued for six continuous months but, under the current requirements of this title, would require approval of a CUP or ACUP, said land use shall not be reestablished unless a CUP or ACUP, as applicable, is approved for the subject use. 
(Ord. No. 13-933, § 6, 6-17-13)  
11.78.090 - Appeals. 
A.  Conditional Use Permits. 
1.  The action of the Planning Commission shall become final on the date the Planning Commission makes its final determination on the application. However, within 15 days after the date of the Planning Commission's decision, a written appeal therefrom may be taken to the City Council by any person aggrieved by the determination of the Planning Commission in connection with the application. Such appeal shall be accompanied by the required appeal fee, which shall be one half of the initial conditional use permit filing fee. The City Council, on its own motion, may appeal any determination of the Planning Commission within 15 days of the Planning Commission's decision or at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting, whichever occurs later. An appeal fee shall not be required in the event of such City Council appeal. 
2.  The appeal request shall stay any proceedings associated with the action appealed from. Upon receipt of the request for the appeal, Planning Division staff shall transmit to the City Council the appeal request and copies of all other papers constituting the official record, together with a written report stating why the appeal should or should not be granted. 
3.  The City Council may, by resolution, affirm, reverse, or modify in whole or in part any decision, determination, or requirement of the Planning Commission; but before conducting a public hearing on granting any appeal of a Planning Commission decision, the City Council shall set the matter for hearing and give the same notice as that provided in Section 11.78.070(B) of this chapter. 
4.  The appeal hearing by the City Council shall be based upon the record of the Planning Commission. In the event any new information or evidence is produced for consideration, the City Council shall refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. 
B.  Administrative Conditional Use Permits. 
1.  The action of the Director of Community Development shall become final on the date he/she makes a final decision on the application. However, within 15 days after the date of the Director's decision, a written appeal therefrom may be taken to the Planning Commission by any person aggrieved by the determination of the Director in connection with the application. Such appeal shall be accompanied by the required appeal fee, which shall be one half of the initial administrative conditional use permit filing fee. The Planning Commission or City Council, on its own motion, may appeal any decision of the Director within 15 days of his/her decision or at the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission or City Council meeting, whichever occurs later. An appeal fee shall not be required in the event of such appeal by the Planning Commission or City Council. 
2.  The appeal request shall stay any proceedings associated with the action appealed from. Upon receipt of the request for the appeal, Planning Division staff shall transmit to the Planning Commission the appeal request and copies of all other papers constituting the official record, together with a written report stating why the appeal should or should not be granted. 
3.  The Planning Commission may, by resolution, affirm, reverse, or modify in whole or in part any decision, determination, or requirement of the Director of Community Development; but before conducting a public hearing on granting any appeal of the Director's decision, the Planning Commission shall set the matter for hearing and give the same notice as that provided in Section 11.78.070(B) of this chapter. 
4.  The appeal hearing by the Planning Commission shall be based upon the record of the administrative decision by the Director of Community Development. In the event any new information or evidence is produced for consideration, the Planning Commission shall refer the matter back to the Director for review and recommendation. 
5.  The action of the Planning Commission on an appeal of the Director's decision shall become final on the date the Planning Commission makes its determination on the appeal. Any person aggrieved by the determination of the Planning Commission in connection with the appeal, or the City Council on its own motion, may appeal the Planning Commission's decision, subject to the timeframe, fees, and criteria set forth in Section 11.78.090(A) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13-933, § 6, 6-17-13)  
11.78.100 - Revocation. 
A.  Conditional Use Permits. 
1.  The Planning Commission, on its own motion or upon the direction of the City Council, may conduct a hearing upon the question of the revocation of a conditional use permit granted under or pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
2.  Notification of such public hearing shall be given in accordance with Section 11.78.070(B) of this chapter provided, however, the owner of the subject property shall have his/her notice mailed by certified mail, postage paid, return receipt requested. 
3.  A conditional use permit granted pursuant to a hearing may be revoked and a nonconforming use may be terminated if the Planning Commission and City Council make any of the following findings: 
a.  That any condition of a conditional use permit or an amended conditional use permit has not been complied with or has been violated; 
b.  That the use is detrimental to the public health or safety or is a nuisance; 
c.  That the conditional use permit was obtained by fraud; 
d.  That the use for which the permit was granted is not being exercised; 
e.  That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased or been suspended for six months or more; or 
f.  That the condition of the improvements, if any, involved in a legal nonconforming use is such that the property, with or without alteration of any existing improvements, can be used for a nonconforming use without impairing the constitutional rights of any person. 
4.  After a hearing upon the revocation of a conditional use permit, the Planning Commission shall report its findings of fact and recommendations to the City Council by a formal and numbered resolution; and upon receipt of such recommendations, the City Council shall determine the facts at a public hearing and may revoke, modify, or allow to remain unchanged the conditional use permit in accordance with the City Council's final determination in such matters. 
B.  Administrative Conditional Use Permits. 
1.  The Planning Commission, on its own motion, upon the recommendation of the Director of Community Development or upon the direction of the City Council, may conduct a hearing upon the question of the revocation of an administrative conditional use permit granted under or pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
2.  Notification of such public hearing shall be given in accordance with Section 11.78.070(B) of this chapter provided, however, the owner of the subject property shall have his/her notice mailed by certified mail, postage paid, return receipt requested. 
3.  An administrative conditional use permit may be revoked and a nonconforming use may be terminated if the Planning Commission and City Council make any of the following findings: 
a.  That any condition of an administrative conditional use permit or an amended administrative conditional use permit has not been complied with or has been violated; 
b.  That the use is detrimental to the public health or safety or is a nuisance; 
c.  That the administrative conditional use permit was obtained by fraud; 
d.  That the use for which the permit was granted is not being exercised; 
e.  That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased or been suspended for six months or more; or 
f.  That the condition of the improvements, if any, involved in a legal nonconforming use is such that the property, with or without alteration of any existing improvements, can be used for a nonconforming use without impairing the constitutional rights of any person. 
4.  After a hearing upon the revocation of an administrative conditional use permit, the Planning Commission shall report its findings of fact and recommendations to the City Council by a formal and numbered resolution, and upon receipt of such recommendations, the City Council shall determine the facts at a public hearing and may revoke, modify, or allow to remain unchanged the administrative conditional use permit in accordance with the City Council's final determination in such matters. 
(Ord. No. 13-933, § 6, 6-17-13)  
Chapter 11.80 - PRECISE PLAN OF DESIGN 
Sections: 
 
11.80.010 - Required for all development other than additions to existing R-1 Zone uses. 
No person shall commence any use and no building permit shall be issued for any structure to be used for or in conjunction with any such use until a Precise Plan of Design covering the parcels to be so used shall be approved as provided in this title, and then such rise may be commenced and such building permit may be issued only in accordance with such specific, approved Precise Plan of Design, including the terms and conditions thereof. 
(Prior code § 9-5.101)  
11.80.020 - Requirements. 
Such Precise Plan of Design shall specify and include: 
A.  The location, size, height and type of all structures, including signs, walls and fences; 
B.  The location, size and dimensions of all yards and setbacks and all spaces between structures; 
C.  The location, dimensions, and method of improvement of all driveways, parking areas, walkways, and means of access, ingress and egress; 
D.  The location, dimensions, and methods of improvement of all property to be dedicated to the public or to public utilities; 
E.  The general nature of the proposed use; 
F.  A detailed plan of landscaping showing the location, dimensions, and method of irrigation for all areas to be landscaped; 
G.  The location, dimensions and layout of all areas to be used for parking; 
H.  The elevations of all buildings proposed for construction, showing the general design, architectural features, and building materials; and 
I.  The location and design of all lighting within the proposed development area except that which is within any building. 
(Prior code § 9-5.102)  
11.80.030 - Adoption, rejection and modification. 
Any such Precise Plan of Design may be adopted, rejected, modified and adopted, or adopted subject to conditions. Any such Precise Plan of Design after adoption may be amended in the same manner as a Precise Plan of Design is first adopted. 
(Prior code § 9-5.103)  
11.80.040 - Restrictions. 
A.  In the approval or rejection of a Precise Plan of Design, consideration shall be given and restrictions shall be imposed by the Planning Commission in view of the size and shape of the parcel and the present and proposed zoning and use of the subject property and the surrounding property to permit the same degree of enjoyment of the subject property, but subject to the same degree of protection of adjoining properties, as would be accorded in normal circumstances by the standard restrictions imposed by this title. The standard restrictions imposed in the various zones relating to the subjects set forth in Section 11.80.020 of this chapter are intended as the minimum restrictions necessary in normal circumstances to prevent a substantial depreciation of property values in the vicinity, unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of property in the vicinity the occupants thereof for lawful purposes, and the protection of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare. "Normal circumstances" are intended to refer to the case of a permitted use upon a lot of normal size and shape surrounded by property in the same zone as the lot in question. 
B.  If the proposed Precise Plan of Design would substantially depreciate property values in the vicinity, or would unreasonably interfere with the use for enjoyment of property in the vicinity by the occupants thereof for lawful purposes, or would endanger the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, such plan shall be rejected or shall be so modified or conditioned before adoption as to remove such objections. 
C.  In addition to the foregoing grounds of rejection, the Planning Commission or City Council, as the case may be, may also consider and take into account the exterior architectural design, general exterior appearance, landscape, color, texture of surface materials and exterior construction, shape and bulk, and other physical characteristics, including the location and type of public utility facilities, and, if it is found that the proposed Precise Plan of Design, including the considerations enumerated, would interfere with the orderly development of the City, such Precise Plan of Design shall be rejected or shall be so modified or conditioned before adoption as to remove such objections. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-5.104)  
11.80.050 - Application forms. 
The application for the approval of a Precise Plan of Design, or an amendment thereof, shall be made in such form as the Planning Commission shall prescribe. The applicant shall submit to the Planning Department nine copies of all the information set forth in Section 11.80.020 of this chapter at least 11 working days before the application is to be considered at a regular meeting of the Planning Commission. A fee shall accompany the application pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 11.08.010 of this title. 
(Prior code § 9-5.105)  
11.80.060 - Conditions of approval. 
A.  A Precise Plan of Design may be approved and adopted subject to the granting of a change of zone variance, a conditional use permit, or the approval of a final subdivision map, and the Planning Commission or Council may require a Precise Plan of Design to be submitted prior to the granting or recommendation of a zone change, variance, or use permit. 
B.  Prior to the issuance of any building or occupancy permit, the owner, and anyone applying on his/her behalf, shall agree, in writing, to meet and abide by all the conditions and requirements imposed. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-5.106)  
11.80.070 - Appeals. 
An applicant may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission to the Council by filing an application for an appeal, showing wherein the Planning Commission erred, within 10 days after the decision of the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-5.107)  
11.80.080 - Violations. 
No person shall violate or fail to comply with the adopted Precise Plan of Design or any conditions or provisions thereof; nor shall a building permit be issued for any structure which would violate or fail to comply with any adopted Precise Plan of Design for the parcels on which such structure is to be located. 
(Prior code § 9-5.108)  
11.80.090 - Government Code provisions not applicable. 
The Precise Plans of Design referred to in this title are not to be confused with, or considered to be, precise plans as referred to in the Government Code of the State. 
(Prior code § 9-5.109)  
11.80.100 - Time limits. 
The duration of the Precise Plan of Design shall be one year from the date the Precise Plan of Design becomes effective. If construction is commenced within this one-year period and construction is being pursued diligently toward completion, the Precise Plan of Design shall stay in full force for another one-year period. The Planning Commission may, upon application, extend the time limit in the case of unavoidable delay. 
(Prior code § 9-5.110)  
Chapter 11.81 - INCLUSIONARY HOUSING 
Sections: 
 
11.81.010 - Purpose and intent. 
In enacting this chapter, the City Council finds and determines as follows: 
A.  It is an objective of the City to ensure that all residential development in the City's redevelopment project areas provide a range of housing opportunities for all identifiable economic segments of the population, including households of very low, lower and moderate income. 
B.  It is also the policy of the City to: 
1.  Require that a minimum of 15 percent of all approved residential development in the City's redevelopment project areas be restricted to and affordable to very low-, lower- and moderate-income households; 
2.  Require that a minimum of 40 percent of the foregoing units be restricted to and affordable to very low-income households; 
3.  Under certain conditions, allow alternatives to on-site construction as a means of providing affordable units for very low-income households; and 
4.  In specific cases, allow inclusionary requirements to be satisfied through the payment of an in-lieu fee as an alternative to requiring affordable units to be constructed. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning established by this section: 
Affordable housing cost means housing for which the monthly housing costs paid by a qualifying household shall not exceed a specified fraction of the San Bernardino County median income, adjusted for household size, for the following classes of housing: 
1.  Extremely low-income, rental or for-sale units: 30 percent times 30 percent of the San Bernardino County median income for a household size appropriate to the unit. 
2.  Very low-income, rental and for-sale units: 30 percent times 50 percent of the San Bernardino County median income for a household size appropriate to the unit. 
3.  Low-income for-sale units: 30 percent times 70 percent of the San Bernardino County median income for a household size appropriate to the unit. At the discretion of the City Council and Agency Board, affordable housing cost for a low-income for-sale unit, which is sold to a lower-income household earning not less than 70 percent of San Bernardino County income, adjusted for household size, may alternatively be 30 percent times the income of the purchaser. 
4.  Low-income rental units: 30 percent times 60 percent of the San Bernardino County median income for a household size appropriate to the unit. 
5.  Moderate-income, for-sale units: 35 percent times 110 percent of the San Bernardino County median income for a household size appropriate to the unit. At the discretion of the City Council and Agency Board, affordable housing cost for a moderate income, for sale unit which is sold to a moderate-income household earning not less than 110 percent of San Bernardino County income, adjusted for household size, may alternatively be 35 percent times the income of the purchaser. 
6.  Moderate-income, rental units: 30 percent times 110 percent of the San Bernardino County median income for a household size appropriate to the unit. 
Affordable housing agreement means a legally binding agreement between a developer and the City and/or agency, which ensures that the inclusionary requirements of this chapter are satisfied. The affordable housing agreement may also provide for compliance with the requirements of the California Community Redevelopment Law. The affordable housing agreement shall establish, among other things, the number of required affordable units, the unit sizes, location, affordability tenure, terms and conditions of affordability and unit production schedule, as provided in Section 11.81.150 of this chapter. 
Affordable housing task force shall consist of the Community Development Director, Redevelopment Director, Police Chief, Fire Chief and City Engineer. 
Agency means the City of Montclair Redevelopment Agency. 
Agency Housing Funds means the agency's Low and Moderate Income Housing Fund or Funds, established pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 33334.3. 
California Community Redevelopment Law means the provisions of Health and Safety Code Section 33000, et seq., as it may be revised from time to time. 
Combined inclusionary housing project means separate residential development sites which are linked by a contractual relationship such that some or all of the affordable units which are associated with one development site are produced and operated at a separate development site or sites. 
Conversion means the change of status of a dwelling unit from a purchased unit to a rental unit or vice versa. 
Density bonus means a minimum density increase of at least 25 percent over the maximum allowable residential density in the General Plan designation, zoning or specific plan, at the time of application, pursuant to Chapter 11.85 of this title. 
Financial assistance means assistance to include, but not be limited to, the subsidization of fees, infrastructure, land costs, or construction costs, the use of Agency Housing Funds, Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Funds, or the provision of other direct financial aid in the form of cash transfer payments or other monetary compensation by the City or Agency. 
Household size appropriate to the unit means one person for a zero bedroom (studio) unit, two persons for a one-bedroom unit, three persons for a two-bedroom unit, four persons for a three-bedroom unit, and five persons for a four-bedroom unit. Household size appropriate to a unit with more than four bedrooms shall be equal to the number of bedrooms plus one. 
Housing Trust Fund means the fund established by the City for the collection of in-lieu fees and other charges required under this chapter. 
Incentives mean concessions or assistance to include, but not limited to, direct financial assistance, density increases, standard modifications or any other financial, land use, or regulatory concession which would result in an identifiable cost reduction enabling the provision of affordable housing. 
Inclusionary housing project means a new residential development, substantial rehabilitation of a residential development, or conversion of existing residential buildings which has at least 15 percent of the total units reserved and made affordable to very low-, lower- or moderate-income households as required by this chapter. 
Inclusionary unit or affordable unit means a dwelling unit that will be offered for rent or sale exclusively to and which shall be affordable to very low-, lower- or moderate-income households, as required by this chapter. 
Income means any monetary benefits that qualify as income in accordance with State law, 25 California Code of Regulations Section 6914, or successor regulation or ordinance. 
Lower-income household means a household whose gross income is not more than the qualifying limit for lower-income households in San Bernardino County established by regulation of the State of California. 
Market-rate unit means a dwelling unit where the rental rate or sales price is not restricted either by this chapter or by requirements imposed through other local, State, or federal affordable housing programs. 
Median income means the median income, adjusted for household size, which is periodically established by regulation of the State of California. 
Moderate-income household means a household whose gross income is not more than the qualifying limit for moderate-income households in San Bernardino County established by regulation of the State of California. 
Monthly housing expense means the total monthly recurring expenses required of a household to obtain shelter for the 12 months after the date of determination. For a for-sale unit, monthly housing expenses include loan principal and interest at the time of initial purchase by the homebuyer, cost of property and mortgage insurance, property taxes and assessments, homeowners' association dues, a reasonable allowance for utilities as determined by the San Bernardino County Housing Authority, space rent if the housing unit is on rented land, and costs of property maintenance and repairs. For a rental unit, monthly housing expenses include rent, a reasonable allowance for utilities as determined by the San Bernardino County Housing Authority, as well as all monthly payments made by the tenant to the lessor in connection with use and occupancy of a housing unit and land and facilities associated therewith, including any separately charged fees, utility charges, or service charges assessed by the lessor and payable by the tenant. 
Redevelopment project areas means the redevelopment projects adopted by the City pursuant to the California Community Redevelopment Law. 
Residential development means any new residential construction or substantial rehabilitation of five or more rental or for-sale units; or conversions of apartments to for-sale housing or for-sale housing to apartments. 
Substantial rehabilitation means rehabilitation of residential units, which satisfies both of the following: (a) the value of the rehabilitation constitutes 25 percent of the after-rehabilitation value of the dwelling, inclusive of the land value, and (b) a portion of the rehabilitation is funded by the Agency. 
Total residential units means the total units in a residential development, which have been approved by the City. Total residential units are composed of both market-rate units and affordable units. 
Very low-income household means a household whose gross income is not more than the qualifying limit for very low-income households in San Bernardino County established by regulation of the State of California. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.030 - Inclusionary housing requirement. 
A.  This chapter shall apply to all residential dwelling units resulting from new construction of rental and "for-sale" residential development projects in redevelopment project areas, the substantial rehabilitation of existing rental and "for-sale" residential development projects in redevelopment project areas, as well as the conversion of apartments to condominiums or condominiums to apartments in redevelopment project areas. 
B.  This chapter shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Housing projects which contain 10 dwelling units or less; 
2.  Existing residences that are altered, improved, restored, repaired, expanded or extended that do not constitute substantial rehabilitation or a conversion; or 
3.  The construction of a new residential structure which replaces a residential structure that was destroyed or demolished within two years prior to the application for a building permit for the new residential structure, provided the number of residential units is not increased from the number of residential units of the previously destroyed or demolished residential structure. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.040 - Affordable housing standards. 
The affordable housing standards are as follows: 
A.  All residential developments are subject to and must satisfy the inclusionary housing requirements of this chapter, notwithstanding a developer's request to process a residential development under other program requirements, laws or regulations, including but not limited to Chapter 11.85 of this title. 
B.  Whenever reasonably possible, affordable units should be built on the residential development project site. 
C.  The required affordable units shall be constructed concurrently with market-rate units within the residential development unless both the final decision-making authority of the City and developer agree within the affordable housing agreement to an alternative schedule for development. 
D.  Inclusionary rental units shall remain restricted and affordable to the designated income group for 55 years. 
E.  After the initial sale of the inclusionary for-sale units at a price affordable to the target income level group, inclusionary for-sale units shall remain affordable to subsequent income-eligible buyers pursuant to a resale restriction with a term of 45 years, or for-sale units may be sold at a market price to other than targeted households provided that the sale shall result in the recapture by the City or Agency of a financial interest in the units equal to the amount of subsidy necessary to make the unit affordable to the designated income group and a proportionate share of any appreciation. Funds recaptured by the City or Agency shall be used in assisting other eligible households with home purchases at affordable prices. To the extent possible, projects using for-sale units to satisfy inclusionary requirements shall be designed to be compatible with conventional mortgage financing programs, including secondary market requirements. 
F.  Inclusionary units should be located on sites that are in proximity to or will provide access to employment opportunities, urban services, or major roads or other transportation and commuter rail facilities and that are compatible with adjacent land uses. 
G.  The design of the affordable units shall be reasonably consistent or compatible with the design of the total project development in terms of appearance, materials and finished quality. Inclusionary units shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the project development. 
H.  Inclusionary housing projects shall provide a mix of sizes of affordable units, in terms of number of bedrooms and unit square footage, which is proportionate to the mix of all units within the residential development. 
I.  No building permit shall be issued, nor any development approval granted for a residential development, which does not meet the requirements of this chapter. No affordable unit shall be rented or sold except in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.050 - Calculating the required number of affordable units. 
Subject to adjustments for incentives under Section 11.81.060 of this chapter, the required number of affordable units shall be not less than 15 percent of the total residential units, approved by the final decision-making authority of the City. Not fewer than 40 percent of the affordable units shall be restricted to very low-income households. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.060 - Incentive credit adjustment to the inclusionary requirement. 
The City may determine that certain types of affordable housing are relatively more desirable in satisfying the City's State-mandated affordable housing requirement as well as the City's housing element goals, objectives and policies, which may include without limitation, special needs housing, housing accessible to disabled persons, and housing affordable to lower-income or extremely low-income households. As an incentive to assist the City in providing this housing, the City in its discretion, may provide developers additional (more than one unit) credit for each of such units provided, thereby reducing the total inclusionary housing requirement to less than 15 percent of all residential units approved. Such inclusionary housing incentive credits shall be specified in the affordable housing agreement. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.070 - Combined inclusionary housing projects. 
An affordable housing requirement may be satisfied with off-site construction as follows: 
A.  When it can be demonstrated by a developer that the goals of this chapter and the City's housing element would be better served by allowing some or all of the affordable units associated with one residential project site to be produced and operated at an alternative site or sites, the resulting linked inclusionary project site(s) is a combined inclusionary housing project. 
B.  It is at the sole discretion of the City Council to authorize a combined inclusionary housing project. Such decision shall be based on findings that the combined project represents a more effective and feasible means of implementing this chapter and the goals of the City's housing element. Factors to be weighed in this determination include: the feasibility of the on-site option considering project size, site constraints, competition from other projects, difficulty in integrating due to significant price and product type disparity, and lack of capacity of the on-site development entity to deliver affordable housing. Also to be considered are whether the off-site option offers greater feasibility and cost effectiveness, particularly regarding potential local public assistance and the City's affordable housing financial assistance policy, location advantages such as proximity to jobs, schools, transportation and services, diminished impact on other existing developments, capacity of the development entity to deliver the project, and satisfaction of multiple developer obligations that would be difficult to satisfy with multiple projects. 
C.  All agreements between parties to form a combined inclusionary housing project shall be made a part of the affordable housing agreement required for the site(s), which affordable housing agreement(s) shall be approved by the City Council. 
D.  To the extent feasible, the off-site construction should be located within the City's redevelopment project areas. If the off-site construction is located outside of the City's redevelopment project areas, each off-site inclusionary housing unit shall be deemed to equal one-half of an affordable unit located within the City's redevelopment project areas. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.080 - Creation of affordable units not required. 
Inclusionary units created which exceed the final requirement for a project may, subject to City Council approval in the affordable housing agreement, be utilized by the developer to satisfy other inclusionary requirements for which it is obligated or market the units to other developers as a combined project subject to the requirements of Section 11.81.070 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.090 - Incentives to the cost of affordable housing development. 
The City and Agency shall consider making incentives available to developers when necessary to enable residential development projects to provide a preferable product type or affordability in excess of the requirements of this chapter. Offsets and assistance may be offered by the City and Agency, in their sole discretion, to the extent that resources and programs for this purpose are available to the City and Agency and approved for such use by the City Council and Agency Board, and to the extent that the residential development, with the use of incentives, assists in achieving the housing goals of the City and Agency. To the degree that the City and Agency make available programs to provide incentives, developers may make application for such programs. Evaluation of requests for incentives shall be based on the effectiveness of the incentives in achieving a preferable product type and/or affordability objectives as set forth within the housing element; the capability of the development team; the reasonableness of development costs and justification of subsidy needs; and the extent to which other resources are used to leverage the requested incentives. Nothing in this chapter establishes, directly or through implication, a right to receive any incentives from the City, Agency or any other party or agency to enable the developer to meet the obligations established by this chapter. Residential development projects may be entitled to density bonuses and/or other incentives in accordance with provisions of State law, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.85 of this title. Any incentives approved by the City Council or Agency and the housing affordability to be achieved by use of those incentives shall be set out within the affordable housing agreement pursuant to Section 11.81.140 of this chapter or, at the discretion of the City and Agency, in a subsequent document. Furthermore, developers are encouraged to utilize local, State or federal assistance, when available, to meet the affordability standards set forth in Sections 11.81.030 and 11.81.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.100 - In-lieu fees. 
A developer of a residential development may pay a fee in lieu of construction of affordable units in the following circumstances: 
A.  The inclusionary requirement for very low-income inclusionary units may be satisfied through the payment to the City of an in-lieu fee. The City may also permit the applicant to pay an in-lieu fee for the moderate-income inclusionary units upon its determination that new construction of moderate-income inclusionary units would be infeasible or present unreasonable hardship in light of such factors as project size, site constraints, market competition, price and product type disparity, developer capability and unavailability of financial subsidies. 
B.  The in-lieu fee to be paid for each very low-income inclusionary unit required under this chapter shall be based on the amount of financial assistance needed to make affordable to a very low-income household, one typical newly-constructed rental apartment unit, which will remain affordable for a period of 55 years. The in-lieu fee to be paid for each moderate-income inclusionary unit required under this chapter shall be the amount of financial assistance needed to make affordable to a moderate-income household a for-sale housing unit pursuant to a local homebuyer assistance or local down payment program, which will remain affordable for a period of 45 years. The in-lieu fee shall be based upon the City Council's determination of the average amount of financial assistance per unit provided by cities and redevelopment agencies in the San Bernardino and Riverside County area under the foregoing types of programs. 
C.  The dollar amount and method of payment of the in-lieu fees shall be fixed by a schedule adopted, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council. 
D.  At the discretion of the City Council, where a developer is authorized to pay a fee in lieu of development, an irrevocable dedication of land or other nonmonetary contribution of a value not less than the sum of the otherwise required in-lieu fee may be accepted as an alternative to paying the in-lieu fee if it is determined that the nonmonetary contribution will be effectual in furthering the goals and policies of the housing element and this chapter. The valuation of any land offered in lieu shall be determined by an appraisal made by an appraiser mutually agreed upon by the City and the developer. Costs associated with the appraisal shall be borne by the developer. 
E.  Where a developer is authorized to pay a fee in lieu of development of affordable housing units, any approvals shall be conditioned upon a requirement to pay the in-lieu fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council in effect at the time of payment. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.110 - Housing Trust Fund. 
All in-lieu fees collected hereunder shall be deposited in a Housing Trust Fund. The Housing Trust Fund shall be administered by the City and shall be used only for the purpose of providing funding assistance for the provision of affordable housing and reasonable costs of administration consistent with the policies and programs contained in the housing element of the General Plan and affordable housing requirements applicable to the Agency. The selection of projects and programs, which are assisted by the Housing Trust Fund, shall be in the sole discretion of the City. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.120 - Preliminary project application and review process. 
The preliminary project application/review process shall be as follows: 
A.  A developer of a residential development not subject to a specific plan proposing an inclusionary housing project shall have an approved site development plan prior to execution of an affordable housing agreement for the project. The developer may submit a preliminary application to the Redevelopment Director prior to the submittal of any formal applications for such housing development. The preliminary application shall include the following information if applicable: 
1.  A brief description of the proposal, including the number of affordable units proposed; 
2.  The zoning, General Plan designations and assessor's parcel number(s) of the project site; 
3.  A site plan, drawn to scale, which includes: building footprints, driveway and parking layout, building elevations, existing contours and proposed grading; and 
4.  A letter identifying what specific incentives and/or adjustments are being requested of the City. Justification for each request should also be included. 
B.  Within 30 days of receipt of the preliminary application by the planning director for projects not requesting incentives or adjustments, or 90 days for projects requesting incentives or adjustments, the department shall provide to an applicant, a letter that identifies project issues of concern, the incentives and adjustments that the Community Development Director can support when making a recommendation to the final decision-making authority, and the procedures for compliance with this chapter. The applicant shall also be provided with a copy of this chapter and related policies and all required application forms. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.130 - New specific plans. 
All specific plans approved on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall include an inclusionary housing plan within the specific plan document. This inclusionary housing plan will include appropriate text, maps, tables or figures to establish the basic framework for implementing the requirements of this chapter. The specific plan may (but is not required to) provide for designated sites for the location of the affordable units, including but not limited to any sites for locating off-site inclusionary housing projects or combined inclusionary housing projects. It shall establish, at a minimum, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  The number of market-rate units in the specific plan; 
B.  The number of required affordable units for very low-income households, lower-income households, and moderate-income households over the entire specific plan; 
C.  A general provision stipulating that an affordable housing agreement shall be made a condition of all future discretionary permits for development within the master or specific plan area, such as tentative maps, parcel maps, planned unit developments, and site development plans. The provision shall establish that all relevant terms and conditions of any affordable housing agreement shall be filed and recorded as a restriction on the project as a whole and those individual lots, units, or projects that are designated as affordable units. The affordable housing agreement shall be consistent with Section 11.81.140 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.140 - Affordable housing agreement as a condition of development. 
A.  Developers subject to this chapter shall demonstrate compliance with this chapter by executing an affordable housing agreement prepared by the City or Agency and submitted to the developer for execution. Agreements which conform to the requirements of this section and which do not involve requests for incentives, other than those permitted by right, if any, shall be reviewed by the affordable housing task force and approved by the Community Development Director or his or her designee. Agreements, which involve requests for incentives, other than those permitted by right, shall require the recommendation of the Planning Commission and action by the City Council as the final decision-maker. Following the approval and execution by all parties, the affordable housing agreement with approved site development plan shall be recorded against the entire development, including market-rate lots/units and the relevant terms and conditions therefrom filed and subsequently recorded as a separate deed restriction or regulatory agreement on the affordable project individual lots or units of property which are designated for the location of affordable units. The approval and execution of the affordable housing agreement shall take place prior to final map approval and shall be recorded upon final map recordation or, where a map is not being processed, prior to the issuance of building permits for such lots/units. The affordable housing agreement may require that more specific project and/or unit restrictions be recorded at a future time. The affordable housing agreement shall bind all future owners and successors in interest for the term of years specified therein. 
B.  An affordable housing agreement for which the inclusionary housing requirement will be satisfied through new construction of affordable units, either on-site or off-site, shall establish, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The number of inclusionary dwelling units proposed; 
2.  The unit square footage and number of bedrooms; 
3.  The proposed location of the affordable units; 
4.  Amenities and services provided, such as day-care, after-school programs, transportation, job training/employment services, and recreation; 
5.  Level and tenure of affordability for affordable units; 
6.  Schedule for production of dwelling units; 
7.  Approved incentives provided by the City and/or Agency; 
8.  Where applicable, requirements for other documents to be approved by the City and/or Agency, such as marketing, leasing, and management plans; financial assistance/loan documents; resale agreements; and monitoring and compliance plans; and 
9.  Identification of the affordable housing developer and agreements specifying the developer's role and relationship to the project. 
C.  An affordable housing agreement for which the inclusionary housing requirement will be satisfied through payment to the City of any in-lieu contributions other than fee moneys, such as land dedication, shall include the method of determination, schedule, and value of total in-lieu contributions. 
D.  An affordable housing agreement will not be required for projects that will be satisfying their inclusionary housing requirement through payment to the City of an in-lieu fee. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.150 - Agreement processing fee. 
The City Council may establish, by resolution, fees to be paid by the developer at the time of preliminary project application to defray the City's cost of preparing and/or reviewing all inclusionary housing agreements. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.160 - Agreement amendments. 
Any amendment to an affordable housing agreement shall be processed in the same manner as an original application for approval, except as authorized in Section 11.81.130 of this chapter. Amendments to affordable housing agreements initially approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be entitled to consideration under this chapter provisions superseded by the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.170 - Expiration of affordability tenure. 
The City or its designee shall have a one-time first right of refusal to purchase any project containing affordable units offered for sale at the end of the minimum tenure of affordability for rental projects. The first right of refusal to purchase the rental project shall be submitted in writing to the Redevelopment Director. Within 90 days of its receipt, the City shall indicate its intent to exercise the first right of refusal for the purpose of providing affordable housing. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.180 - Enforcement. 
Enforcement provisions are as follows: 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all developers and their agents, successors and assigns proposing a residential development governed by this chapter. No building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued, nor any entitlement granted, for a project that is not exempt and does not meet the requirements of this chapter. All affordable units shall be rented or owned in accordance with this chapter. 
B.  The City may institute any appropriate legal actions or proceedings necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter including but not limited to, actions to revoke, deny or suspend any permit or development approval. 
C.  Any individual who sells or rents a restricted unit in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to forfeit all monetary amounts so obtained. Such amounts shall be added to the City's Housing Trust Fund. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
11.81.190 - Separability of provisions. 
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of the provision to other persons not similarly situated or to other circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. 05-866 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 11.82 - VARIANCES 
Sections: 
 
11.82.010 - Purpose and authorization. 
A.  When practical difficulties, unnecessary physical hardships, or results inconsistent with the general intent and purpose of this title would occur from the literal interpretation and enforcement of any of its provisions, the Planning Commission shall have the authority to grant a variance upon approved terms and conditions as may be deemed necessary to ensure that the intent and purpose of this title and the public health, safety and welfare will be promoted. 
B.  The granting of a variance shall be subject to such conditions as will ensure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is situated. Under no circumstance shall this provision be utilized to permit a use inconsistent with the existing zone or the adopted General Plan Land Use designation. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1920)  
11.82.020 - Initiation of proceedings. 
A.  Any property owner, or his/her authorized representative, desiring a variance may file an application for such with the Planning Division on forms to be furnished by the City, along with the following items in order to complete the application: 
1.  A legal description of the property involved and the proposed use, with plot plans and other appropriate drawings showing existing or proposed buildings or facilities, and the reasons for the requested variance; 
2.  Names and mailing addresses, typed on mailing labels, of all owners of real property within 300 feet from the external boundaries of the property involved as shown on the latest adopted, publicly available tax roll of the County; 
3.  A filing fee, the amount of which shall be determined by resolution of the City Council; 
4.  Variance justification form; 
5.  Environmental assessment form; and 
6.  Other information as may be required by the Planning Commission. 
B.  No application for the same general variance concerning the same property, which application has been recommended for denial by the Commission or denied by the Commission and/or the Council on appeal, shall be received or processed by the Secretary of the Commission within 12 months after such denial, except by the consent of at least four members of the Planning Commission present at a regular meeting of the Commission. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1921)  
11.82.030 - Hearing. 
A.  Upon the acceptance of a completed application for a variance, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall forward the application to the Development Review Committee for review and comments and shall provide the applicant with appropriate recommendations and comments from the Development Review Committee. A date shall then be set by the Secretary of the Planning Commission for a public hearing before the Planning Commission. The date of the hearing shall not be less than 10 days nor more than 40 days from the date the application is deemed completed. 
B.  The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall give notice of such requested variance and of the time and place of such hearing as follows: 
1.  By one publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in the City at least 10 days, but no more than 15 days, prior to the date set for the hearing; and 
2.  By mailed notice not less than 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing to all owners of property within a radius of 300 feet of the external boundaries of the property described in the application, using for this purpose the last known name and mailing address of such owners as are shown on the tax roll of the County, and may, at the discretion of the Planning Commission, give additional notice. 
C.  The Planning Commission shall cause to be made, by its own members or members of its staff, such investigation of facts bearing upon such application set for hearing, including an analysis of precedent cases as in the opinion of the Planning Commission will serve to provide the necessary information to enable the Planning Commission to act. 
D.  A copy of the staff report shall be made available to the applicant and to the general public, upon request, prior to the hearing. 
E.  At the time and place so fixed and noticed, the public hearing shall be conducted before the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall consider all pertinent oral and written evidence and information prior to adoption of a formal and numbered resolution authorizing or denying such variance. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at the hearing, the names and addresses of persons testifying, copies of all notices, affidavits of publication, and records of action taken shall be a part of the permanent files of the case. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1922)  
11.82.040 - Findings, conditions, and time limits. 
A.  Findings. The Planning Commission, before granting a variance, must adopt a resolution stating that the evidence presented shows that each of the following findings have been made: 
1.  That because of special circumstances applicable to the subject property, including its size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the provisions of this title is found to deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zone classifications; 
2.  That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant, which right is possessed by other property owners in the vicinity and under identical zone classifications; 
3.  That the granting of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is located; and 
4.  That the granting of such variance will not be contrary to the objectives of any part of the adopted General Plan. 
B.  Conditions. 
1.  The Planning Commission may grant the requested variance in whole or in part upon said items and conditions as it may deem necessary to safeguard and protect the public health, safety, general welfare, the existing and possible uses on adjoining lands in the neighborhood, the proper handling and regulation of traffic, and to ensure the eventual development of the property with respect to which the variance is granted. 
2.  Prior to the issuance of any building or occupancy permit, the owner and anyone applying on his/her behalf shall agree, in writing, to meet and abide by all the conditions and requirements imposed on the project requiring such variance. 
C.  Time Limit. 
1.  A variance granted by the Planning Commission pursuant to this chapter shall be utilized within six months after the effective date thereof, unless a shorter or longer time period is established by the Planning Commission. If it is not so utilized or if preliminary construction work has not begun within such time and carried on diligently to the completion of at least 25 percent of the approved project, this authorization shall become void, and any privilege or permit granted thereby shall be deemed to have lapsed. The Planning Commission, however, shall have the authority to extend the time limit for another six months for good cause and in the case of unavoidable delay, upon submittal of a written request and the required time extension filing fees by the applicant at least 10 days prior to the expiration date. 
2.  As a condition for granting an extension of time, the Planning Commission may revise existing conditions or impose additional conditions to ensure that the variance will be in compliance with City standards in effect at the time such extension is granted. 
3.  The privileges of a variance shall lapse and become null and void if the use, structure, sign, or other improvement is abandoned for a period of six months or longer. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1923)  
11.82.050 - Appeals. 
A.  The action of the Planning Commission shall become final on the date the Planning Commission makes its final determination. However, within 10 days after the date of the Planning Commission's decision, a written appeal therefrom may be taken to the City Council by any person aggrieved by the determination of the Planning Commission in connection with the application. Such appeal shall be accompanied by the required appeal fee, which shall be one-half of the initial variance filing fee. The City Council, on its own motion, may appeal any determination of the Planning Commission. An appeal fee shall not be required in the event of such City Council appeal. Such appeal, except on the City Council's own motion, shall be filed in triplicate with the City Clerk and shall state the grounds therefor and wherein the Planning Commission erred or failed to conform to the requirements of the provisions of this title. The City Clerk shall forthwith transmit one copy of the appeal to the Secretary of the Planning Commission, one copy to the applicant, and the other copies to the members of the Planning Commission. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from until the determination or dismissal of the appeal, withdrawal of the application, or any other disposition of the appeal by the City Council or the applicant. In the event the City Council makes no decision or other specific disposition on the appeal within 90 days after the same is filed, the appeal shall be deemed to have failed, and the determination of the Planning Commission shall remain as the final determination on the application. 
B.  At the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting subsequent to the receipt of an appeal, the Planning Commission shall, within 10 days, transmit to the City Council the original application and copies of all other papers constituting the record upon which the action was taken, together with a written report disclosing in what respects the application, and facts offered in support thereof, met or failed to meet the requirements set forth in this title and why the proposed variance should or should not be granted. 
C.  The City Council may, by resolution, affirm, reverse or modify in whole or in part any decision, determination or requirement of the Planning Commission, but before granting any appealed petition which was denied by the Planning Commission, or before changing any of the conditions imposed by the Planning Commission, the City Council shall set the matter for hearing and give the same notice as that provided for in Section 11.78.090 of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.1924)  
Chapter 11.84 - ZONING AMENDMENTS 
Sections: 
 
11.84.010 - Authorization. 
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practices require, the City Council may, by ordinance, after a report thereon by the Planning Commission and subject to the provisions of this chapter, amend, supplement, or change the regulations, zone boundaries, or classifications of property established by this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.2101)  
11.84.020 - Initiation of proceedings. 
A.  An amendment to the provisions of this title, or a change in the accompanying official zoning map, may be initiated by a resolution of intention by the Planning Commission or the City Council or by an application of one or more of the owners of property affected by the proposed amendment or change. 
B.  Applications shall be filed with the Secretary of the Planning Commission on forms which will be furnished by the Secretary, and applications shall be accompanied by such data and information as may be prescribed for that purpose by the Planning Commission to ensure the fullest practicable presentation of facts for the permanent record. In the event the application proposes a change in the official zoning map, the application shall include the following: 
1.  A legal description of the property involved; 
2.  A map showing the particular property for which the change of zone is requested and the adjoining properties and public streets and ways within a radius of 300 feet of the exterior boundaries thereof; and 
3.  Names and addresses, typed on mailing labels, of all property owners within 300 feet from the external boundaries of the property involved as shown on the latest adopted publicly available tax roll of the County. 
C.  No application from an owner of the property for the same general purpose concerning the same property, which application has been denied by the Planning Commission, shall be received or processed by the Secretary of the Planning Commission within 12 months of such denial except by unanimous action of the members of the Planning Commission present at a regular meeting of the Planning Commission. 
D.  A filing fee per the fee schedule as established in accordance with Section 11.08.010 of this title by the City Council shall be paid at the time of the filing of an application by an owner or owner's representative, but no fee will be required in the case of a proceeding instituted by either the City Council or the Planning Commission. (Amended during 1999 codification; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.2102)  
11.84.030 - Hearing date. 
Upon the filing of any such application, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall set a date for one public hearing before the Planning Commission. The date of the hearing shall be not less than 10 days nor more than 35 days, from the date of filing of such application. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part): prior code § 9-4.2103)  
11.84.040 - Hearing notice. 
The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall give notice of the date, time and purpose of the hearing as follows: 
A.  For change of official zoning map; 
1.  By one publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the City at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing, 
2.  By mailed notice to owners, as their names and addresses are disclosed by the latest adopted publicly available tax roll of the County, of real property within 300 feet of the external boundaries of the property under consideration, or 
3.  By conspicuously posting in front of the property under consideration, not less than 10 days prior to the date of such hearing, a notice consisting of the words, "Notice of Proposed Change of Zone Boundaries," printed in plain type with letters not less than 1 inch in height and containing a statement in legible characters setting forth a description of the property involved in the proposed change and the time and place at which the public hearing will be held before the Planning Commission. Such notices may also be conspicuously posted not more than 150 feet apart on each side of each street or public way within 300 feet of the external boundaries of the property involved; 
B.  For an amendment to the provisions of this title: In cases concerning a proposed change in the text of this title, notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not less than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing, and the title of such notice shall consist of the words, "Notice of Proposed Amendment to Zoning Law," in larger type than that used for the balance of the notice. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.2104)  
11.84.050 - Investigations by Planning Commission. 
The Planning Commission shall cause to be made by any of its own members or by any member of its staff such investigations of facts bearing upon such application or matter set for hearing (including any analysis of precedent cases) as in the opinion of the Planning Commission will serve to provide the necessary information to enable the Planning Commission to act. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.2105)  
11.84.060 - Hearing records. 
A.  At the time and place so fixed and noticed, the public hearing shall be conducted before the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of public hearings, and the member of the Planning Commission presiding at such hearing is empowered to administer oaths to any persons testifying. 
B.  The Planning Commission may, for any reason when it deems such action necessary or desirable, continue such hearing to a time and place certain. 
C.  A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at the public hearing, the names and addresses of persons testifying, copies of all notices, affidavits of posting and publication, and records of action taken shall become a part of the permanent files of the case. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.2106)  
11.84.070 - Hearing—Findings and decision. 
If, from the facts presented to the Planning Commission in the application, at the public hearing, or by investigation, the Planning Commission, by a two-thirds vote of its total voting members, finds that the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practices require the proposed change or amendment involved, or any portion thereof, the Planning Commission shall recommend such proposed change or amendment to the City Council; otherwise it shall be disapproved. The Planning Commission shall make its findings and recommendation in writing within 40 days from the date of completion of the hearing and shall forthwith transmit a copy thereof to the applicant. If the Planning Commission recommends the approval of the proposed change or amendment, or any portion thereof, it shall transmit the application, together with its report and recommendation relative thereto, to the City Council for its action. If the Planning Commission fails to make a determination within the time limit specified, it shall lose jurisdiction, and the applicant may appeal to the City Council as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.2107)  
11.84.080 - City Council action. 
Upon receipt of the application, together with the Planning Commission's report and recommendations relative thereto, the City Council, after it has conducted a public hearing thereon following published notice thereof as provided in Section 11.84.040 of this chapter, may approve, modify, or disapprove the recommendations of the Planning Commission; provided, however, any modification of the proposed ordinance or amendment by the City Council shall first be referred to the Planning Commission for report and recommendation, but the Planning Commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing thereon. The failure of the Planning Commission to report within 40 days after the referral, or such longer period as may be designated by the City Council, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed modification. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.2108)  
11.84.090 - Appeals. 
If the Planning Commission denies or does not make a determination upon the proposed change or amendment within the time limit specified, the applicant may, within 10 days from the date the notification of denial is mailed to the applicant, or from the termination of the time limit, appeal to the City Council by written Notice of Appeal filed with the City Clerk. The appeal shall be accompanied by any required appeal fee. Such an appeal by an applicant shall be filed in duplicate and shall set forth specifically wherein the Planning Commission's findings were in error and wherein the public necessity, convenience, welfare, or good zoning practices require such change or amendment. If no appeal is taken within the time specified, the action of the Planning Commission shall be final. 
Upon notice or such appeal, the Planning Commission shall make a report to the City Council disclosing in what respect it failed to find that the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practices required the change or amendment involved. The City Council may grant any appealed application, but before making any change in the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing thereon, with published notice as provided in Section 11.84.040 of this chapter, and shall make a written finding of facts, setting forth the facts justifying or requiring the change or amendment. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-4.2109)  
Chapter 11.85 - RESIDENTIAL DENSITY BONUS 
Sections: 
 
11.85.010 - Purpose and intent. 
In enacting this chapter, the City Council finds and determines as follows: 
The public good is served when there exists in a City housing which is appropriate for the needs of and affordable to all members of the public who reside within that City. Among other needs, there is in the City of Montclair a need for housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households and senior citizens. Therefore, it is in the public interest for the City to promote the construction of such additional housing through the exercise of its powers and the utilization of its resources. 
A.  It is the purpose of this chapter to provide incentives to developers for the production of housing affordable to lower-income households, moderate-income households and senior citizens. 
B.  It is the purpose of this chapter to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the housing element of the City's General Plan. 
C.  It is the purpose of this chapter to implement Sections 65915 through 65917 of the California Government Code. 
D.  Nothing in this chapter is intended to create a mandatory duty on behalf of the City or its employees under the Government Tort Claims Act and no cause of action against the City or its employees is created by this chapter that would not arise independently of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-855 § 1 (part))  
11.85.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning established by this section: 
Additional incentives means any incentive(s) that is offered in addition to the 25 percent density bonus. 
Affordable housing cost means housing for which the monthly housing costs paid by a qualifying household shall not exceed a specified fraction of the San Bernardino County median income, adjusted for household size, for the following classes of housing: 
1.  Extremely low-income, rental and for sale units: 30 percent times 30 percent of the San Bernardino County median income for a household size appropriate to the unit. 
2.  Very low-income, rental and for sale units: 30 percent times 50 percent of the San Bernardino County median income for a household size appropriate to the unit. 
3.  Lower-income, for sale units: 30 percent times 70 percent of the San Bernardino County median income for a household size appropriate to the unit. At the discretion of the City, affordable housing cost for a lower-income, for sale unit which is sold to a lower-income household earning not less than 70 percent of San Bernardino County income, adjusted for household size, may alternatively be 30 percent times the income of the purchaser. 
4.  Lower-income, rental units: 30 percent times 60 percent of the San Bernardino County median income for a household size appropriate to the unit. 
5.  Moderate-income, for sale units: 35 percent times 110 percent of the San Bernardino County median income for a household size appropriate to the unit. At the discretion of the City, affordable housing cost for a moderate-income, for sale unit which is sold to a moderate-income household earning not less than 110 percent of San Bernardino County income, adjusted for household size, may alternatively be 35 percent times the income of the purchaser. 
6.  Moderate-income, rental units: 30 percent times 110 percent of the San Bernardino County median income for a household size appropriate to the unit. 
Agency means the City of Montclair Redevelopment Agency. 
City means the City of Montclair. 
Combined density bonus housing project means separate residential development sites which are linked by a contractual relationship such that some or all of the restricted dwelling units and/or density bonus dwelling units which are associated with one development site are produced and operated at a separate development site or sites. 
Conversion means the change of status of a dwelling unit from a purchased unit to a rental unit or vice versa. 
Density bonus (condominium conversions) means a minimum density increase of at least 25 percent over the number of dwelling units within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion. 
Density bonus (new residential construction) means a minimum density increase of at least 25 percent over the otherwise maximum residential density. 
Density bonus dwelling units means those residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which are above the otherwise maximum residential density of the project site. 
Density bonus housing agreement means a legally binding agreement between a developer and the City and/or Agency which ensures that the density bonus requirements of this chapter are satisfied. The density bonus housing agreement establishes the number of restricted dwelling units and density bonus dwelling units, the unit sizes, location, affordability tenure, terms and conditions of affordability and unit production schedule. 
Equivalent financial incentive means incentives offered by the City, which are of equivalent financial value based upon the land cost per dwelling unit(s) that are offered in-lieu of the following: 
1.  A density bonus and additional incentive(s); or 
2.  A density bonus, where an additional incentive(s) is not requested or is determined to be unnecessary. 
Household size appropriate to the unit means one person for a zero bedroom (studio) unit, two persons for a one-bedroom unit, three persons for a two-bedroom unit, four persons for a three-bedroom unit, and five persons for a four-bedroom unit. Household size appropriate to a unit with more than four bedrooms shall be equal to the number of bedrooms plus one. 
Housing development means a new residential development or conversion of existing residential building(s) of five or more residential dwelling units. 
Incentives means such regulatory concessions as stipulated in State Government Code Section 65915(k), to include, but not be limited to, the reduction of site development standards or zoning code requirements, approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project, or any other regulatory incentive which would result in identifiable cost reductions to enable the provision of housing for lower-income households, moderate-income households and qualifying residents. 
Lower-income household means a household whose gross income is not more than the qualifying limit for lower-income households in San Bernardino County established by regulation of the State of California. 
Market-rate dwelling unit means a dwelling unit where the rental rate or sales price is not restricted either by this chapter or by requirements imposed through other local, state, or federal affordable housing programs. 
Maximum residential density means the maximum allowable residential density in the general plan designation, zoning, or specific plan, at the time of application. 
Moderate-income household means a household whose gross income is not more than the qualifying limit for moderate-income households in San Bernardino County established by regulation of the State of California. 
Monthly housing expense means the total monthly recurring expenses required of a household to obtain shelter for the 12 months after the date of determination. For a for sale unit, monthly housing expenses include loan principal and interest at the time of initial purchase by the homebuyer, cost of property and mortgage insurance, property taxes and assessments, homeowners' association dues, a reasonable allowance for utilities as determined by the San Bernardino County Housing Authority, space rent if the housing unit is on rented land, and costs of property maintenance and repairs. For a rental unit, monthly housing expenses include rent, a reasonable allowance for utilities as determined by the San Bernardino County Housing Authority, as well as all monthly payments made by the tenant to the lessor in connection with use and occupancy of a housing unit and land and facilities associated therewith, including any separately charged fees, utility charges, or service charges assessed by the lessor and payable by the tenant. 
Partial density bonus means a density bonus less than the minimum number specified in this chapter. 
Qualifying resident means a resident as defined in Section 51.3 of the California Civil Code. 
Restricted dwelling unit means a dwelling unit that will be offered for rent or sale exclusively to and which shall be affordable to the designated income group or qualifying resident, as required by this chapter. 
Very low-income household means a household whose gross income is not more than the qualifying limit for very low-income households in San Bernardino County established by regulation of the State of California. 
(Ord. 04-855 § 1 (part))  
11.85.030 - Implementation. 
The City shall grant either: a density bonus, or a density bonus with an additional incentive(s), or equivalent financial incentives as set forth in Section 11.85.100 of this chapter, to an applicant or developer of a housing development, who agrees to construct the following: 
A.  At least 20 percent of the total units of the housing development as restricted dwelling units as restricted and affordable to low-income households; 
B.  At least 10 percent of the total units of the housing development as restricted dwelling units as restricted and affordable to very low-income households; or 
C.  At least 50 percent of the total units of the housing development as restricted dwelling units as restricted to qualifying (senior) residents. 
In determining the minimum number of density bonus dwelling units to be granted pursuant to this section, the maximum residential density for the site shall be multiplied by 0.25. Any resulting decimal fraction shall be rounded to the next larger integer. 
In determining the number of restricted dwelling units to be reserved pursuant to this section, the maximum residential density shall be multiplied by 0.10 for housing developments qualifying under subsection B of this section, 0.20 for housing developments qualifying under subsection A of this section, or 0.50 for housing developments qualifying under subsection C of this section. The density bonus shall not be included when determining the number of housing units which is equal to the applicable percentage. Any resulting decimal fraction shall be rounded to the next larger integer. 
In cases where a density increase of less than 25 percent is requested, including cases where a density increase is sought to satisfy inclusionary housing requirements, no reduction will be allowed in the number of restricted dwelling units required. 
In cases where a density increase of more than 25 percent is requested, the requested density increase is an additional density bonus and shall be considered an additional incentive, in accordance to Section 11.85.100 of this chapter. The City Council may at its discretion grant an additional density bonus if a written finding is made by the City Council that the additional density bonus is required in order for allowable housing expenses to be set as affordable. The City in granting an additional density bonus may require some portion of the additional density bonus to be designated as restricted dwelling units. 
In cases where the developer agrees to construct both 20 percent of the total units for low-income households and 10 percent of the total units for very low-income households, the developer is entitled to only one density bonus and at least one additional incentive. 
A density bonus housing agreement shall be made a condition of the discretionary permits (i.e., tentative maps, parcel maps, planned unit developments, condominium permits, site development plans and redevelopment permits) for all housing developments that request a density bonus and additional incentives or equivalent financial incentives. The relevant terms and conditions of the density bonus housing agreement shall be filed and recorded as a deed restriction on those individual lots or units of a project development which are designated for the location of restricted dwelling units. The density bonus housing agreement shall be consistent with Section 11.85.120 of this chapter, and may be made a condition of City or Agency financial assistance. 
(Ord. 04-855 § 1 (part))  
11.85.040 - Condominium construction. 
In cases where the developer does not meet the requirements of subsection A, B or C of Section 11.85.030, but agrees to construct a condominium project as defined in a subdivision (f) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code, in which at least 20 percent of the total dwelling units are restricted to moderate-income households, the City shall grant a density bonus of at least 10 percent. 
In determining the minimum number of density bonus dwelling units to be granted pursuant to this section, the maximum residential density for the site shall be multiplied by 0.10. Any resulting decimal fraction shall be rounded to the next larger integer. 
In determining the number of restricted dwelling units to be reserved pursuant to this section, the maximum residential density shall be multiplied by 0.20. The density bonus shall not be included when determining the number of housing units which is equal to 20 percent of the total units of the condominium project. Any resulting decimal fraction shall be rounded to the next larger integer. 
In cases where a density increase of more than 10 percent is requested, the requested density increase is an additional density bonus and shall be considered an additional incentive, in accordance with Section 11.85.100 of this chapter. The City Council may at its discretion grant an additional density bonus if a written finding is made by the City Council that the additional density bonus is required in order for allowable housing expenses to be set as affordable. The City in granting an additional density bonus may require some portion of the additional density bonus to be designated as restricted dwelling units. 
A density bonus housing agreement shall be made a condition of the discretionary permits (i.e., tentative maps, parcel maps, planned unit developments, condominium permits, site development plans and redevelopment permits) for all condominium projects that request a density bonus and additional incentives or equivalent financial incentives. The relevant terms and conditions of the density bonus housing agreement shall be filed and recorded as a deed restriction on those individual lots or units of a condominium project which are designated for the location of restricted dwelling units. The density bonus housing agreement shall be consistent with Section 11.85.120 of this chapter, and may be made a condition of City or Agency financial assistance. 
(Ord. 04-855 § 1 (part))  
11.85.050 - Condominium conversions. 
A.  The City shall grant either a density bonus or equivalent financial incentives, as set forth in Section 11.85.100, to an applicant or developer proposing to convert apartments to condominiums, and who agrees to provide the following: 
1.  At least 33 percent of the total units of the housing development as restricted dwelling units as restricted and affordable to lower-income or moderate-income households; or 
2.  At least 15 percent of the total units of the housing development as restricted dwelling units as restricted and affordable to lower-income households. 
B.  An applicant/developer proposing to convert apartments to condominiums shall be ineligible for a density bonus or additional incentives under this section if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or additional incentives were previously provided under this chapter. 
C.  In determining the number of density bonus dwelling units to be granted pursuant to the standards of this section, the number of existing apartment units within the structure or structures proposed for conversion shall be multiplied by 0.25. Any resulting decimal fraction shall be rounded to the next larger integer. 
D.  In determining the number of restricted dwelling units to be reserved pursuant to the standards of this section, the number of existing apartment units within the structure or structures proposed for conversion shall be multiplied by 0.33 for low- or moderate-income households or 0.15 for lower-income households. The density bonus shall not be included when determining the number of housing units which is equal to 33 percent or 15 percent of the total units of the housing development. Any resulting decimal fraction shall be rounded to the next larger integer. 
E.  In cases where a density increase of less than 25 percent is requested, no reduction will be allowed in the number of restricted dwelling units required. 
F.  A density bonus housing agreement shall be made a condition of the discretionary permits (tentative maps, parcel maps, planned unit developments and condominium permits) for all condominium conversion proposals that request a density bonus or equivalent financial incentives. The relevant terms and conditions of the density bonus housing agreement shall be filed and recorded as a deed restriction on those individual lots or units of a project development which are designated for the location of restricted dwelling units. The density bonus housing agreement shall be consistent with Section 11.85.120 of this chapter, and may be made a condition of City or Agency financial assistance. 
(Ord. 04-855 § 1 (part))  
11.85.060 - Child care facilities. 
A.  When a developer proposes to construct a housing development that conforms to the requirements of Section 11.85.030 or Section 11.85.040 of this chapter and includes a child care facility, as defined in Section 65915 of the California Government Code, that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the project, the City shall grant either of the following: 
1.  An additional density bonus that is in the amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility; 
2.  Additional incentive(s) or equivalent financial incentive(s) that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility. 
B.  The child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of at time that is equal or longer than the period of time during which the restricted dwelling units are required to remain restricted and affordable to the designated group pursuant to Section 11.85.080 of this chapter. 
C.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City shall not be required to provide a density bonus or additional incentive(s) or equivalent financial incentive(s) if it finds that the community has adequate child care facilities. 
D.  Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of very low-income households, lower-income households, or families of moderate-income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for very low-income households, lower-income households or families of moderate-income pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-855 § 1 (part))  
11.85.070 - Combined density bonus housing projects. 
A.  Circumstances may arise from time to time in which the public interest would be served by allowing some or all of the density bonus dwelling units and/or restricted dwelling units associated with one residential project site to be produced and operated at an alternative site or sites. Where the parties in interest to the sites and the City form an agreement to such an effect, the resulting linked project sites shall be considered to be a single combined density bonus housing project. 
B.  It is the exclusive prerogative of the City Council to determine whether or not it is in the public interest to authorize the residential sites to form a combined density bonus housing project. 
C.  All agreements between parties to form a combined density bonus housing project shall be made a part of the density bonus housing agreement required for the sites. 
(Ord. 04-855 § 1 (part))  
11.85.080 - Development standards. 
A.  Notwithstanding a developer's request to process a residential project pursuant to this chapter, all residential projects within redevelopment project areas may be subject to and must satisfy the requirements of the Agency. 
B.  Required restricted dwelling units should be constructed concurrent with market rate dwelling units unless both the City Council and the developer/applicant agree within the density bonus housing agreement to an alternative schedule for development. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, restricted dwelling units shall remain restricted and affordable to the designated group for a period of at least 30 years, or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program, under the following circumstances: 
1.  Density bonus and/or additional incentive(s) are granted by the City; or 
2.  Equivalent financial incentives in the form of direct financial contributions are granted by the City. 
D.  Restricted dwelling units shall remain restricted and affordable to moderate-income households for a period of at least 10 years if the units are directly related to the developer's receipt of a density bonus for the construction of a condominium project as defined in subdivision (f) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code. 
E.  Restricted dwelling units reserved pursuant to Section 11.85.050 of this chapter shall remain restricted and affordable to the designated group for a period of at least 45 years if the units are directly related to the developer's receipt of a density bonus or equivalent financial incentive(s) for the conversion of apartments to condominiums. 
F.  Restricted dwelling units reserved for qualifying (senior) residents shall remain restricted to the designated group for a period of at least 30 years, if the units are directly related to the developer's receipt of a density bonus and/or additional incentive(s) or equivalent financial incentives for reservation as to this designated group. 
G.  Notwithstanding the minimum affordability periods required by this chapter, all residential projects are subject to longer affordability periods if required as a condition of City and/or Agency financial assistance. 
H.  Restricted dwelling units and density bonus dwelling units should be built on-site and, whenever reasonably possible, be distributed throughout the project site. 
I.  In certain cases where a combined density bonus housing project is proposed, the restricted dwelling units and density bonus dwelling units may be provided on a site separate from the site of the market-rate dwelling units. 
J.  Restricted dwelling units should be located, whenever feasible, on sites that are in proximity to or will provide access to employment opportunities, urban services, or major roads or other transportation and commuter rail facilities (i.e., freeways, bus lines) and that are compatible with adjacent land uses. 
K.  Density bonus projects shall include a mix of restricted dwelling units (by size and number of bedrooms) which is proportionate to the mix of all units within the residential development. 
L.  Density bonus projects shall comply with all applicable development standards, except those which may be modified as an additional incentive as provided in this chapter with regard to additional incentives. In addition, all units must conform to the requirements of the applicable Building and Housing Codes. The design of the restricted dwelling units shall be reasonably consistent or compatible with the design of the total project development in terms of appearance, materials and finished quality. 
M.  No building permit shall be issued, nor any development approval granted, for a development, which does not meet the requirements of this chapter. No restricted dwelling unit shall be rented or sold except in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-855 § 1 (part))  
11.85.090 - Expiration of affordability tenure. 
A.  At the end of the minimum tenure for rental units in projects containing restricted dwelling units or for sale restricted dwelling units the City or its designee shall have a one-time first right of refusal to purchase the project. Within 90 days of the notification of availability of the rental project or for sale restricted dwelling unit(s), the City, or its designee has the first right of refusal to buy the rental project or for sale restricted dwelling unit(s) for the purposes of providing affordable housing. In the event that the City exercises its right of first refusal, the City or its designee will make a good faith effort to close escrow within 90 days. 
B.  If the City or its designee fails to exercise its first right of refusal to purchase the rental project or for sale restricted dwelling unit(s) within 90 days of notification of availability of the rental project or for sale units, then the restricted dwelling units may be converted to market-rate dwelling units under the following circumstances: 
1.  The management of the complex intending to convert rental restricted dwelling units to market-rate dwelling units shall give notice of such intent, via registered mail, to each affected tenant household and to the City Clerk. The notice shall be given at least 180 days prior to the date proposed for conversion to market-rate rents; and 
2.  Each affected tenant household shall be eligible to receive rental relocation assistance in an amount equal to four months rent, or such greater amount as may be required by applicable law. Such assistance shall be provided by the owner/management company and paid to the tenant at least 60 days prior to conversion to market-rate rents. 
(Ord. 04-855 § 1 (part))  
11.85.100 - Development incentives. 
A.  Upon application by a developer, pursuant to Section 11.85.030 of this chapter, the City Council shall grant either a density bonus and at least one additional incentive or equivalent financial incentives to qualified lower-income or senior housing developments. 
B.  Upon application by a developer, pursuant to Section 11.85.040 of this chapter, the City Council shall grant either a density bonus or equivalent financial incentives to qualified condominium projects. 
C.  Upon application by a developer, pursuant to Section 11.85.050 of this chapter, the City Council shall grant either a density bonus or equivalent financial incentives to qualified lower-income and/or moderate-income housing developments. 
D.  Additional incentives or equivalent financial incentives, as defined in Section 11.85.020 of this chapter, may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements which exceed the minimum building standards approved by the State Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and in the ratio of vehicle parking spaces that would otherwise be required; 
2.  Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing development if mixed use zoning will reduce the cost of developing the housing; 
3.  Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the City which result in identifiable cost reductions; 
4.  Partial or additional density bonus; 
5.  A change of zoning designation which increases the permitted density or allows residential uses; and 
6.  Direct financial aid, including, but not limited to, the City's provision of money from its Housing Trust Fund, the Agency's provision of Low and Moderate Income Housing Funds, Community Development Block Grant funding, or subsidizing infrastructure, land cost or construction costs or other incentives of equivalent financial value based upon the land costs per dwelling unit. 
E.  The value of each incentive will vary from project to project; therefore, additional incentives or equivalent financial incentives shall be determined on a case-by-case basis. 
F.  The City shall provide at least one additional incentive, for qualified housing developments as set forth in Section 11.85.030 of this chapter, upon a written request by the developer unless the City makes a written finding that the additional incentive is not required in order for allowable housing expenses to be set as affordable. The applicant/owner shall be required to show that the additional incentive is economically necessary to make the units affordable as required by this chapter. The process for requesting an additional incentive and the criteria for evaluating such request is contained in Section 11.85.110 of this chapter. 
G.  It is the exclusive prerogative of the City to offer equivalent financial incentives, based upon the land cost per dwelling unit, instead of a density bonus and at least one additional incentive. 
H.  Where a density bonus would cause a housing development restricted for lower-income households, moderate-income households or qualified seniors to exceed the upper end of the general plan density range for the project site, then this request shall be evaluated relative to the proposal's compatibility with adjacent land uses and its proximity to employment opportunities, urban services or major roads. 
(Ord. 04-855 § 1 (part))  
11.85.110 - Application requirements and review. 
A.  All residential projects requesting a density bonus, additional incentive(s) or equivalent financial incentives pursuant to this chapter, shall be required to comply with the following application requirements: 
1.  Application for on-site restricted dwelling units. Restricted dwelling units proposed to be developed within the same project site requiring such units shall be designated on the project plans and shall be processed under a site development plan application in addition to the otherwise required project development application(s) (i.e., tentative maps, parcel maps, planned unit developments, conditional use permits and redevelopment permits). If the application involves a request to the City for direct financial incentives, then any action by the Planning Commission on the application shall be advisory only, and the City Council shall have the authority to make the final decision on the site development plan application and any related discretionary permits; 
2.  Application for combined density bonus housing projects. Separate development application(s) (including the submittal of a site development plan) shall be processed concurrently for both sites unless the alternative site has previously received its discretionary permits. If the application involves a request to the City for direct financial incentives, then any action by the Planning Commission on the application shall be advisory only, and the City Council shall have the authority to make the final decision on all of the required development permits. 
B.  Preliminary Application. An applicant/developer proposing a density bonus housing project shall submit a preliminary application prior to the submittal of any formal requests for approvals of such housing development. The preliminary application shall include the following information: 
1.  A brief description of the proposal including the number of restricted dwelling units and density bonus dwelling units proposed; 
2.  The zoning, general plan designations and assessor's parcel number(s) of the project site; 
3.  A site plan, drawn to scale, which includes: building footprints, driveway and parking layout, building elevations, existing contours and proposed grading; and 
4.  A letter identifying what specific incentives (i.e., standards modifications, density bonus, or fee subsidies) are being requested of the City. Within 30 days of receipt of the preliminary application for projects requesting direct financial assistance from the City, the City shall provide to an applicant/developer, a letter which identifies project issues of concern, the financial assistance that the Planning Director can support when making a recommendation to the City Council for its final approval and the procedures for compliance with this chapter. The applicant shall also be provided with a copy of this chapter and related policies, the pertinent sections of the California Codes to which reference is made in this chapter and all required application forms. 
C.  Submittal. The completed application(s) shall include the following information: 
1.  A legal description of the total site proposed for development of the restricted dwelling units including a statement of present ownership and present and proposed zoning; 
2.  A letter signed by the present owner stating what incentives, if any, is being requested from the City; 
3.  A detailed vicinity map showing the project location and such details as the location of the nearest commercial retail, transit stop, potential employment locations, park or recreation facilities or other social or community service facilities; 
4.  Site plans, designating the total number of units proposed on the site, including the number of restricted dwelling units and density bonus dwelling units, and supporting plans per the application submittal requirements; 
5.  In the case of a request for any incentive(s), a pro forma for the proposed project to justify the request; 
6.  In the case of a condominium conversion request, a report documenting the following information for each unit proposed to be converted: the monthly income of tenants of each unit throughout the prior year, the monthly rent for each unit throughout the prior year, and vacancy information for each unit throughout the prior year. 
D.  Review. The Community Development Director and/or his/her designated staff shall evaluate the request based upon the following criteria: 
1.  The density bonus housing project helps achieve the City's housing goals for lower-income, moderate-income or qualified senior households, as set forth in the housing element of the General Plan; 
2.  The requested incentive(s) (including, but not limited to, additional density bonuses, requests for a mixed use project, reduction in development standards, or direct or indirect financial contributions) must be necessary to make the project economically feasible; 
3.  The housing project shall not result in an overall development pattern that is incompatible with other land uses in the immediate vicinity; 
4.  The density bonus housing project complies with the General Plan, zoning and development policies of the City; 
5.  That the conversion of apartment units to condominiums shall not result in a reduction in the affordable housing stock for lower income groups, as of most recent inventory; and 
6.  In cases where pursuant to this chapter an applicant/developer otherwise qualifies for and requests an additional incentive, the City shall grant the requested incentive(s) unless the City makes a written finding that the requested incentive(s) is not required in order for allowable housing expenses to be set at affordable or the incentive(s) would be materially detrimental to public health and safety. 
(Ord. 04-855 § 1 (part))  
11.85.120 - Density bonus housing agreement. 
A.  Applicants/developers, requesting a density bonus, additional incentives or equivalent financial incentives pursuant to this chapter, shall demonstrate compliance with this chapter by the execution of a density bonus housing agreement. A density bonus housing agreement shall be submitted by the City to the applicant. Following the approval and the signing by all parties, the completed density bonus housing agreement shall be recorded and the relevant terms and conditions therefrom filed and recorded as a deed restriction on those individual lots or units of a property which are designated for the location of restricted dwelling units. The approval and recordation shall take place prior to final map approval, or, where a map is not being processed, prior to issuance of building permits for such lots or units. The density bonus housing agreement shall be binding on all future owners and successors in interest. 
B.  A density bonus housing agreement for new residential construction processed pursuant to this chapter shall include the following: 
1.  The number of density bonus dwelling units granted; 
2.  The number of lower-income, moderate-income and senior dwelling units proposed; 
3.  The unit size(s) (square footage) of restricted dwelling units and the number of bedrooms per restricted dwelling unit; 
4.  The proposed location of the lower-income, moderate-income and senior restricted dwelling units; 
5.  Tenure of restrictions for restricted dwelling units (of at least 10 or 30 years); 
6.  Schedule for production of restricted dwelling units; 
7.  Incentives and/or financial assistance provided by the City; 
8.  Where applicable, tenure and conditions governing the initial sale of for sale restricted dwelling units; and 
9.  Where applicable, tenure and conditions establishing rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, setting rental rates, filling vacancies, and operating and maintaining units for rental restricted dwelling units. 
C.  A density bonus housing agreement for condominium conversions processed pursuant to this chapter shall be required to include the following: 
1.  The number of density bonus dwelling units granted; 
2.  The number of lower-income and moderate-income dwelling units proposed; 
3.  The unit size(s) (square footage) of restricted dwelling units and number of bedrooms per restricted dwelling unit; 
4.  The proposed location of the lower-income and moderate-income restricted dwelling units; 
5.  Tenure of affordability for restricted dwelling units; 
6.  Schedule for production of restricted dwelling units; 
7.  Equivalent financial incentives provided by the City; and 
8.  Terms and conditions of for sale restricted dwelling units. 
D.  Where an inclusionary housing agreement is required pursuant to the Agency, both the density bonus housing agreement and inclusionary housing agreement shall be combined into a single housing agreement. Where there is a conflict between the requirements of this chapter and the requirements of the Agency, the stricter requirements shall apply to the housing development. 
(Ord. 04-855 § 1 (part))  
11.85.130 - Density bonus resale agreements. 
A.  All buyers of for sale restricted dwelling units shall enter into a density bonus resale agreement with the City prior to purchasing the unit or property. The resale agreement shall specify that the title to the subject property or unit may not be transferred without prior approval of the City. 
(Ord. 04-855 § 1 (part))  
11.85.140 - Management and monitoring. 
Rental restricted dwelling units shall be managed/operated by the developer or his/her agent. Each developer of rental restricted dwelling units shall submit an annual report to the City identifying which units are restricted dwelling units, the monthly rent, vacancy information for each rental restricted dwelling unit for the prior year, monthly income for tenants of each rental restricted dwelling unit throughout the prior year, and other information as required by the City, while ensuring the privacy of the tenant. 
(Ord. 04-855 § 1 (part))  
11.85.150 - Administrative fee for restricted dwelling units. 
Over the minimum tenure of projects containing restricted dwelling units, the City will either directly or, via one or more third parties, provide a number of recurring services associated with the administration and monitoring of such units. Although the provision of some of these services will be within the normal purview of existing City activities, others will involve new costs to the City for which there are no existing funding sources. Unless and until alternative funding sources are identified, it is necessary to require the builders/owners of residential projects to share in these administrative costs. Therefore, the City Council establishes an administrative fee for restricted dwelling units, the amount to be established by the City Council resolution and paid prior to the issuance of building permit(s). 
(Ord. 04-855 § 1 (part))  
Division V. - Planned Subdivisions  
Chapter 11.86 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
11.86.010 - Citation and authority. 
This chapter is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act of the State and may be cited as the "Subdivision Regulations of the City of Montclair." 
(Prior code § 9-3.01)  
11.86.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined, but are defined in the Subdivision Map Act of the State as last amended, such definitions are incorporated in this chapter and shall be deemed to apply as though set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.02)  
11.86.030 - Control by City Council on division of land. 
A.  The City Council assumes the control of the design and improvement of land subdivision, including any division of land created by a parcel map, as such is vested in the City by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the State, and amendments thereto, or as otherwise established and set forth in this chapter. 
B.  In conjunction therewith and in addition to the aforesaid control of land within the City, it is declared that any land that is divided in any method or manner whatsoever shall be accomplished by either a subdivision map or parcel map which shall first be approved by the Planning Commission and the City Council. 
C.  No person shall sell, offer to sell, or transfer title from one owner to another, or otherwise dispose of such in any manner whatsoever, any parcel of land, or fraction thereof, without first conforming to the applicable requirements of the Subdivision Map Act of the State and the requirements of this or any other provision or requirement set forth and established by the City Council. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.03)  
11.86.040 - Units of land. 
For the purposes of this chapter, a unit of land is any plot of land separately described as shown on either: 
A.  The Tax Assessor's Map Record on tax rolls as a separate unit of land on June 18, 1956; or 
B.  The official records of the County Recorder accomplished by either a subdivision map or other City Council-approved division of land. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.04)  
11.86.050 - Advisory agency. 
The Planning Commission is made the advisory agency of the City Council, as such advisory agency is defined and established by the Subdivision Map Act of the State, and the powers are delegated to the advisory agency to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove and to report such actions on tentative subdivision maps or tentative parcel maps directly to the subdivider. The advisory agency is given full power and authority to investigate any and all matters pertaining to a proposed division of land to be created by either a subdivision map or a parcel map and to make its findings of fact in relation thereto, which shall be communicated in writing to the City Council. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.05)  
11.86.060 - General plan conformance—Time for or waivers of reports. 
A.  A report as to conformity to the General Plan, which report is required pursuant to Section 65402 of the Government Code of the State as the result of a proposed division of land, may be included as part of and at the same time as the action taken by the advisory agency on such division of land. 
B.  Such report shall not be required for a proposed subdivision which involves: (1) The disposition of the remainder or a larger parcel which was acquired and used in part for street purposes; (2) acquisitions, dispositions or abandonments for street widening; or (3) alignment projects provided the advisory agency expressly finds that any such disposition for street purposes, acquisitions, dispositions or abandonments for street widening or alignment projects is of a minor nature. 
(Prior code § 9-3.06)  
11.86.070 - Parcel map procedures. 
A.  A parcel map shall be filed and recorded for any subdivision for which a tentative and final map is not required by the Subdivision Map Act of the State, except for subdivisions created by short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than 30 days' notice in writing) of a portion of an operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code of the State; provided, however, upon a showing made to the City Council based upon substantial evidence that public policy necessitates such a map, this exception shall not apply. 
B.  Such maps shall meet all of the requirements of Section 11.86.090 of this chapter and shall show all dedications or offers of dedication thereon. The City Council may require that such dedications or offers of dedication be made by deed in lieu of or in addition to appearing on the map. 
C.  When a parcel map is required by this title, a tentative parcel map shall first be filed with the City Council. Such tentative map shall meet all the requirements for tentative maps provided by the Subdivision Map Act of the State and this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.07)  
11.86.080 - Imposition of reasonable filing fees. 
A.  The subdivider shall pay to the City fees for filing, processing and checking all tentative subdivision maps, final subdivision maps, tentative parcel maps, final parcel maps, street improvement plans, sanitary sewer plans, and utility plans. 
B.  The fees for such services shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.08)  
11.86.090 - Filing of tentative maps. 
A.  Filing. Tentative maps shall be filed with the Planning Division and shall be processed in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act of the State and the provisions of this title. The subdivider shall file as many copies of the tentative map as may be required by the Planning Division. 
B.  Tentative Map Requirements. The following will be required for tentative maps: 
1.  The title of the subdivision and a description of the property; 
2.  The name and address of the owner and subdivider; 
3.  The name and address of the person preparing the map; 
4.  The approximate acreage; 
5.  The north point; 
6.  The scale; 
7.  The date; 
8.  The boundary lines; 
9.  The locations and names of streets; 
10.  The widths of streets and alleys; 
11.  The names, locations, and widths of adjacent streets; 
12.  The proposed street grades; 
13.  The proposed lot grades; 
14.  The locations and widths of easements; 
15.  The dimensions of reservations; 
16.  The existing structures; 
17.  The locations of existing and proposed public utilities; 
18.  The existing sewers; 
19.  The existing water mains; 
20.  The existing culverts and drainpipes; 
21.  The watercourses; 
22.  The land subject to overflow or inundation; 
23.  The railroads; 
24.  The lot lines and approximate dimensions; 
25.  The approximate radii of curves; 
26.  The building lines; 
27.  The lands and parks to be dedicated for public use; 
28.  The contours at 5-foot intervals if the slope is greater than 10 percent; 
29.  The contours at 2-foot intervals if the slope is less than 10 percent; 
30.  The proposed land uses; 
31.  The names and tract numbers of adjoining subdivisions; and 
32.  The names of any geologists or soils engineers whose services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map. 
Such information may be furnished separately from the map itself. 
C.  Dedications. The City Council may require that all dedications or offers of dedication be made by deed in lieu of or in addition to appearing on the map. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.09)  
11.86.100 - Waivers of requirements—Additional requirements. 
The City Council may waive or direct an exemption from any of the requirements of Section 11.86.090 of this chapter whenever the City Council finds that the type of subdivision is such that compliance is unnecessary or that other circumstances justify the waiver. The City Council may require such drawings, data, or other information as is deemed necessary. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.10)  
11.86.110 - Improvement requirements. 
The subdivider shall improve, or agree to improve, all streets, highways, alleys, ways or easements required in connection with, or as a part of, a subdivision or a division of land created by a parcel map as a condition precedent to the acceptance thereof and the approval of the final map. Such improvements shall be installed at lines and grades, and in accordance with plans, standards and specifications, approved by the City Engineer and shall include: 
A.  The grading, drainage, and drainage structures necessary for proper use and for public safety; 
B.  Portland cement concrete curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and drive approaches; 
C.  Storm drains, conduits and channels; 
D.  Asphalt concrete street paving; 
E.  Aggregate base; 
F.  An adequate domestic water supply, including the relocation or replacement of all water mains, irrigation lines, and appurtenances as required by the City Engineer; 
G.  Sanitary sewer facilities and connections for each lot; 
H.  Underground utilities providing services to each lot; 
I.  Services from public utilities, where provided, and from sanitary sewers shall be made available for each lot in such manner as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street pavement, gutters, curbs and sidewalks when service connections are made; 
J.  Street trees; 
K.  Fire hydrants; 
L.  Street name signs and traffic regulatory devices; 
M.  Street lights, including ornamental light standards; 
N.  The relocation or replacement of all utility lines and poles as required by the City Engineer; 
O.  Permanent subdivision survey monuments; and 
P.  In addition to the aforesaid minimum requirements, the City Council may require such additional improvements and facilities or such modifications in the standards of minimum improvements as special conditions may cause the City Council to make a special finding of need. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.11)  
11.86.120 - Public hearings and notices where required. 
Whenever a public hearing is held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, a notice of the time and place thereof, including a general description of the location of the subdivision or proposed subdivision, shall be given at least 10 days before the hearing. Such notice shall be given by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the County and circulated in the City. In addition to notice by publication, the City Council may require notice of the hearing to be given in such other manner as the City Council may deem necessary or desirable. Any interested person may appear at such a hearing and shall be heard. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.12)  
11.86.130 - Expiration of maps and extensions. 
A.  Expiration. The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire 12 months after the date the map was approved or conditionally approved. 
B.  Extensions. The person filing the tentative map may request an extension of the tentative map approval or conditional approval by a written application to be filed at least 30 days before the approval or conditional approval is due to expire. The application shall state the reasons for requesting the extension. In granting an extension, new conditions may be imposed, and existing conditions may be revised. 
C.  Time Limits on Extensions. An extension or extensions of tentative map approval or conditional approval shall not exceed an aggregate of two years. 
D.  Effect of Map Modifications on Extensions. The modification of a tentative map after its approval or conditional approval shall not extend the time limits imposed by this section. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.13)  
11.86.140 - Failure to file parcel maps. 
Failure to file a parcel map with the County Recorder within 60 days after the approval or conditional approval of such map shall terminate all proceedings. Any subdivision of the same land shall require the filing of a new map. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.14)  
11.86.150 - Waivers of direct street access. 
The Planning Commission may impose a requirement that any dedication or offer of dedication of a street shall include a waiver of direct vehicular access rights to such street from any property shown on a final map as abutting thereon, and that, if the dedication is accepted, such waiver shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of the waiver of direct access. In addition, the Planning Commission may require a waiver of access to an existing street which abuts a subdivision if the Planning Commission determines that a safety hazard would be created as a result of direct access. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.15)  
11.86.160 - Reservations. 
A.  Requirements. As a condition of approval of a map, the subdivider shall reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries, or other public uses according to the standards and formula set forth in this section. 
B.  Standards and Formula for the Reservation of Land. If a park, recreational facilities, fire station, library, or other public use is shown on an adopted specific plan or adopted General Plan containing a community facilities element, recreation and parks element, and/or a public building element, the subdivider may be required by the City Council to reserve sites as so determined by the City or County in accordance with the definite principals and standards contained in such specific plan or General Plan. The reserved area shall be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make the development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible. The reserved area shall conform to the adopted specific plan or General Plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event it is not acquired within the prescribed period. 
C.  Procedure. The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of the approval of the final map or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless such period of time is extended by mutual agreement. 
D.  Payment. The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map, plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of the reservation, and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such reserved area. 
E.  Termination. If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into such a binding agreement, the reservation of such area shall automatically terminate. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.16)  
11.86.170 - Dedication and design regulations for streets, alleys, drainage, public utility easements, and other public easements. 
A.  Requirements. As a condition of the approval of a map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public easements. In addition, the subdivider shall improve, or agree to improve, all streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public easements in accordance with the City of Montclair Standard Construction Drawings and the provisions of this section. 
B.  Streets, Alleys, Easements and Parks. Streets, alleys, easements and parks shall conform as follows: 
1.  Major Streets and Thoroughfares. Major streets and thoroughfares shall conform to good engineering and planning procedures and shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Council. 
2.  Local streets. Local streets shall be not less than 60 feet in width, or dedicated to that width of previously dedicated portions of streets, and shall be located to provide natural drainage and shall be adjusted to the topography. There shall be a minimum number of interceptions with major streets or thoroughfares, and blocks shall be not less than 600 feet in length. Each street intersection shall have a corner radius of not less than 10 feet. 
When one or more streets or alleys are dedicated or proposed to be dedicated as part of a subdivision or an approved parcel map, such streets and alleys shall conform to and be, as nearly as possible, in alignment with other established or dedicated streets or alleys. 
3.  Dead-End Streets. Dead-end streets shall be terminated by a turnaround area not less than 96 feet in diameter separated to the depth of one lot from the exterior boundary line or other topographical features of the subdivision or parcel map. 
4.  Boundary Line Streets and Half Streets. Boundary line streets and half streets shall be required to be developed to a minimum width of 28 feet or to such greater width as may be required by the City Council in the public interest and to facilitate safe and convenient traffic movement. Such partial streets shall be permitted only when assurances are presented in writing by the owner of the adjoining property of his/her intention to dedicate the remaining parts of the street when such adjoining property is subdivided or when the City Council determines that such partial dedications are necessary for safety and convenience. 
5.  Alleys. 
a.  Improved alleyways, which shall be at least 20 feet wide, shall be provided at the rear of all lots when required by the City Council. 
b.  All alley intersections shall have corner cutbacks of not less than a 10-foot radius. 
c.  Alleys in the rear of business, industrial, or income property shall be designed and located according to the plan for the development of the particular use involved. All public utilities shall be placed and maintained in such alleys whenever practical to do so. 
6.  Easements. Easements shall be dedicated as follows: 
a.  For flood channels or drainage purposes at such widths as the County Flood Officer or the City Engineer may indicate; and 
b.  For utilities at the rear of all lots, insofar as practical, to serve the property when alleys are not provided. 
7.  Small Parks. Small parks or other public areas shall be dedicated as may be appropriate. 
8.  Curved Street. Curved streets in comparatively level locations shall have a center line radius of 500 feet or greater. 
9.  Street Corners. Street corners shall have a minimum 20-foot curb radius with the property line designed so as not to reduce the parkway widths. 
10.  Alley Corners. All alley corners intersecting with streets shall have a minimum curb radius of not less than 8 feet. 
11.  Street Connections or Intersections. All street connections or intersections shall be made at approximately right angles. 
12.  Minimum Widths. Minimum widths for pavements and sidewalks shall be as follows: 
a.  For streets, 40 feet; 
b.  For business districts, 6-foot sidewalks; and 
c.  For residential districts, 5-foot sidewalks. 
C.  Lots and Blocks. Lots and blocks shall have dimensions suitable to the land uses proposed and shall be, in no case, less than the minimum sizes specified in the zoning laws. 
1.  Lots. Lots in residential zones shall be not less than 60 feet wide, measured at the building line and 100 feet deep with a 65-foot minimum width for comer lots; provided, however, those lots located at the end of a cul-de-sac street may have a minimum width at the building setback line of not less than 50 feet provided the average width of such lot is not less than 60 feet. Exception to this requirement shall apply only to areas designated by an "SL" overlay zone and subject to the provisions of Chapter 11.36 of this title. Side lines of lots shall be approximately perpendicular to the street line. When large lots are proposed, the shapes and building locations may be required to be so established as to permit later practical resubdivision. No reserved lots or strips shall be permitted. Every lot shall front or abut on a dedicated street. Double frontage lots shall be avoided. 
2.  Blocks. Blocks shall ordinarily be two lot depths in width and not over 1400 feet in length. If shown at greater width, the City Council may require easements or other assurances to permit later practical resubdivision. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.17)  
11.86.180 - Supplemental improvements—Reimbursement agreements. 
A.  Supplemental Improvements Required. The subdivider may be required to install improvements for the benefit of the subdivision which may contain supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision as a condition precedent to the approval of a subdivision or parcel map and thereafter to dedicate such improvements to the public. However, the subdivider shall be reimbursed for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the State. 
B.  Supplemental Improvements—Reimbursement Agreements—Funding Procedures. No charge, area of benefit, or local benefit district shall be established unless and until a public hearing, in accordance with the provisions of Section 11.86.120 of this chapter, is held thereon by the City Council, and the City Council finds that the fee or charge and the area of benefit or local benefit district is reasonably related to the costs of such supplemental improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries thereof. 
C.  Notices. In addition to the notice required by Section 11.86.120 of this title, a written notice of the hearing shall be given to the subdivider, and to those who own property within the proposed area of benefit as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll, and to the potential users of the supplemental improvements insofar as they can be ascertained at the time. Such notices shall be mailed by the City Clerk at least 10 days prior to the date established by the City for the hearing. 
D.  Supplemental Improvements—Drainage, Sewerage, Bridges, and Major Thoroughfares. If the City has adopted a local drainage or sanitary sewer plan or map as required for the imposition of fees there- for, the City may impose a reasonable charge on property within the area benefitted and may provide for the collection of such charge as set forth in this title. The City may enter into reimbursement agreements with a subdivider who constructs such facilities, and the charges collected by the City therefor may be utilized to reimburse the subdivider as set forth herein. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.18)  
11.86.190 - Improvement security. 
A.  Improvement Security Required. Any improvement agreement, contract, or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act of the State for which security is required shall be secured in the manner provided for in Section 66499 of the Subdivision Map Act of the State. 
B.  Improvement Security—Amount. The improvement security shall be in the amount set forth or authorized in Section 66499.3 of the Subdivision Map Act of the State. If the improvement security is other than a bond or bonds furnished by duly authorized corporate sureties, an additional amount shall be included as determined by the City Council as necessary to cover the costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorneys' fees, which may be incurred by the City in successfully enforcing the obligation secured. 
C.  Changes or Alterations. The improvement security shall also secure the faithful performance of any changes or alterations in the work to the extent that such changes or alterations do not exceed 10 percent of the original estimated cost of the improvement. 
D.  Improvement Security—Special Assessment Proceedings—Reductions. In the event the required subdivision improvements are financed and installed pursuant to special assessment proceedings, the subdivider may apply to the City Council for a reduction in the amount of the improvement security required hereunder up to an amount corresponding to the amount of faithful performance and labor and material bonds required by the special assessment act being used. The City Council may grant such reduction if it finds that such bonds have been in fact provided and that the obligations secured thereby are substantially equivalent to those required by this chapter. 
E.  Improvement Security—Release. The improvement security required hereunder shall be released in the following manner: 
1.  Security given for the faithful performance of any act or agreement shall be released upon the final completion and acceptance of the act or work, subject to the provisions of subsection (E)(2) of this section. 
2.  The City Council may release a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the performance of the act or work as it progresses upon an application therefor by the subdivider; provided, however, no such release shall be for an amount less than 25 percent of the total improvement security given for the faithful performance of the act or work, and the security shall not be reduced to an amount less than 50 percent of the total improvement security given for the faithful performance until the final completion and the acceptance of the act or work. In no event shall the City Council authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce such security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the act or work and any other obligation imposed by this chapter, the Subdivision Map Act of the State, or the improvement agreement. 
3.  Security given to secure payment to the contractor, his or her subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment may, 6 months after the completion and acceptance of the act or work, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all claims therefor filed and of which notice has been given to the legislative body, plus an amount reasonably determined by the City Council to be required to ensure the performance of any other obligations secured thereby. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all such claims and obligations for which the security was given. 
4.  No security given for the guarantee or warranty of work shall be released until the expiration of the period thereof. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.19)  
11.86.200 - Reversions to acreage. 
A.  Reversions to Acreage by Final Map. Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
B.  Initiation of Proceedings by Owners. Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by the petition of all of the owners of record of the property. The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the Planning Division. The petition shall contain the information required by subsection D of this section and such other information as required by the Planning Division. 
C.  Initiation of Proceedings by the City Council. The Planning Commission or the City Council on its own motion may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage. The Planning Division shall obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings. 
D.  Data for Reversions to Acreage. Petitioners shall file the following: 
1.  Evidence of title to the real property; 
2.  Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of interests in the property; 
3.  Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final map or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; 
4.  Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such final or parcel map was filed for record; 
5.  A tentative map in the form prescribed by this chapter; 
6.  A final map in the form prescribed by this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act of the State, which final map delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion. 
E.  Fees. Petitions to revert subdivided property to acreage pursuant to subsection B of this section shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council. Such fee shall not be refundable. 
F.  Proceedings before the City Council. A public hearing shall be held before the City Council on all petitions for initiations for reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 11.86.120 of this chapter. The City Council may require such other notice that it deems necessary or advisable. The City Council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records in writing that: 
1.  Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purpose; and 
2.  Either: 
a.  All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion, or 
b.  None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years after the date the final or parcel map was filed for record or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later, or 
c.  No lots shown on the final or parcel map were filed for record; 
3.  The City Council may require as conditions of the reversion: 
a.  That the owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets or easements, and 
b.  The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits, or improvement securities if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this chapter. 
G.  Return Fees and Deposits—Release of Securities. Except as provided in subsection E of this section, upon the filing of the final map for reversion to acreage with the County Recorder, all deposits shall be returned to the subdivider, and all improvement securities shall be released by the City Council. 
H.  Delivery of Final Maps. After the hearing before the City Council and the approval of the reversion, the final map shall be delivered to the County Recorder. 
I.  Effect of Filing Reversion Maps with the County Recorder. Reversions shall be effective upon the final map being filed for record by the County Recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the final map for reversion shall have no further force and effect. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.20)  
11.86.210 - Monuments. 
A.  Sufficiency of Monuments. At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. 
B.  Required Monuments. The engineer or surveyor shall also set any additional monuments as may be set forth on those standard drawings which the City Engineer may prepare for the purpose of identifying subdivision monumentation requirements of the City. 
C.  Time of Setting. All monuments necessary to establish the exterior boundaries of the subdivision shall be set or referenced prior to the recordation of the final map. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.21)  
11.86.220 - Grading and erosion control. 
Every map approved pursuant no the provisions of this title shall be conditioned for compliance with the requirements for grading and erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damages to off-site property, set forth in the Uniform Building Code. 
(Prior code § 9-3.22)  
11.86.230 - Merger of parcels. 
A.  A parcel or unit may be merged with a contiguous parcel or unit held by the same owner if any one of the contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size under the zoning ordinance applicable to the parcels or units of land, and if all of the following requirements are satisfied: 
1.  At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit. 
2.  With respect to the affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists: 
a.  Comprises less than 5000 square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger; 
b.  Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation; 
c.  Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply; 
d.  Does not meet slope stability standards; 
e.  Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular safety equipment access and maneuverability; 
f.  Its development would create health or safety hazards; 
g.  Is inconsistent with the applicable General Plan and any applicable specific plans, other than minimum lot size or density standards. 
B.  For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that notice of intention to determine status is recorded. 
C.  A merger of parcels becomes effective when the City causes to be filed for record with the Recorder of the County of San Bernardino a notice of merger specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property. 
D.  Prior to recording a notice of merger, the City shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the then-current record owner of the property a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to standards specified in the merger ordinance, and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the Recorder of the County of San Bernardino on the date that notice is mailed to the property owner. 
E.  At any time within 30 days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of the affected property may file with the City a request for a hearing on determination of status. 
F.  Upon receiving a request for a hearing on determination of status, the City shall fix a time, date and place for a hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission and shall so notify the property owner by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted not less than 30 days following the City's receipt of the property owner's request therefor, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the City and the property owner. 
G.  At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the standards for merger specified in this merger ordinance. At the close of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall so notify the owner of its determination. A determination of merger shall be recorded within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing. 
H.  If, within the 30-day period specified in subsection G of this section, the owner does not file a request for hearing in accordance with subsection E of this section, the Planning Commission may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. A determination of merger shall be recorded as provided in subsection C of this section no later than 90 days following the mailing of notice required by subsection F of this section. 
I.  If, in accordance with subsection G or H of this section, the Planning Commission determines that the subject property shall not be merged, it shall cause to be recorded in the manner specified in subsection C of this section a release of the notice of intention to determine status, recorded pursuant to subsection D of this section, and shall mail a clearance letter to the then-current owner of record. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.23)  
Chapter 11.88 - OFFICE AND INDUSTRIAL CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENTS—PLANNED 
Sections: 
 
11.88.010 - Findings, intent and purpose. 
A.  The City Council finds that office condominium and industrial condominium developments are different in so many respects from other types and forms of land ownership and development as to require different regulations. 
B.  The intent of this chapter is to develop standards, procedures and guidelines, to provide a more flexible method whereby sufficiently large and properly located land areas can be developed, employing more innovative and imaginative land planning concepts than would be possible through the strict application of conventional zoning subdivision regulations. 
C.  The purpose of the chapter is to provide for the general control of design and development of common ownership office and industrial condominium developments in relation to adjoining areas in accordance with the basic purpose of the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.203)  
11.88.20 - Objectives and purposes. 
The objectives and purposes of the planned office and industrial condominiums developments are as follows: 
A.  To encourage a more desirable business and working environment than would be possible through a strict application of the provisions of this title; 
B.  To encourage an orderly and well-planned growth of owner-occupied office and industrial developments; 
C.  To encourage a more efficient, aesthetic, and desirable use of land; 
D.  To encourage variety in the physical development pattern of the City; and 
E.  To ensure that these objectives are realized and that in the process, the development objectives, principles and standards remain in conformity with the requirements of the zoning ordinance and General Plan. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.204)  
11.88.30 - Application of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all office condominium developments in C-2, C-3 and A-P zoned districts, as well as to all industrial condominium developments in M-1, M-2 and M-I-P Zones. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.202)  
11.88.040 - Authorization. 
The Commission is authorized to grant office and industrial condominium development use permits for particular cases which are qualified pursuant to the provisions of this title. In granting such office and industrial condominium development use permits, the Planning Commission may stipulate conditions in addition no those required by this title which will tend to safeguard the health, safety, and property values in the area. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.201)  
11.88.050 - Permits required. 
A.  Office condominium developments are permitted in the C-2, C-3 and A-P Zones subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this title and the approval of tentative or final tract or parcel maps as may be required by law. This requirement is in addition to other permits or certificates required by law. 
Furthermore, the types of office condominium uses which are allowed per the required conditional use permit are as follows: 
1.  Professional offices, such as: 
Accountants 
Attorneys 
Dentists, doctors, etc. 
Engineers, architects, planners, etc. 
2.  Business offices, such as: 
Advertising agencies 
Banks and other financial offices 
Business and management consultant services (includes data processing, computer programming and the like) 
Business, professional, and civic associations (excluding union meeting and hiring halls) 
Communication and recording studios (excluding towers) 
Corporate headquarters 
Detective and protective services (offices only) 
Educational, scientific and social science research facilities (excluding schools) 
Employment agencies 
Escrow and real estate companies 
Governmental offices 
Insurance companies 
Interior decorating consultant services 
Microfilming services 
News agency and publication offices 
Photographers, artists, etc. 
Public and private utility offices 
Secretarial and stenographic services 
Telephone answering services 
Transportation and entertainment ticket services (excluding passenger terminals) 
Travel agencies 
3.  Those uses in Sections 11.24.030 and 11.24.040 of this title may be permitted in office condominium developments subject to the requirements stated in those respective sections; 
4.  Accessory uses and facilities which are clearly related and incidental to one of the above-permitted conditional uses. 
B.  Industrial condominium developments are permitted in the M-1, M-2, and M-I-P Zones subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.78 of this title and the approval of tentative or final tract or parcel maps as may be required by law. This requirement is in addition to other permits or certificates required by law. 
Furthermore, the types of industrial condominium uses which are allowed per the required conditional use permit are as follows: 
1.  Light manufacturing and light industrial uses which are not obnoxious by reason of sound, fumes, repulsive odors, and the like, whether the same constitute an actual nuisance or not, and including such uses as: 
Assembly plants 
Bakeries, wholesale 
Bottling plants 
Building material and contractor storage yards and plants 
Cabinet shops and furniture manufacture 
Canning and packing 
Canvas products manufacture 
Cereal factories 
Cleaning and dyeing plants 
Cosmetics manufacture 
Creameries 
Electroplating 
Food products manufacture, except fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and the rendering or refining of fats and oils 
Fruit and vegetable packing plants 
Garment manufacture 
Ice and cold storage plants 
Laboratories, experimental and the like 
Laundries (commercial operations only) 
Machine, welding, and blacksmith shops, excluding the use of equipment producing undue noise or vibration 
Neon and electric sign manufacture 
Radio manufacture and assembly and electrical and electronic appliances 
Rug and carpet cleaning plants 
Storage of goods, materials, liquids, and equipment (except the bulk storage of matter or materials which are inflammable or explosive or which create dust, odor, or fumes) 
Tire retreading and recapping and battery manufacture 
Toy and novelty manufacture 
Warehouses and storage buildings 
Wholesale buildings 
Similar light industrial and manufacturing uses but excluding automobile and truck repair related uses 
2.  Retail or wholesale stores, businesses, offices, or commercial activities when specifically authorized by the Planning Commission and are found to be incidental and directly related to one of the above-permitted conditional uses and that such uses will be compatible with the other industrial condominium units; 
3.  Accessory uses and facilities which are clearly related and incidental to one of the above-permitted conditional uses. 
C.  The Planning Commission shall be empowered through its review of any office or industrial condominium conditional use permit to exclude any of the uses listed in subsection A and/or B of this section if it finds that such use will conflict with the purpose and intent of this chapter and/or the General Plan. 
D.  The conversion of lease or rental office developments to office condominium developments and the conversion of lease or rental industrial developments to industrial condominium developments within appropriately zoned districts is permitted, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.72 of this title and the approval of tentative or final tract or parcel maps as may be required by law. This requirement is in addition to other permits on certificates required by law. 
Furthermore, approval of said conditional use permit for conversion shall require that the development in question meet all requirements currently in effect for new office or industrial condominium developments. 
E.  No person shall construct, sell, lease, rent, convey, maintain or use an office or industrial condominium development or unit within the City without complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.206)  
11.88.060 - Preliminary review. 
Before filing any development approval application for an office or industrial condominium development, the prospective applicant shall submit to the Planning Division, Department of Community Development, a request for preliminary review application containing preliminary sketches and general site information, as may be reasonably required for consideration and advice to the applicant, as to the relation of the proposal to general development objectives to be attained in the area and as to the policies of the Planning Commission with reference thereto. The Planning Division shall then submit the preliminary application to the Development Review Committee at a regular meeting. The Development Review Committee shall review the preliminary review application and forward to the Planning Division all recommendations and comments, and also anticipated conditions, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9-3.207)  
11.88.070 - Precise plans required. 
A Precise Plan of Design shall be required for the use or development of any lot or parcel of real property for an office or industrial condominium development irrespective of the area or size of such lot or parcel. 
(Prior code § 9-3.208)  
11.88.080 - Application requirements. 
After the preliminary review, the applicant may file a request for development approval application for an office or industrial condominium development and shall include the information required by this section and any other information that may be required to adequately consider such proposal. A conditional use permit, Precise Plan of Design, tentative tract map, and preliminary site plans, as required by this chapter, shall be submitted to the Planning Division concurrently. The Planning Division shall make recommendations on such project to the Planning Commission for approval, conditional approval, or denial. Tentative tract maps, Precise Plan of Design and conditional use permit applications, filed pursuant to this chapter, shall be processed simultaneously. 
(Prior code § 9-3.209)  
11.88.090 - Information to be submitted. 
The information to be filed in support of an office or industrial condominium development and conditional use permit, in addition to those items specified in Sections 11.78.080, 11.80.020 and 11.86.090 of this title, shall consist of the following: 
A.  A site plan depicting: 
1.  The building site showing the arrangement and location of all buildings, structures and improvements proposed and to be retained or constructed and the gross floor area and ground floor area of each unit and/or building type. This includes existing and proposed off-site improvements, 
2.  The location and design of on-site circulation, including pedestrian ways, on-site parking and location, loading areas, and outside storage areas, 
3.  The location of all landscaped areas, fences and trash storage areas and how the utility services and drainage are to be provided: 
B.  A landscape plan, including landscape plant schedule, showing the location of existing trees proposed to be removed and proposed to be retained, and the amount, size, type and location of landscaped areas, planting beds, and plant materials, including provisions for 100 percent automatic irrigation; 
C.  An architectural drawing, renderings or sketches showing all elevations and floor plans of the proposed buildings and structures as they will appear on completion. All exterior surfacing materials and color shall be specified and mounted on a sample board; 
D.  Scale drawings of all signs and exterior lighting showing the size, location, materials, colors, copy and illumination. This shall include all light standard specifications; 
E.  Preliminary grading plans when necessary to ensure development properly related to the site and to surrounding properties and structures; 
F.  Calculations indicating the land area devoted to each proposed use in the planned office or industrial condominium development and its percentage of the total area; 
G.  A map indicating any proposed division of land within the office or industrial condominium development; 
H.  A preliminary title report showing the vested ownership and all covenants, conditions, restrictions and reservations of record; 
I.  A time schedule indicating when construction is to begin, the anticipated rate of development and the approximate completion date, including the phase construction; 
J.  Any other drawings or additional information necessary to adequately consider the drawings required by this section and determine compliance with the purpose and intent of this title. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.210)  
11.88.100 - Development standards. 
To achieve the purpose of this chapter, the Planning Commission shall require, prior to the approval of construction, that all office and industrial condominium developments conform to this Code in effect at the time of approval. Such standards shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
A.  Office condominium developments may be constructed in C-2, C-3 and A-P Zones subject to the development standards of the underlying zone; all applicable parking and sign regulations; and any conditions of approval as required by Precise Plan of Design and conditional use permit review. 
B.  Industrial condominium developments may be constructed in M-1, M-2 and MIP Zones subject to the development standards of the underlying zone; all applicable parking and sign regulations; and any conditions of approval as required by Precise Plan of Design and conditional use permit review. 
C.  In addition to requirements applied because of the zone in which office or industrial condominium developments are located (as indicated in subsections A and B of this section), the following development standards shall apply. Wherever there is a conflict or the appearance of a conflict between the normal zoning requirements and the following condominium requirements, the more stringent standards shall apply unless the conflict is mutually exclusive, in which case this chapter shall apply. 
1.  Site Area. 
a.  The minimum gross site area for office condominium developments within a C-2, C-3 or A-P Zone, when developed pursuant to this chapter, shall be 7200 square feet, except that sites with lesser area may be permitted when contiguous to an existing office condominium development constructed to the standards of this chapter or constitute a logical extension in arrangement of buildings, facilities, and open space, per an adopted Specific Plan of Development. 
b.  The minimum gross site area for industrial condominium developments within an M-1, M-2 or MIP Zone, when developed pursuant to this chapter, shall be 10,000 square feet, except that sites with lesser area may be permitted when contiguous to an existing industrial condominium development constructed to the standards of this chapter or constitute a logical extension in arrangement of buildings, facilities, and open space, per an adopted Specific Plan of Development. 
2.  Minimum Unit Size. 
a.  Each office condominium unit shall be a minimum 1200 gross square feet including all structures, parking, open space, and other appurtenant facilities that are reserved for the exclusive use of that unit as well as a proportionate share of all common space and facilities. Also, a minimum average of 600 net square feet of fully enclosed floor area shall be provided for each office condominium unit within an office condominium development. Furthermore, an absolute minimum of 300 net usable square feet of fully enclosed floor area shall be provided for each office condominium unit and/or each individual business, organization, or professional entity permitted to operate on the premises. 
b.  Each industrial condominium unit shall be a minimum 5000 gross square feet including all structures, parking, open space, and other appurtenant facilities that are reserved for the exclusive use of that unit as well as a proportionate share of all common space and facilities. Also, a minimum average of 2000 net square feet of fully enclosed floor area shall be provided for each industrial condominium unit within an industrial condominium development. Furthermore, an absolute minimum of 1500 net, usable square feet of fully enclosed floor area shall be provided for each industrial condominium unit and/or individual business, organization, or industrial entity permitted to occupy the premises. 
3.  Utilities. Each office or industrial condominium unit shall have separate water, sewage, and utility connections. Each utility that is controlled by and consumed within the unit shall be separately billed for its use. Each unit shall have access to its own meter(s), heater(s), and air-conditioner(s), and shall not require entry through another unit. Each unit shall have its own electrical panel and access thereto. 
4.  Fire Rating. Each office or industrial condominium unit shall be constructed with a minimum of one-hour rated construction throughout. 
5.  Outdoor Storage Areas. Outdoor storage may be permitted in industrial condominium developments as a part of the required conditional use permit when the Planning Commission determines that such storage is adequately screened from public view and will not be aesthetically or materially detrimental to surrounding properties. If the Planning Commission determines that a proposed industrial condominium development can adequately accommodate outdoor storage area(s), then the following standards shall apply: 
a.  Outdoor storage shall only be permitted within the rear or side yards (except corner side yards) of the development. 
b.  All outdoor storage areas shall be fully enclosed within a minimum 6-foot-high masonry block wall similar in color and appearance to the primary structure(s). Accessways to storage areas shall be gated with an opaque material such as wood, metal, chain link (with wood slats), or other suitable material. Exception: Chain link fence or a similar material may be submitted for the required masonry block wall between adjoining industrial side and/or rear property lines when the City is presented with a written, mutual agreement between the property owners involved. This exception may apply only to adjoining industrial uses (appropriately zoned) and shall not be permitted when one of the properties is vacant or when the property line in question abuts a public or private street. 
c.  Only those materials common to the operation of the permitted use of the respective industrial condominium unit shall be permitted in an outdoor storage area. Waste and scrap materials shall be removed at least once a week. 
d.  Goods or materials within the outdoor storage area may not be stored or stacked so as to exceed the height of the required masonry block wall. 
(Ord. 06-871 § 11; Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.211)  
11.88.110 - Appearance standards. 
The following standards shall be considered by the Planning Commission before approving a planned office or industrial condominium development: 
A.  Architectural features and general appearance of the proposed development shall enhance the orderly and harmonious development of the area or the community as a whole. 
B.  Architectural features and complimentary colors shall be incorporated into the design of all vertical exterior surfaces of the building in order to create an aesthetically pleasing project. 
C.  Particular attention shall be given to incorporating the design, including colors of signs, into the overall design of the entire development in order to achieve uniformity. 
D.  Vehicular accessways shall be designed with landscaping and building variation to eliminate an alley-like appearance. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.212)  
11.88.120 - Miscellaneous development standards. 
The following development standards shall be applicable to office and industrial condominium developments in addition to those required in Section 11.88.100: 
A.  Grading: Notification of Completion and Written Certification Required. The permittee or his/her agent shall notify the City Building Official when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices and all erosion control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan and the required reports have been submitted, including written certification that work completed is in accordance with the final approved grading plan. 
B.  Landscaping: Notification of Completion and Written Certification Required. The permittee or his/her agent shall notify the Director of Community Development when the final landscaping installation is ready for inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including installation of plant material and irrigation systems, has been completed in accordance with the approved landscape plan the permittee has submitted, written certification that the work that has been completed is in accordance with the final approved landscape plan. 
C.  Energy Conservation. The project shall be designed to fully comply with all energy conservation features and materials required by current State and local requirements. 
D.  Fire Detection System. Fire protection appurtenances shall be provided as may be required by current State and local requirements. 
E.  Security Measures. The general design of any proposed planned residential development shall facilitate the reduction of crime. Individual unit security shall be a significant consideration in the construction of the development, in accordance with the City's current security ordinance. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.213)  
11.88.130 - Provisions required—Covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&R's). 
In order to ensure maintenance of all streets, parking areas, and landscaping within all common areas of any and all office and industrial condominium developments, the following provisions shall be contained in the covenants, conditions and restrictions and shall be recorded with the tract map. No such CC&R's shall be acceptable until approved by the Director of Community Development as to suitability for the proposed use and maintenance of the streets, parking areas, and other common areas and shall also be approved by the City Attorney as to legal form and effect. These provisions shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  Provisions for the maintenance of all parking, streets, landscaping, and other common areas by an association of the individual office or industrial condominium unit owners; 
B.  Provisions for the common use of all parking facilities and streets by each office or industrial condominium unit; 
C.  Provisions restricting the use of each office or industrial condominium unit to the uses permitted by this title in Section 11.88.050 of this chapter; 
D.  Provisions requiring the continued maintenance of design and building standards which are approved through the required Precise Plan of Design including but not limited to construction details, exterior finishes and colors, landscaping, outdoor storage areas, and signing. Any changes must be approved through a separate Precise Plan of Design; 
E.  The final CC&R's, upon approval by the City, shall be recorded with the final tract or parcel map; 
F.  The City shall be made a party to the CC&R's shall approve any changes or amendments to the CC&R's; 
G.  The City shall be granted the power to enforce all provisions of the CC&R's including but not limited to the maintenance of all streets and parking areas and landscaping within all common areas; 
H.  The City shall be granted the express power to enforce all laws and ordinances of the State of California and/or the City on the private streets, alleys and parking areas within the project; nothing within the CC&R's shall be construed as imposing an obligation or requiring the City to enforce any provision of the CC&R's; 
I.  The City shall be entitled to prior written notice of any proposed amendment to the CC&R's. Such notice shall be given by mailing a copy of the precise language of the proposed amendment to the City, c/o City Clerk, together with a letter of transmittal explaining the proposed change in general terms. The City shall have an opportunity to review and comment upon the proposed amendment for a period of not less than 45 days prior to the effective date of any such proposed amendment; 
J.  Right of Entry. The City, through its duly authorized agents or employees, shall have the right to enter upon the common areas for the following purposes: 
1.  Inspection, maintenance and repair of the landscape and private street components of the common areas where such maintenance and repair is required, 
2.  Enforcement of local traffic and/or parking regulations: All privately owned and maintained streets, drives, alleys and parking areas shall be open for the use of the public for purposes of vehicle traffic and are so connected with highways and streets and that provisions of the Vehicle Code of the State of California may be applied in their entirety to them. Whenever by this provision, or any other law of the City, parking is restricted or prohibited and signs are erected giving notice thereof, the officers of the City Police Department may cause the vehicles in violation thereof to be towed away and stored at the expense of the owner, operator, or person to whom the vehicle is entitled to be released, and the vehicle shall not be released except upon payment of the towing and storage costs. In tow-away zones, the Director of Public Works shall cause to be erected appropriate signs giving notice thereof; 
K.  Reimbursements of City expenditures by the association: All costs and expenses incurred by the City arising out of its maintenance and repair of the common areas, as provided in subsection (J)(1) and (2) of this section, shall be charged as an expense of the homeowners' association and shall be paid within 30 days of receipt of an invoice for same; 
L.  Assessments and lien rights of the City: If City maintenance costs are not paid with 30 days from the date due, said unpaid costs and expenses shall become a special assessment against the property, and upon hearing and confirmation by the City Council shall be collected in the same manner as real property taxes and shall be subject to the same penalties, procedures and sale in case of delinquency as is provided for real property taxes; 
M.  Provisions requiring notification of the City as to the name of a contact person(s) from the condominium owners' association. Said notification shall be made at the inception of the association and whenever the name of said contact person(s) changes due to election, resignation, or reorganization; 
N.  Provisions requiring compliance with the CC&R's by each condominium unit owner and the association as well as all tenants, lessees, or other persons or parties making use of the office or industrial condominium development property and/or facilities. 
(Ord. 99-791 Exh. A (part); prior code § 9-3.214) 
