MAMMOTH LAKES, CALIFORNIA - MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the Town of Mammoth Lakes, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 14, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
> 
PREFACE 
The Mammoth Lakes, California, Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1990, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Peter Tracy, town attorney and Pam Kraft, town clerk. 
The Code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the Code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 14, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through
Ordinance No. 19-01, adopted April 3, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This Code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this Code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the Code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This Code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this Code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the Code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the Code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this Code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the Code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 14, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the Code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the Code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 14, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the Code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the Code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the Code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 14, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 14, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the Code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the Code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this Code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the Code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the Code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the Code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the Code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this Code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 14, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com. 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this Code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 1, 2018, amended Title 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Title 1, §§ 1.01.010—1.01.100, 1.04.010—1.04.190, 1.08.010—1.08.070, 1.12.010—1.12.060, 1.16.010—1.16.060, 1.20.010—1.20.060, 1.24.010—1.24.040, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Prior code §§ 1.01.001—1.01.005, 1.01.010—1.01.050, 1.01.100, 1.01.110, 1.01.130, 1.01.150, 1.01.160, 1.01.270, 1.01.300, 1.01.310, 1.04.010—1.04.060, 1.04.120, 1.04.140, 1.05.020—1.05.040, 1.08.010—1.08.050; Ord. 2 §§ 1—2 (part), adopted 1984; Ord. 84-10 §§ 1—7, adopted 1984; Ord. 86-04 § 1(part), adopted 1986; Ord. 86-06 §§ 1, 2 (part), adopted 1986; Ord. 86-11 § 1, adopted 1986; Ord. 89-03 § 1(part), adopted 1989; Ord. 90-02 §§ 1—9, 11, adopted 1990; Ord. 94-03 § 1, adopted 1994; Ord. 95-09 § 1(part), adopted 1995; Ord. No. 12-01, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Mar. 7, 2012; and Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 23, 2013. 
 
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted the "Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code" together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the "Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code." 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This Code shall be known as the "Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said Code as the "Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceedings at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting, or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction, or repeal of the "Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code." Further reference may be made to the titles, chapters, sections, and subsections of the "Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code," and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section, or subsection as it appears in the Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.01.030 - Codification authority. 
This Code consists of all regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the Town of Mammoth Lakes, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1—50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.01.040 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the "Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code," or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the Town of Mammoth Lakes, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections, and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.01.050 - Title, chapter, and section heading. 
The title, chapter, and section headings contained in this Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, or section of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.01.060 - Effect of Code on past actions and obligation. 
Neither the adoption of this Code or any portion thereof, nor the repeal by this Code of any ordinance previously in effect in the town, shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violation of any ordinance, which violation was committed prior to the effective date of this Code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty due and unpaid under such ordinances on such effective date, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation of such ordinances, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required to be posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinances, and all vested rights and obligations pertaining to such ordinances shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.01.070 - Effective date of Code. 
This Code shall become effective October 19, 1990. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.01.080 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The council declares that it would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
1.04.010 - Purpose. 
The town council finds that it is desirable and in the public interest to establish a municipal code in order to provide a scheme of organization for the classification and grouping of ordinances which the council may adopt. The council intends to adopt ordinances of a general and permanent nature to provide for their placement in accordance with the scheme of the Code. This will provide the user with a convenient and logical compilation of the ordinances of the town. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.020 - Municipal code established. 
This Code shall be known as the "Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code." It shall be sufficient to refer to this Code as the Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision of this Code. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting, or repealing provisions of this Code as an addition or amendment to, or repeal of, the Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code, or a portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.030 - Contents of Code. 
This Code shall consist of all ordinances adopted by the town council which are of a general and permanent nature. An ordinance relating to any of the following subject matters is not considered an ordinance of a general and permanent nature and need not be included within the Code: 
A.  The naming of streets or roads; 
B.  Granting, altering, or withdrawing franchises; 
C.  Levying real property taxes; 
D.  Calling an election; 
E.  Annexation proceedings; 
F.  Interim zoning measures; 
G.  Zoning and rezoning a particular parcel of property; 
H.  Such other ordinances of a special or particular subject matter which the council considers inappropriate to a compilation of laws of a general and permanent nature. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.040 - Outline of Code. 
A.  The ordinances of the town which are of a general and permanent nature shall be organized and grouped according to subject matter. 
B.  Ordinances which are adopted from time to time shall be classified, organized, and codified under the following scheme of titles: 
1.  General Provisions. 
2.  Administration and Personnel. 
3.  Revenue and Finance. 
4.  Reserved. 
5.  Business Taxes, Licenses, and Regulations. 
6.  Animals. 
7.  Reserved. 
8.  Health and Safety. 
9.  Public Peace, Morals, and Welfare. 
10.  Vehicles and Traffic. 
11.  Reserved. 
12.  Streets, Sidewalks, and Public Places. 
13.  Public Services. 
14.  Reserved. 
15.  Buildings and Construction. 
16.  Subdivisions. 
17.  Zoning. 
18.  Airport. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.050 - Definitions. 
A.  As used in this Code, unless a different meaning is apparent from the context or is specified elsewhere in the Code: 
"Calendar year" means from January 1st through December 31st of any given year. 
"Council" means the Town Council of the Town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Councilmember" means a person duly elected to the town council. 
"County" means the County of Mono, California, or the area within the limits of Mono County, and such territory outside Mono County over which the county has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provisions. 
"Fiscal year" means from July 1st of any given year through June 30th of the following year. 
Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders. 
"Goods" means and includes wares and merchandise. 
"Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the State of California, the ordinances of the Town of Mammoth Lakes, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
"May" shall be permissive. 
"Month" means a calendar month, unless otherwise expressed. 
"Must" is mandatory. 
Number. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural number shall include the singular. 
"Oath" means and includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Official Standard Time. Wherever certain hours are named in this Code, they mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the town. 
"Operate" means and includes carrying on, keeping, conducting, or maintaining. 
"Owner" applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
"Person" means and includes any person, joint venture, joint stock company, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, public corporation, town (except the Town of Mammoth Lakes), the County of Mono, any district in the County of Mono, the State of California, or the United States of America, or any department, agency, or political subdivision of the above, club, business, trust, organization, or the employee, manager, officer, agent, lessee, or servant of any thereof, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. 
"Personal property" includes, but is not limited to, money, goods, chattels, things in action, and evidences of debt. 
"Police," "police chief," or "chief of police" means the agency which performs the appropriate law enforcement function for the town, and the head of the agency or division thereof which at the time involved has responsibility for performing the police function for, or within the town. 
"Preceding" and "following" means next before and next after, respectively. 
"Property" includes real and personal property. 
"Quarterly" where used to designate a period of time, means the first three calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three calendar months. 
"Real property" includes, but is not limited to, land, tenements, and hereditaments. 
"Sale" includes, but is not limited to, any sale or exchange, barter, or offer for sale. 
Section and Subsection. "Section" means a section of this Code, unless some other source is specifically set forth. "Subsection" means a subsection of the section in which the term occurs, unless some other section is expressly set forth. 
"Shall" is mandatory. 
"State" means the State of California. 
"Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in the town which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the state. 
"Tenant" or "occupant" applies to a building or land, shall include, but not be limited to, any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tense, and the future tense includes the present tense. 
"Town" means the Town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Town manager" means the appointed official of the town who occupies the position as chief administrative officer of the town. 
"Writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement, or record is required or authorized by this Code, such notice, report, statement, or record shall be made in writing in the English language, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. 
"Written" means and includes printed, typewritten, mimeographs, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
B.  Words and phrases not defined in this Code are construed according to the approved usage of the language, or, when appropriate, by reference to definitions contained in state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.060 - Acts by deputies. 
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this Code expressly provided otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.070 - References to ordinances—Amendment. 
Whenever a reference in this Code is made to an ordinance, the reference shall apply to such ordinance of the town, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. Whenever any reference is made to any portion of this Code, or to any ordinance of this town, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections, and additions heretofore, now or hereafter added to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.080 - Statute of limitations. 
When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing ordinance or statute for acquiring a right or barring a remedy, or for any other purpose, has begun or run before this Code goes into effect, the time which has already run shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such limitation. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.090 - Maintenance of Code. 
Not less than one copy of this Code, certified by the town clerk, shall be kept on file in the office of the town clerk for examination and use by the public. Amendments to this Code shall be noted by ordinance number, or appropriate pages of this Code, and complete files of amendatory ordinances, indexed for ready reference, shall be maintained in the office of the town clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.100 - Interpretation of provisions. 
A.  The provisions of this Code and all proceedings under it are to be construed to effect its purposes and to promote justice. 
B.  All the provisions of this Code and all other town ordinances shall be interpreted to refer to the appropriate or designated officer or office of the town, and whether an ordinance, uniform code, statute, or other matter which is adopted by reference refers to any department, officer, employee, inspection, police, or other functions, unless the context requires otherwise, all references shall be to the appropriate or designated office, officer, department, agency, employee, or function of the town, or to the person or agency performing the function for the town. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.110 - Effect of Code on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendment by this Code of any ordinance or part of portion of any ordinance previously in effect in the town or within the territory currently comprising the town, shall in any manner affect the prosecution for the violation of any ordinance, which violation was committed prior to the effective date of this Code, nor be construed as a waiver of any tax, license, fee, or penalty on such effective due date and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such tax, license, fee, or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation of such ordinances, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required to be posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all vested rights and obligations pertaining to such ordinances shall continue in full force and effect. The repeal of any ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.120 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The town council hereby declares that it would have adopted this Code, and each section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.130 - Territorial limitation. 
This Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the town (i.e. the municipal boundary) and that territory outside of the town over which the town has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.140 - Local significance. 
All references in this Code to places, acts, persons, or things and all else in relation to this Code shall be construed to mean that the same are applicable to this town, whether the town is mentioned in each particular section or not. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.150 - Rules of construction. 
Unless the provisions of this Code otherwise specifically provide, or the context of this Code indicates to the contrary, the general provisions, rules of construction, and definitions as set forth in the following sections of this chapter shall govern the construction of this Code. The provisions of this Code, and all proceedings under it, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.160 - Violation of administrative provisions. 
The violation of, or the failure or omission to perform in accordance with any administrative provision of this Code by any officer or employee of the town shall generally not be considered a criminal act, but may be deemed a failure to perform the duties or to observe the rules or regulations of the department, office, commission, or board within the meaning of the civil service ordinances and rules and regulations of the town. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.170 - Notices—Service. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given, or may be given, under any provision of this Code or any provision of any Code adopted by reference by this Code or any provision of any ordinance or resolution of the town not included within this Code, such notice may be given as herein provided. Unless different or special provisions are otherwise specifically made in this Code or in some other applicable enactment, any such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified, or by deposit in the U.S. Mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at that person's last known residence or business address as the same appears in the public records and other records pertaining to the matters to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office or in the official receptacle thereof. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.04.180 - Notices—Proof. 
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of this town or by the affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury of any person over the age of eighteen years, which shows service in conformity with this Code or other provision of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
Chapter 1.12 - GENERAL PENALTY 
 
1.12.010 - Violations a misdemeanor or infraction. 
Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. No person shall violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Code, or other Codes adopted by the town. Every such person shall be guilty of a separate and distinct offense for each and every day, or any portion thereof, of which any violation of any provision of this Code is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Every act prohibited, declared unlawful, or declared substandard or unsafe and every failure to perform an act made mandatory shall constitute either a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the town attorney or district attorney, as applicable. Except as expressly provided otherwise in this Code or other applicable law, no act or omission constituting a violation of this Code shall be made lawful or otherwise permitted due to the town's intentional or unintentional failure to prosecute, cite, or otherwise address such violation. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.12.020 - Infraction. 
Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Code, including its adopted Codes, may be prosecuted for an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this Code shall be punished according to the fine schedule listed below: 
A.  One hundred dollars for a first violation; 
B.  Two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision (other than a building and safety code provision) within one year, and five hundred dollars for a violation of a building and safety code provision; 
C.  Five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same provision (other than a building and safety code provision) within one year, and one thousand dollars for a violation of a building and safety code provision. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.12.030 - Misdemeanor. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Code, including its adopted codes, may be prosecuted for a misdemeanor. 
B.  Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or both. 
C.  In the event a person is imprisoned for violation of any of the provisions of this Code, such person may be required to labor on public property or work within the town. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.12.040 - Civil action. 
The town attorney, by and at the request of the town council or town staff, may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin, or abate the condition(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this Code, including its adopted Codes, as provided by law. The town attorney, by and at the request of the town council or town staff, may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect a civil debt owing to the town. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.12.050 - Administrative citation. 
As set forth in Chapter 8.32, the town may issue an administrative citation for any violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.12.060 - Attorneys' fees and costs. 
A.  In any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding commenced by the town to abate a public nuisance, to enjoin violation of any provision of this Code, including its adopted codes, or to collect a civil debt owing to the town, if the town elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys' fees, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover all costs incurred therein, including reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of suit. In no action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the town in the action or proceeding. 
B.  The town shall be considered a prevailing party entitled to attorneys' fees under Subsection A when it can demonstrate that: 
1.  Its lawsuit was the catalyst motivating the defendant to provide the primary relief sought; 
2.  The lawsuit was meritorious and achieved its result by "threat of victory"; and 
3.  The town reasonably attempted to settle the litigation before filing the lawsuit. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
Chapter 1.16 - AUTHORITY OF TOWN OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO CITE FOR ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS 
 
1.16.010 - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Sections 853.5 and 836.5 of the Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.16.020 - Town officers authorized to issue notice to appear. 
Pursuant to Penal Code Sections 853.5 and 836.5, officers or employees of the town are authorized to issue notices to appear, subject to the limitations hereinafter provided, where there is reasonable cause to believe that the person cited has violated a statute or ordinance which such officer or employee, or his/her designee, has the duty to enforce. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.16.030 - Citation procedure. 
The officers and employees enumerated under Section 1.16.020 shall be authorized to issue notices to appear in court as prescribed by Chapter 5(c) of Title 5, Part 2 of the Penal Code, commencing with Section 853.5. If a violator to whom a notice is given fails to give his or her promise to appear, the individual giving the notice shall refer the notice to appear to the district attorney and shall not take the violator into custody. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.16.040 - Violation of promise to appear. 
Any person who willfully violates his or her written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge set forth in the notice to appear. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.16.050 - Warrant for arrest upon failure to appear. 
When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided in Section 853.6 of the Penal Code, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his or her arrest as provided in Section 853.8 of the Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.16.060 - Procedures and remedies. 
The procedures and remedies provided for this Code are cumulative of all other remedies provided by federal, state or local laws, ordinances, and regulations. The town may employ or utilize any or all such additional procedures or remedies, whether criminal, civil, administrative, or of another nature. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
Chapter 1.20 - TOWN SEAL 
 
1.20.010 - Adoption. 
A corporate seal for the town is adopted, the design of which seal shall be set out in Section 1.20.020. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.20.020 - Design. 
The seal adopted in Section 1.20.010 shall be circular in form and shall not be less than two inches in diameter. Around its circumference shall appear the words "Town of Mammoth Lakes, California," and, within, the words "Incorporated, 1984." 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.20.030 - Designation. 
The town seal is the impression made by that certain instrument retained and used by the town clerk for the purpose of attesting documents as acts of the town council. The general design and the details of the impression made by the town seal, shall correspond with the design designated in Section 1.20.020. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.20.040 - Use. 
The town seal, or any facsimile thereof, shall not be affixed to any document or writing, except by the town clerk or such assistants to the town clerk as may be authorized by him or her, and except for the purpose of attesting the document to be an act of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.20.050 - Omission—Effect. 
No act of the town council or document in evidence thereof shall be invalid by reason of the omission of the town seal. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.20.060 - Loss. 
In the event of loss of the instrument used for affixing the seal, the words "Seal, Town of Mammoth Lakes, California," written by the town clerk in attestation of a document, shall constitute the town seal. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
Chapter 1.24 - TOWN LOGO 
 
1.24.010 - Designation. 
The town logo is a design used for the purpose of symbolically representing the authority of the town and the capacity of its officers, employees, and agents as representatives of the town. The general design and the details of the town logo, excluding colors, shall correspond substantially with the following representation thereof: 
  
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.24.020 - Use in election campaign prohibited. 
No person shall use the town logo, or any facsimile thereof, for purposes of supporting or opposing the nomination or election of any town or other public office of himself or any other person, or for purposes of supporting or opposing any ballot measure, nor include such town logo on any writing distributed for purposes of influencing the action of the electorate, or any part thereof, in any election. This section shall not be applicable to writing issued by the town and pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.24.030 - Use by person other than officers and employees. 
No person other than an officer or employee of the town, shall use the town logo, or any facsimile thereof, for any purpose except to the extent authorized to do so. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.24.040 - Use for malicious or financial purposes prohibited. 
No person shall use the town logo, or any facsimile thereof, for any malicious purpose or for the purpose of personal financial gain. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.24.050 - Prior approval required for use. 
Use of the town logo, or any cut, facsimile, or reproduction thereof, by any person, corporation, or organization shall be subject to the prior approval of the town manager and the conditions herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.24.060 - Use of the words "Town of Mammoth Lakes." 
Use of the words "Town of Mammoth Lakes" in a manner that suggests to a reasonable person Town sponsorship and/or endorsement of an event or activity shall be subject to the prior approval of the town manager and the conditions herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.24.070 - Criteria for use of logo or the words "Town of Mammoth Lakes." 
The town manager may permit the use of the town logo, the words "Town of Mammoth Lakes," or any cut, facsimile, or reproduction thereof, by any person, corporation, or organization ("applicant") which meets all of the following criteria: 
A.  The use of the town logo, or any cut, facsimile, or reproduction thereof, or the words "Town of Mammoth Lakes" at an event or activity that is for town, local civic, local cultural, local charitable, or other nonprofit purpose. 
B.  The applicant agrees not to use the town logo, or any cut, facsimile, or reproduction thereof, or the words "Town of Mammoth Lakes" for commercial or other purposes not allowed above, unless specifically allowed by the town. 
C.  The applicant pays a fee, where applicable, and where set by resolution of the town council. 
D.  Samples shall be submitted of all documents, goods, and other materials upon which the town logo or the words "Town of Mammoth Lakes" are to be used and objective evidence of good quality and workmanship is submitted so that the use of the town logo or the words "Town of Mammoth Lakes" on said item does not discredit and impair the integrity of the logo or words in any manner. 
E.  The applicant shall grant to the town the right, at all reasonable times, to inspect any item upon which the town logo or the words "Town of Mammoth Lakes" are used in order that the town may verify that the logo and the words are being used in an unadulterated form. 
F.  Permission to use the town logo, the words "Town of Mammoth Lakes," or any cut, facsimile, or reproduction thereof, shall not be assignable. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.24.080 - Breach of conditions. 
If the applicant breaches any of the conditions set forth in Section 1.24.070, the town may serve written notice of such breach upon the applicant with request to cure or take appropriate affirmative action in good faith to cure the breach immediately. In the event the applicant fails to cure the breach to the satisfaction of the town, the town may terminate the user's permission to use the town logo, the words "Town of Mammoth Lakes," or any cut, facsimile, or reproduction thereof. Upon receipt of notice from town of such termination, the applicant shall cease the prior permitted use and take all steps reasonably necessary to restrain the improper use of the town logo, the words "Town of Mammoth Lakes," or any cut, facsimile, or reproduction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
1.24.090 - Approval of uses by town council. 
The town council reserves the right to approve uses of the town logo, the words "Town of Mammoth Lakes," or any cut, facsimile, or reproduction thereof, other than authorized in this chapter which promote the interests of the town. Such uses shall include, but not be limited to, use of the town logo, the words "Town of Mammoth Lakes," or any such cut, facsimile, or reproduction thereof, by town officials and on town vehicles, equipment, and stationery. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1(Exh. A), 8-1-2018)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 2.04 - TOWN COUNCIL 
Sections: 
 
2.04.010 - Meetings—Time. 
The regular meetings of the town council shall be held on the first Wednesday of each month at the hour of six p.m. local time and on the third Wednesday of each month at the hour of six p.m. local time. 
(Ord. 86-15 § 1, 1986: Ord. 7 § 1, 1984: prior code § 2.04.010)  
2.04.020 - Meetings—Place. 
The regular meetings of town council shall be held at the Council Chamber/Suite Z of the Minaret Village Mall, 437 Old Mammoth Road, Mammoth Lakes, CA 93546. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017; prior code § 2.04.020)  
2.04.030 - Meetings—Improper conduct. 
A.  Any person who engages in disorderly behavior that actually disrupts, disturbs, or otherwise impedes the orderly conduct of any town council meeting shall, upon an order by the presiding officer or a majority of the town council, be barred from further audience before the town council during that meeting, pursuant to the provisions of subdivision C, below. 
B.  Disorderly behavior under subdivision A may include, but is not limited to: speaking without being recognized by the presiding officer; continuing to speak after the allotted time has expired; speaking on an item at a time not designated for discussion by the public of that item; throwing objects; speaking on an issue that is not within the jurisdiction of the town council; and refusing to modify conduct after being advised by the presiding officer that the conduct is disrupting the meeting, or disobeying any other lawful order of the presiding officer or a majority of the town council. 
C.  Whenever practicable, the presiding officer or a majority of the town council shall give a warning to the person who is breaching the rules of conduct to comply with the rules of conduct hereunder. Such a warning shall articulate the rule of conduct being violated and the manner in which the person must comply. A warning shall not be necessary when it would not be effective under the circumstances, including when, but not limited to, the disturbance is such that the warning cannot be heard above the noise, or the conduct of the person or persons constitutes an immediate threat to public safety, such as the throwing of objects or specific threats of harm and the apparent, present ability to carry out such threats. A warning shall also not be necessary when an individual violates the rules of conduct more than once during a council meeting. 
D.  A person who engages in disorderly behavior shall be barred from the remainder of that council meeting by the presiding officer or a majority of the town council when that person: (i) continues the disorderly behavior after receiving a warning; or (ii) engages in disorderly behavior and no warning is practicable under the circumstances. 
The continuation of disorderly behavior after receiving a warning, repeated disorderly behavior during a council meeting, disorderly behavior at council meeting after council meeting, or disorderly behavior that is so significant that a warning cannot be given, constitutes the type of behavior that actually disrupts, disturbs or otherwise impedes the orderly conduct of a town council meeting. 
E.  The following conduct shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as a misdemeanor: (i) continuing to engage in disorderly conduct which disrupts, disturbs or otherwise impedes the orderly conduct of any town council meeting, after receiving a warning; (ii) refusing to leave a town council meeting after being directed to do so; or (iii) returning to a council meeting after being barred, removed or directed to leave such meeting as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017; prior code § 2.04.030)  
2.04.040 - Adoption of procedures. 
The town council shall, by resolution, adopt rules of procedure to govern the conduct of its meetings, any of its other functions and activities, and regulations pertaining thereto. 
(Prior code § 2.04.040)  
2.04.050 - Compensation and reimbursement. 
Pursuant to Section 36516 of the California Government Code, effective upon the beginning of the term of office for any member of the town council elected at the June 2014 election, or upon July 1, 2014, whichever occurs later, compensation shall be paid to each member of the town council in the amount of seven hundred thirty-five dollars per month. The compensation prescribed in this section is and shall be exclusive of any benefits provided to town councilmembers pursuant to Government Code Section 36516(d), and any amounts payable to each member of the council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of official duties for the town, and, accordingly, each member of the council shall receive reimbursement for such actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties for the town, pursuant to the provisions of Section 36514.5 of the Government Code, as amended from time to time. Such reimbursement shall be as established by a policy resolution adopted by the town council. 
(Prior code § 2.04.050) 
(Ord. No. 14-03, § 2, 4-16-2014)  
2.04.060 - Commission appointments. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this code or state law, all town board and commission appointments, except for ex officio members where applicable, shall be made by the town council. 
(Prior code § 2.04.060)  
2.04.070 - Appeals to council. 
A.  Except when an appeals procedure is otherwise specifically set forth in this code, any person excepting to the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit applied for or held by him pursuant to any of the provisions of the code, or to any administrative decision made by any official of the town, if the denial, suspension, or revocation of such permit or the determination of such administrative decision involves the exercise of such administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of the provisions of this code, may appeal in writing to the council by filing with the town clerk a written notice of such appeal. 
B.  No appeal may be taken to any such administrative decision made by an official of the town pursuant to any of the provisions of this chapter unless such decision to appeal has been first taken up with the department head concerned and with the town manager, and each such official has not adjusted the matter to the appellant's satisfaction. 
C.  No right of appeal to the council from any administrative decision made by an official of the town pursuant to any of the provisions of this code shall exist when such decision is ministerial and thus does not involve the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of the provisions of this code, whether the administrative decision involves the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit or any other administrative decision. Also, there shall be no such right of appeal with regard to law enforcement activities involving state law. 
(Prior code § 2.04.100)  
2.04.080 - Appeals notice—Time limit—Contents. 
A.  Any such notice of appeal shall not be acted upon unless filed within ten days after service of written notice of such action appealed from; provided, that if such notice of action has not been served in writing, the appellant may, within ten days after being apprised of such action, demand service of written notice thereof, and shall have ten days following such service in which to file the notice of appeal. 
B.  The notice of appeal shall set forth: 
1.  The specific action appealed from; 
2.  The specific grounds of the appeal; 
3.  The relief or action sought from the town council. 
In the event any notice of appeal fails to set forth any information required by this section, the town clerk shall return the same to the appellant with a statement of the respects in which it is deficient, and the appellant shall thereafter be allowed five days in which to perfect and refile the notice of appeal. 
C.  Except in those instances where an appeal is filed by the town manager or other public official in pursuance of official duties, the written notice of appeal from the action of an administrative official or from an administrative body of the town, as the case may be, shall be accompanied by a filing fee. The fee shall be established by the town master fee schedule. 
(Ord. 89-04 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 2.04.110)  
2.04.090 - Appeals—Hearings—Notices. 
Upon the timely filing of a notice of appeal in proper form, the town clerk shall schedule the matter promptly upon the town council agenda at a subsequent regular meeting and shall cause notice thereof to be given the appellant not less than five days prior to such hearing, unless such notice is waived in writing by the appellant. The town clerk shall also cause a copy of the notice of appeal to be transmitted to the official or body whose action has been appealed from. 
(Prior code § 2.04.120)  
2.04.100 - Appeals—Hearings—Procedure. 
A.  The town council at the hearing may limit participation in the hearing to the directly interested parties, or may allow participation by the public. Such public participation, however, shall only be appropriate when the council deems the same necessary in the public interest. If a hearing is ordered open to public participation, notice thereof shall be given by publishing notice of the same in a newspaper of general circulation in the town no less than five days prior to the date of such hearing, and by such other means as the town council deems necessary. 
B.  At the time of consideration of the appeal by the town council the appellant shall be limited to a presentation on the specific grounds of appeal and matters set forth in his or her notice of appeal and shall have the burden of establishing cause why the action being appealed should be altered, reversed or modified. The town council may continue the matter from time to time, and at the conclusion of its consideration may affirm, reverse or modify the action appealed from and may take any action that might have been legally taken in the first instance by the official or body from whose action the appeal has been taken. In ruling on the appeal the findings and action of the town council shall be final and conclusive on the matter. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017; prior code § 2.04.130)  
Chapter 2.08 - TOWN MANAGER 
Sections: 
 
2.08.010 - Office created—Term. 
The office of the town manager is created and established. The town manager shall be appointed by the town council wholly on the basis of administrative and executive ability and qualifications. The town manager shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the town council, subject to the terms of a binding employment agreement entered into between the town council and the town manager. 
(Ord. 00-06 § 1, 2000: prior code § 7.08.010)  
2.08.020 - Eligibility. 
No member of the town council shall be eligible for appointment as town manager until one year has elapsed after such council member has ceased to be a member of the town council. 
(Prior code § 2.08.020)  
2.08.030 - Compensation. 
The town manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the town council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the town as the council shall designate. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017; prior code § 2.08.030)  
2.08.040 - Expense reimbursement. 
The town manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of his or her official duties. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017; prior code § 2.08.040)  
2.08.050 - Designation of acting town manager. 
The deputy town manager shall serve as manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the town manager. In the event there is no assistant town manager to so act, the town manager, by a letter filed with the town clerk, shall designate a qualified town administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during his temporary absence or disability. The town council may appoint an acting town manager. 
(Ord. 89-04 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 2.08.050)  
2.08.060 - Powers and duties. 
The town manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the town under the direction and control of the town council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The town manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all affairs of the town which are under his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, and not as limitation thereon, he or she shall be expected to, and shall have the power to: 
A.  Enforce all laws and ordinances of the town and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the town council are faithfully observed; 
B.  Shall serve as the personnel director and appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the town except elective officers and the town attorney subject to all applicable personnel rules and regulations which may be adopted by the town council; 
C.  Control, order and give directions to all department heads who are subject to his or her appointment and removal authority, and to subordinate officers and employees of the town under his or her jurisdiction; 
D.  Conduct studies and effect such organization and reorganization of offices, positions, or units under his or her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the town's business. 
E.  Recommend to the town council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary; 
F.  Attend all meetings of the town council unless excused therefrom by the mayor individually or the town council as a whole, except when his or her removal is under consideration; 
G.  Prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the town council for its approval; 
H.  Direct and supervise all the purchasing activities of the town; 
I.  Keep the town council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the town; 
J.  Make investigations into the affairs of the town and any department or division thereof and any contract or the proper performance of any of the obligations of the town; and further, to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the town government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the town; 
K.  Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public properties which are under the control and jurisdiction of the town council; 
L.  Have the same authority as the mayor (as conveniences to the parties may dictate) to sign documents specified in Section 40602 of the Government Code of the state whenever such documents have been approved by the town council for execution by resolution, motion, minute order or other appropriate action; and 
M.  Perform such other responsibilities and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017; Ord. 89-04 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 2.08.060)  
2.08.070 - Relations with council. 
The town council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the town only through the town manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the town council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the town manager. For purposes of this section, "inquiry" means any and all communications short of giving orders, directions or instructions to any member of the administrative staff. Such member shall give all information reasonably requested by any councilmember. The town manager shall take his or her orders and instructions from the town council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the town council and no individual councilmember shall give any order or instructions to the town manager. The town council shall instruct the town manager in matters of policy. Any action, determination or omission of the town manager shall be subject to review by the town council. The town council may not overrule, change or modify any such action, determination or omission except by the affirmative vote of at least three members of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017; prior code § 2.08.070)  
2.08.080 - Departmental cooperation. 
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the town attorney to assist the town manager in administering the affairs of the town efficiently, economically and harmoniously. 
(Ord. 89-04 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 2.08.080)  
2.08.090 - Attendance at commission meetings. 
The town manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission, and any other commission, board or committee created by the town council, upon his or her own volition or upon direction of the town council. At such meetings which the town manager attends, he or she shall be heard by such commissions, boards, or committees as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof. He or she shall inform such member as to the status of any matter being considered by the town council, and he or she shall cooperate to the fullest extent with members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017; prior code § 2.08.090)  
2.08.100 - Removal. 
The removal of the town manager shall be effected only by a majority vote of the whole council; subject, however, to the provisions of Section 2.08.110 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 4, 2017, repealed the former §§ 2.08.100—2.08.160, which pertained to removal—method—notice; removal—hearing; removal—suspension pending hearing; removal—council discretion; removal—limitation; wilful misconduct—determination; and wilful misconduct—defined; enacted new §§ 2.08.100 and 2.08.110 as set out herein; and renumbered former § 2.08.170 as § 2.08.120. The former §§ 2.08.100—2.08.170 derived from the prior code §§ 2.08.100—2.08.170.  
2.08.110 - Removal of town manager after municipal election. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2.08.120 of this chapter, the town manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety days following any general municipal election held in the town at which election a member of the town council is considered by the voters of the town. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected member of the town council or a reorganized town council to observe the actions and ability of the town manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his/her office. After the expiration of the ninety-day period aforementioned, the provisions of Section 2.08.100 of this chapter, as to the removal of the town manager, shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017) 
Note— See note at § 2.08.100.  
2.08.120 - Agreements with council. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the town council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the town manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017) 
Note— See note at § 2.08.100.  
Chapter 2.12 - TOWN CLERK 
Sections: 
 
2.12.010 - Office—Created. 
The office of the town clerk is created and established. The town clerk shall be appointed by the town manager. 
(Ord. 89-04 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 2.10.010)  
2.12.020 - Compensation. 
The town clerk shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the town council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the town as the town council shall designate. 
(Prior code § 2.10.020)  
2.12.030 - Functions. 
A.  The town clerk shall have the powers, duties, and responsibilities granted to and imposed upon the office of the town clerk by the provisions of Chapter 2 of Part 3 of Division 3 of Title 4 of the Government Code of the state, other general laws of the state, the provisions of the code, and the ordinances and resolutions of the town council; provided, however, pursuant to the provisions of Section 40805.5 of the Government Code, the financial and accounting duties imposed upon the town clerk by Sections 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code shall be performed by the director of finance. 
B.  The principal functions of the town clerk shall be to: 
1.  Attend all meetings of the town council and be responsible for the recording and maintaining of a record of all the actions of the council; 
2.  Keep all ordinances and resolutions of the council in such a manner that the information contained therein will be readily accessible and open to the public. The town clerk shall attach to the original copy of each ordinance a certificate which shall state the date the ordinance was adopted and, as to an ordinance requiring publication, that the ordinance has been published or posted in accordance with law; 
3.  Keep all records of the council and of the office of the town clerk in such manner that the information contained therein will be readily accessible and open to the public until such time as any of the records may be destroyed, or reproduced and the original destroyed, in accordance with state law; 
4.  Serve as the official custodian of all town records; 
5.  Be the custodian of the seal of the town; 
6.  Prepare the council agendas, in conjunction with and under the direction of the town manager; 
7.  Perform the duties prescribed by the Elections Code of the state in conducting municipal elections; 
8.  Perform the duties imposed upon town clerks by the California Political Reform Act; 
9.  Be responsible for the publication of all the official advertising of the town; 
10.  Be responsible for the maintenance and distribution of the municipal code; 
11.  Process all claims filed against the town and its officers, agents or employees, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1 of Part 3 of Division 3 of Title 1 of the Government Code of the state and Chapter 3.16 of Title 3 of this code; and 
12.  Perform such other duties consistent with this code as may be required of the town clerk, by the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017; Ord. 89-04 § 1(part), 1989; prior code § 2.10.030)  
2.12.040 - Deputy town clerk. 
The town clerk shall have the authority and is authorized to appoint a deputy town clerk as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of the duties of the office. 
(Prior code § 2.10.040)  
Chapter 2.16 - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE 
Sections: 
 
2.16.010 - Office created. 
The office of the director of finance is created and established. The director of finance shall be the chief fiscal officer of the town. 
(Ord. 89-04 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 2.12.010)  
2.16.020 - Appointment. 
The director of finance shall be appointed by the town manager, and he or she shall serve at the pleasure of the town manager. The director of finance shall be qualified by sufficient technical accounting training, skill and experience to be proficient in the office and shall show evidence of executive ability. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017; Ord. 89-04 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 2.12.020)  
2.16.030 - Duties. 
The duties of the director of finance shall be as follows, to: 
A.  Serve as the chief fiscal officer of the town; 
B.  Assist and advise the administration and the town council in all matters pertaining to town finances; 
C.  Perform all financial and accounting duties imposed upon the town clerk by Sections 40802 through 40805 of the California Government Code; 
D.  Develop and maintain, in accordance with the state laws and the town ordinances and best accepted procedures, adequate financial records, reports and budgetary control of all receipts, disbursement and reserves of the town; 
E.  Supervise the keeping of current inventories of all property of the town departments, offices and agencies; 
F.  Prescribe and develop accounting forms, reports and procedure in conjunction with administrative needs and requests, and as required by law; 
G.  Audit all demands in accordance with Sections 3.24.020 through 3.24.060; 
H.  Prepare annually for budget purposes an estimate of revenues for the town manager, and assist the town manager in compiling the annual budget in accordance with the prescribed chart of accounts and accepted procedures; 
I.  Assist the town council and the town manager in formulating a long range financial plan and program; 
J.  Perform such purchasing duties as delegated to the director of finance by the town manager; 
K.  Perform such other duties related to administrative and general services for the municipal government and business operations as may be delegated to the director of finance by the town manager; 
L.  Serve as town treasurer; and 
M.  Have the authority to sign all documents specified in Sections 40602(a) and 40602(b) of the California Government Code. The authority to sign documents specified in Government Code Section 40602(b) is only authorized if signing of such documents is consistent with the town's purchasing ordinance. In addition, have the authority to sign any other documents approved by the town council for execution by resolution. 
N.  In addition to all other duties, the director of finance shall have the duties and obligations specified in the general laws of the state assigned to the office of the town treasurer and town tax collector. The director of finance shall be the town treasurer and town tax collector and, as such officers, shall have the authority to execute on behalf of the town any and all documents and instruments required to be executed as town treasurer or town tax collector. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017; Ord. 04-14 § 1, 2004; Ord. 89-04 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 2.12.030)  
Chapter 2.20 - TOWN ATTORNEY 
Sections: 
 
2.20.010 - Officer created. 
A.  The office of the town attorney is established. It shall consist of the town attorney and such assistants as may be authorized by the town council. The town attorney shall administer the office and be responsible for the successful performance of its functions. He or she shall serve under the direct supervision and control of the town council as its legal advisor. 
B.  The town attorney may retain or employ other attorneys, assistants or special counsel as may be needed to take charge of any litigation or legal matters or assist the town attorney therein; provided, however, that such employment or retainer shall be reported to the town council at the regular meeting thereof next following the employment or retainer. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017; prior code § 2.16.010)  
2.20.020 - Compensation. 
The town attorney shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the town council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the town as the town council shall designate. 
(Prior code § 2.16.020)  
2.20.030 - Functions. 
The functions of the office of the town attorney shall be to: 
A.  Advise the council and all town officials in all matters of law pertaining to their offices; 
B.  Furnish legal service at all meetings of the council, except when excused or disabled, and give advice or opinions on the legality of all matters under consideration by the council or by any of the boards and commissions or officers of the town; 
C.  Prepare and/or approve all ordinances, resolutions, agreements, contracts and other legal instruments as shall be required for the proper conduct of the business of the town and approve the form of all contracts and agreements and bonds given to the town; 
D.  Prosecute on behalf of the people cases for violation of town ordinances; and 
E.  Perform such other legal duties as may be required by the council or as may be necessary to complete the performance of the foregoing functions. 
(Prior code § 2.16.030)  
Chapter 2.24 - MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
2.24.010 - Municipal general election. 
The general municipal election of the town shall be held on the same day as the statewide primary election held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in June of even-numbered years. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017; Ord. 6 § 1, 1984)  
2.24.020 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 4, 2017, repealed § 2.24.020, which pertained to notice and derived from Ord. 6 § 3, adopted 1984).  
Chapter 2.28 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
2.28.010 - Appointments, terms, vacancies, and meetings. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided by law, or by ordinance or resolution, or unless by the very nature of a situation the provisions of this chapter may not be made applicable, all members of boards and commissions of the town shall be appointed by the town council. Newly established boards or commissions initial or revised appointments will be made on a staggered-term basis. The term of office shall be four years, with an expiration date of July 31 of even-numbered years. Interim vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term of the member replaced. 
B.  Any member of a board or commission of this town may be removed from office at any time, with or without cause, by a majority vote of the town council, except in cases where the mayor or town council are not the appointing authority (in which cases such regular appointing authority may exercise this power of removal). If a member absents himself/herself, without advance permission of the board or commission or of his/her appointing authority, from three consecutive regular meetings or from twenty-five percent of the duly scheduled meetings of the board or commission within any fiscal year, his/her office shall thereupon become vacant and shall be filled as any other vacancy. 
C.  Unless otherwise provided by law, or by ordinance or resolution of the town council, at least four members of any five-member board or commission; at least five members of any seven-member board or commission; or at least six members of any nine-member board or commission of the town appointed by the town council shall be initially, and during their incumbencies, bona fide residents and registered voters of the town. No such member shall at appointment or during his/her incumbency be an employee of the town. 
D.  All boards and commissions shall hold one regular meeting per month, at a time, date, and place designated by the board or commission unless a meeting(s) is cancelled by the chair or the majority of the board or commission for a lack of agenda items. Special meetings may be called by the chair or a majority of the board or commission members, provided notice has been given to all members at least forty-eight hours prior to the meeting. 
(Ord. 00-07 § 1, 2000; Ord. 99-08 § 1, 1999; Ord. 96-09 § 1, 1996; Ord. 93-01, 1993; Ord. 89-04 § 1 (part), 1989; prior code § 2.06.010) 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1(Exh. A), 11-4-09; Ord. No. 12-02, § 2(Exh. A), 6-6-2012)  
2.28.020 - Chairpersons and vice chairpersons—Selection—Terms. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, or by ordinances or resolution, each board and commission of the town shall annually at its first meeting held after June 30th, choose one of its number as chairperson and one as vice-chairperson. Each chairperson and vice-chairperson shall have authority and perform such duties as are commonly associated with their respective titles, or any may be specially prescribed by law or by the laws or other rules of the board or commission. Vacancies in either such position occurring prior to July 1st may be filled as in the first instance, and a new chairperson or vice-chairperson may be chosen at any time any majority vote of all members of the board or commission. 
(Prior code § 2.06.020)  
Chapter 2.32 - PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, adopted Dec. 19, 2012, effective Jan. 20, 2013, changed the title of Ch. 2.32 from "Planning Commission" to read as herein set out. 
 
2.32.010 - Created. 
There is created a planning commission for the town. It shall consist of five members appointed in the manner and for the terms prescribed in Sections 2.04.060 and 2.28.010. (Ord. 89-10 § 1(part), 1989: Ord. 4 § 1(part), 1984: prior code § 2.18.010) 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1(Exh. A), 11-4-09)  
2.32.020 - Chair—Committees—Staff. 
Designation of chairpersons for the commission shall be governed by Section 2.28.020. The commission shall be authorized to appoint and fix the membership of such number of standing and temporary committees as it may find expedient for the performance of its duties. The town manager may appoint an executive secretary and other staff and provide such compensation for their services as may be authorized by the town council and by the annual town budget of expenditures. 
(Ord. 4 § 1(part), 1984: prior code § 2.18.020)  
2.32.030 - Meetings—Rules of procedure. 
The planning commission shall hold one regular meeting each month at a time, date, and place designated by the commission unless a meeting(s) is cancelled by the chair or the majority of the commission for a lack of agenda items. Special meetings may be called by the chair or a majority of the commission, provided notice has been given to all members at least forty-eight hours prior to the meeting. A majority of commissioners shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. 92-10 § 1, 1992; Ord. 4 § 1(part), 1984: prior code § 2.18.030) 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 2(Exh. A), 6-6-2012)  
2.32.040 - Functions, powers and duties. 
The functions, powers, and duties of the planning and economic development commission shall be all those functions, powers, and duties of a planning commission and board of zoning adjustment as provided in Chapters 3 and 4 of Title 7 commencing with Section 65100 of the Government Code of the state (the planning and zoning law), as the same may be hereafter amended. The planning and economic development commission shall perform such other duties and functions as may be designated by the town council. All references in this Municipal Code to the public arts commission shall be deemed to mean the planning and economic development commission. 
(Ord. 4 § 1(part), 1984: prior code § 2.18.040) 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 2, 12-19-2012)  
2.32.050 - Rules—Records and meetings. 
The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, and shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. Minutes of the planning commission meetings shall be filed with the town clerk. 
(Ord. 4 § 1(part), 1984: prior code § 2.18.050)  
2.32.060 - Compensation. 
The members of the planning commission shall receive such reasonable compensation as is established from time to time by resolution of the town council and reimbursement for such traveling expenses and mileage as is set forth in the town's policies and procedures regarding traveling expenses and mileage, as the same are amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 4 § 1(part), 1984: prior code § 2.18.060)  
Chapter 2.40 - TOWN OF MAMMOTH LAKES RECREATION COMMISSION[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
 Prior ordinance history: Ords. 90-01, 90-03, 91-05, 91-09, 92-13, 93-11, 00-08 and 00-12. 
 
2.40.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, "commission" means the Town of Mammoth Lakes Recreation Commission. 
(Ord. 04-06 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1(Att. A), 9-22-2010)  
2.40.020 - Created. 
There is created within the town a recreation commission which shall consist of five regular voting members. Such members shall be appointed by the town council in the manner and for the terms prescribed in Sections 2.04.060 and 2.28.010. 
(Ord. 04-06 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1(Exh. A), 11-4-09; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1(Att. A), 9-22-2010; Ord. No. 12-02, § 2(Exh. A), 6-6-2012)  
2.40.025 - Composition. 
The commission shall be comprised of members who represent a broad spectrum of business and recreation interests. 
(Ord. 04-06 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1(Att. A), 9-22-2010; Ord. No. 12-02, § 2(Exh. A), 6-6-2012)  
2.40.030 - Vacancies—Vote. 
A vacancy or vacancies on the commission shall not impair the right of the remaining members to exercise the powers of the commission. Three members shall constitute a quorum. The commission shall act only upon a majority vote of the members present, but in no case shall action be taken unless a quorum is present. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1(Exh. A), 11-4-09; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1(Att. A), 9-22-2010; Ord. No. 12-02, § 2(Exh. A), 6-6-2012)  
2.40.040 - Powers and duties. 
Within the limitations provided by law, the Town of Mammoth Lakes Recreation Commission shall have the following powers and duties to: 
A.  Establish a schedule of regular meeting times and places; 
B.  Make recommendations to the department director (or designee) on funding priorities related to the departmental budget; 
C.  Serve as a liaison between the Town of Mammoth Lakes Recreation Commission and the recreation service providers and users, and the town; 
D.  Advise the town council and the town manager in all matters pertaining to parks, recreation, facilities, trails, special events and all other associated activities as prescribed by ordinances or by town council action; 
E.  Aid and participate in advancement and coordination of recreation services and events with other governmental agencies, non-governmental organizations, civic groups, volunteer organizations, and the private sector; 
F.  Formulate rules and regulations with respect to use and conduct in parks and other recreation areas; 
G.  Regularly review surveys provided by the department director (or designee) of the population of Mammoth Lakes, to insure that parks, recreation, facilities, trails, and special event needs are being met; 
H.  Determine the recreational capital needs of the community, after review of recommendations by the department director (or designee), for consideration in the town's master facility and capital improvement program process; 
I.  Conduct public hearings relating to land acquisition for recreation purposes, subject to town council approval; 
J.  Conduct public hearings and make decisions, subject to appeal to council, relating to park and facility design and development; 
K.  Provide input to contract professionals, in conjunction with the department director (or designee), to assist in the design of facilities approved for construction through the budget process, subject to appeal to council. 
(Ord. 04-06 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1(Att. A), 9-22-2010)  
2.40.050 - Receipt of donations. 
The commission shall be empowered to receive donations, contributions and other gifts to be used for recreation purposes, but all money so received by it shall be deposited in a special park and recreation account. After appropriation by the town council, money deposited in such an account shall be expended for park and recreation purposes, including but not limited to capital and operating expenditures. 
(Ord. 04-06 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1(Att. A), 9-22-2010)  
2.40.060 - Compensation. 
The members of the commission may receive such reasonable compensation as is established from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. 04-06 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1(Att. A), 9-22-2010)  
2.40.070 - Special requirements. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, or by ordinance or resolution of the town council, at least four members of the recreation commission shall initially, and during their incumbencies, be bona fide residents and registered voters of the town. To capture a "Sphere of Influence," one member of the commission may reside outside of the town boundaries but between June Lake and Tom's Place, inclusive. No such member shall at appointment or during his or her incumbency be an employee of the town. 
(Ord. 04-06 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1(Att. A), 9-22-2010; Ord. No. 12-02, § 2(Exh. A), 6-6-2012)  
Chapter 2.44 - PERSONNEL SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
2.44.010 - Adoption. 
In order to establish an equitable and uniform system for dealing with personnel matters, and to comply with applicable laws relating to the administration of the personnel process, the following personnel system is adopted. 
(Ord. 89-06 § 1, 1989)  
2.44.020 - Definitions. 
The terms used to administer the personnel system shall be defined in the personnel rules. 
(Ord. 89-06 § 2, 1989)  
2.44.030 - Administration. 
The town manager shall administer the town personnel system and may delegate any of the powers and duties to any other officer or employee of the town. The town manager shall: 
A.  Act as the appointing authority for the town; 
B.  Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules; 
C.  Prepare and recommend to the town council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules; 
D.  Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions to the plan; 
E.  Have the authority to discipline employees in accordance with this chapter and the personnel rules of the town; 
F.  Provide for the publishing and posting of notices for positions; the receiving of applications therefor; the conducting of interviews and performing any other duty that may be required to administer the personnel system. 
(Ord. 89-06 § 3, 1989)  
2.44.040 - Applicability of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions, and employments in the competitive service of the town, except: 
A.  Elected officers; 
B.  The town manager; 
C.  The town attorney and any assistant town attorneys; 
D.  Department heads with individual employment contracts; 
E.  Appointed members of boards, commissions, and committees; 
F.  Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical, or any other services; 
G.  All council appointed town officers; 
H.  Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as fire, flood, or earthquake which threatens life or property; 
I.  Limited term employees, which are not provided full-time employment throughout a fiscal year. The kinds of positions assigned to limited term include temporary, part-time, seasonal positions, or positions hired due to an emergency; and 
J.  Nothing in the personnel rules adopted pursuant to this chapter shall preclude the layoff of an employee holding any position primarily funded under a state or federal employment program or grant when such program or grant ends or expires. 
K.  At-will employees with individual employment contracts. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017; Ord. 89-06 § 4, 1989)  
2.44.050 - Amendment of rules. 
Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. 89-06 § 5, 1989)  
Chapter 2.48 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-01, § 2(Exh. B), adopted Jan. 4, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 2.48, §§ 2.48.010—2.48.100, and enacted a new Ch. 2.48 as set out herein. The former Ch. 2.48 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 85-05 § 1—10, adopted 1985. 
 
2.48.010 - General purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the town in the event of the emergency or disaster conditions hereafter referred to; the direction of the disaster organization; the coordination of the disaster functions of the town with the county and with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons; and to ensure the continuation of government in the event of an emergency. Furthermore, this chapter establishes the Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) and the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as the means for effectively preparing for or responding to emergencies in the town. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2(Exh. B), 1-4-2017)  
2.48.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, conditions or degrees of emergency or disaster have the meanings described in this section: 
"Disaster" means any occurrence that has resulted in property damage, deaths and/or injuries to a community. A disaster is a dangerous event that causes significant human and economic loss and demands a crisis response beyond the scope of any single agency or service. Disasters are distinguished from emergencies by the greater level of response required. 
"Emergency" means a dangerous event (for example, storm, flood, earthquake, landslide, mudslide, drought, fire, explosion or other catastrophe) that did not result in a request for state or federal assistance; a disaster requires resources beyond those that are available locally. 
"Local emergency" means the existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial limits of a town, city, county or city and county, caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of that political subdivision and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
"State of emergency" means the duly declared existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the state caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake, terrorism or threat of terrorism, or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy or conditions causing a "state of war emergency," which conditions, by reason of the magnitude, are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of any single town, city, county or city and county and require combined forces of a mutual aid region or regions or combat. 
"State of war emergency" means the condition which exists immediately, with or without a proclamation thereof by the governor, whenever this state or nation is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by the state of a warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy attack is probable or imminent. 
Other terms used herein shall have meanings as used in the California Emergency Services Act, codified at Government Code Section 8550 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2(Exh. B), 1-4-2017)  
2.48.030 - Emergency operations plan. 
The town's emergency services director shall be responsible for the final development of the town's emergency operations plan (EOP), which shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this town, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a disaster, emergency, local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency. The EOP shall provide for the structure of the town emergency services organization using concepts of SEMS and NIMS. The EOP shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the town council and shall be reviewed and modified as needed. The EOP shall be the primary guiding document used in the event of an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2(Exh. B), 1-4-2017)  
2.48.040 - Emergency services organization. 
A.  The town emergency services organization consists of all officers and employees of the town and its agencies, together with all volunteers and all groups, organizations and persons commandeered under the provisions of the California Emergency Services Act, this chapter, and the EOP, with all equipment and material publicly owned, volunteered, commandeered or in any way under the control of the aforementioned personnel in the conduct of disaster operations. 
B.  The emergency services organization shall be composed of such elements as are provided for in the town's EOP. 
C.  The officers of the town shall have the authority and duty to plan for mobilization, operation and support of that segment of the emergency services organization for which each is responsible as provided for in the town's EOP, and to conduct the activities thereof. 
D.  The emergency services organization will fill the role of disaster council as may be required for the purposes of state or federal relief, support, and/or reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2(Exh. B), 1-4-2017)  
2.48.050 - Emergency services organization—Activation. 
The town emergency services organization shall be activated and shall function as a disaster or emergency relief body only: 
A.  Upon the existence of a state of war emergency; 
B.  Upon the declaration by the governor of the state, or by persons authorized to act in his or her stead, of a state of emergency affecting and including the town; 
C.  Upon the declaration of a local emergency by the county board of supervisors, or by an official authorized to act in its stead, for the purpose of making such declaration affecting and including the town; or 
D.  Upon the declaration of a local emergency by the town council, or by an official designated in this chapter to act in its stead, for the purpose of making such a declaration. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2(Exh. B), 1-4-2017)  
2.48.060 - Emergency services director. 
The town manager shall be the emergency services director. In the town manager's absence or inability to act, the town manager shall automatically be succeeded as emergency services director by, in order: (i) the officials and persons designated for this purpose by the town manager; (ii) police chief; (iii) public works director; (iv) mayor; or (v) mayor pro-tem, on an as-needed basis. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2(Exh. B), 1-4-2017)  
2.48.070 - Emergency services director—Powers and duties. 
The emergency services director shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  To make key appointments, and to make all other appointments or delegate the making of the same, within the emergency services organization. 
B.  Declare a local emergency as described in the EOP and shall have the authority to make, issue, and enforce rules and regulations described therein, as necessary. 
C.  During the existence of a state of war emergency, or the declared existence of a state of emergency, local emergency, disaster, or emergency affecting the town, to: 
1.  Control and direct the activities of the town emergency services organization; 
2.  Use all town resources for the preservation of life and property and to reduce the effects of disaster; 
3.  Resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise in disaster operations; 
4.  Obtain vital supplies, equipment and other resources needed for the preservation of life and property by either binding the town for the fair value thereof or by commandeering the same; 
5.  Delegate to elected and appointed officials of the town such duties and authorities as may be deemed necessary; 
6.  Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by a condition declared an emergency as proved herein; 
7.  Require performance of emergency services by a town officer or employee and to command the aid of as many citizens of the town as may be necessary in the execution of required duties; and 
8.  Exercise complete authority over the town and to exercise all police power vested in the town by the state and federal constitution and general laws; 
9.  Designate alternative locations for the town's emergency operations center (EOC). 
D.  In addition to the powers granted herein, the director shall have such powers incidental to the performance of duties as shall be necessary to allow the town's EOP to be carried out, it being the intent of this chapter that the enumerated powers herein are not limitations upon necessary powers. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2(Exh. B), 1-4-2017)  
2.48.080 - Powers of succession. 
Each person who shall succeed to each position or office as provided in this chapter shall succeed to all the powers and duties of the office succeeded to immediately upon such succession. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2(Exh. B), 1-4-2017)  
2.48.090 - Orders by member of emergency services organization. 
During the existence of a state of war emergency or of a declared state of emergency, local emergency, disaster, or emergency affecting the town, each member of the town emergency services organization shall have authority to require that all persons shall follow reasonable orders given within the scope of necessary functions in order to execute the EOP of the town, and the willful failure of any person to follow such reasonable order or orders shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2(Exh. B), 1-4-2017)  
2.48.100 - Line of succession for council members. 
The line of succession for the position of mayor during a state of emergency, war emergency, local emergency or other condition of disaster, unless otherwise ordered by the town council, shall be mayor pro tempore followed by the remaining town council members in the order of their seniority, excluding standby successors who may have been appointed pursuant to Section 8638 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2(Exh. B), 1-4-2017)  
2.48.110 - Emergency operations center. 
Unless emergencies render the same impossible or unduly hazardous to safety, the town shall operate an emergency operations center (EOC) in the town council chamber. Alternative sites may be designated and/or developed as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2(Exh. B), 1-4-2017)  
2.48.120 - Prohibited acts during emergencies. 
It shall be a criminal act and a misdemeanor for any person during a state of emergency, war emergency, local emergency or other condition of disaster: 
A.  To willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the town emergency services organization in the enforcement of any law or lawful rule, regulation or order issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon such emergency services organization member by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  To do any act forbidden by any lawful rule, regulation or order issued pursuant to this chapter that could give, or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil life or property, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection of persons or property; or 
C.  To wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency services of disaster or civil defense agencies of the federal or state governments. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2(Exh. B), 1-4-2017)  
2.48.130 - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or executive order issued pursuant thereto is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2(Exh. B), 1-4-2017)  
Chapter 2.52 - JUDICIAL REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS 
Sections: 
 
2.52.010 - Administrative decisions—Judicial review—Time limits. 
The provisions of Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedures of the state are adopted by the town council, and the provisions are made applicable in the town as further specified in Section 2.52.020. 
(Prior code § 2.50.010)  
2.52.020 - Decisions to be affected. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to "decisions," as defined by Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state, that are final on and after August 20, 1984. 
(Prior code § 2.50.020)  
Chapter 2.56 - DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS TOWN PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
2.56.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "uniform town surplus ordinance." 
(Ord. 87-13 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 3.29.010)  
2.56.020 - Definitions. 
"Exchange," as used in this chapter, includes transactions wherein personal property not required for public use is transferred as consideration or partial consideration for the purchase of property by the town. 
(Ord. 87-13 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 3.29.020)  
2.56.030 - Disposal required. 
The town manager, or any other officer of the town designated by the town council, shall, in the manner provided in this chapter, dispose of personal property of the town not required for public use. 
(Ord. 87-13 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 3.29.030)  
2.56.040 - Notice of surplus property—Value estimate. 
The town manager shall give notice in writing to the purchasing agent (as defined in Section 3.20.030) that certain personal property is not required for public use and shall give an estimate of the market value thereof. 
(Ord. 87-13 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 3.39.040)  
2.56.050 - Market value less than one thousand dollars. 
If personal property which is not required for public use is of a market value less than one thousand dollars, the town manager may sell it without advertising for bids or may exchange it for other property. 
(Ord. 87-13 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 3.29.050)  
2.56.060 - Market value one thousand dollars or more. 
If personal property which is not required for public use is of a market value of one thousand dollars or more, the town manager shall sell or exchange it as provided by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. 87-13 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 3.29.060)  
2.56.070 - Disposition of proceeds. 
The amount received for any personal property sold or exchanged under the provisions of this chapter shall be credited to the town's general fund. 
(Ord. 87-13 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 3.29.070)  
2.56.080 - Town personnel prohibited from purchase. 
No town officer or employee shall purchase surplus town property sold in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 87-13 § 1 (part), 1987: prior code § 3.29.080)  
Chapter 2.60 - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Jan 4, 2017, amended Ch. 2.60 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 2.60, §§ 2.60.010—2.60.60, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 87-08 § 1(part), adopted 1987; and prior code § 10.90.010—10.90.060. 
 
2.60.010 - Application of section and general provisions. 
All money or property coming into the possession of an officer of the town, which becomes subject to disposition other than to the owner, finder, or other person entitled to the possession thereof, pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 1408, 1411, and Civil Code Sections 2080.2 or 2080.3 shall be disposed of as set out in this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017)  
2.60.020 - Lost and unclaimed property procedures. 
Pursuant to Civil Code Section 2080.6, the disposition of lost personal property shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article 1, Chapter 4, Title 6, Part 4, Division 3 of the Civil Code, except as otherwise provided herein. Such unclaimed property shall be held for a period of at least three months. Thereafter such property shall, after compliance with the publication provision of Civil Code Section 2080.3, be held for thirty days, during which period it may be claimed by the finder. If the property is not claimed by the owner or finder or the owner or finder fails to pay the cost of publication attributable thereto, title to said property shall vest in the town and it shall be disposed of as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017)  
2.60.030 - Bicycles and toys. 
Bicycles and toys in the possession of the chief of police may be disposed of by him or her pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 217, by turning such property over to any appropriate town department or agency for use in any program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency. Any such property not needed for said purpose may be disposed of pursuant to Civil Code Section 2080.5. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017)  
2.60.040 - Coins and currency. 
All coins and currency shall be deposited in the town treasury, but coins and currency having numismatic or other value greater than the face value thereof may be disposed of by the town manager or his or her designee in such manner as to obtain such greater value. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017)  
2.60.050 - Weapons. 
Any officer coming into possession of any weapon shall inform the police chief thereof, and upon request shall turn said weapon over to him or her. The police chief may retain for use by his or her department any weapon coming into his or her possession for disposition pursuant to this section. Any weapon not so retained by the police chief shall be disposed of in accordance with Penal Code Sections 12028 and 12030. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017)  
2.60.060 - All other property. 
Any property in possession of any town employee which such employee believes may be needed for public use shall be reported to the town manager and with his or her concurrence, may be retained by that officer for public use. All other such property shall be subject to disposition by the town manager as provided in Civil Code Section 2080.4, except for property which is believed to have no substantial value or believed to be unsaleable, which may be destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-4-2017)  
Chapter 2.64 - VALIDATION PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
2.64.010 - Authorized. 
The town, upon a majority vote of the town council, or in the alternative, in the sole discretion of the town manager, may utilize the validation procedures contained in Part 2, Title 10, Chapter 9 (beginning with Section 860 thereof) of the California Code of Civil Procedure for the purpose of validating any ordinance, resolution, motion, order, procedure, codification, decision, action or other matter of any and every kind cognizable by such validation procedures and which may be validated pursuant to Part 2, Title 10, Chapter 9 (beginning with Section 860 thereof), whether legislative, judicial or administrative, when such matters concern, effect or touch upon the town, its departments, officers, agents, servants, employees or representatives. 
(Ord. 89-09 § 1, 1989: prior code § 2.60.010)  
Chapter 2.72 - CLAIMS 
Sections: 
 
2.72.010 - Claims. 
A.  Authority. This chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 935 of the California Government Code. 
B.  Claims Required. All claims against the town for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Government Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this chapter, "claims") shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this chapter. 
C.  Form of Claim. All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910. 
D.  Claim Prerequisite to Suit. In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by the town prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of subsection B of this section. 
E.  Suit. Any action brought against the town upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Section 940 through 949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the town shall conform with the requirements of Sections 950 and 951 of the California Government Code. 
F.  Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies. Prior to seeking judicial relief with respect to a dispute regarding a tax, fee or other charge imposed by the town, an aggrieved taxpayer, fee payer or any other person must: (i) exhaust any administrative remedies specified by any other provision of this code or other applicable law, (ii) pay the full amount owed, including applicable penalties and interest, and (iii) present a claim for refund as required by any or all of Section 2.72.010 of this Code; the Government Claims Act, Government Code Section 910 et seq.; and other applicable law. 
(Ord. 06-10 § 1, 2006) 
(Ord. No. 10-10, 9-22-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-10, adopted Sept. 22, 2010, shall become effective and enforceable Nov. 8, 2010.  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.04 - TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - County authority—Real property. 
Pursuant to and in compliance with Section 51501 of the Government Code of the state of California, the assessment and tax collection duties which otherwise might be performed by a town assessor and tax collector, respective to real property, secured and unsecured, are transferred to the assessor and tax collector of the county of Mono. This section shall not apply to any other town tax. 
(Ord. 89-18 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.20.010)  
Chapter 3.08 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "uniform local sales and use tax ordinance." 
(Ord. 3 § 1, 1984)  
3.08.020 - Purpose. 
The town council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes; to: 
A.  Adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  Adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  Adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adopts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires that least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
D.  Adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting town sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 3 § 4, 1984)  
3.08.030 - Collection—Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the town shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this town shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 3 § 5, 1984)  
3.08.040 - Rate designated. 
The rate of sales and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Ord. 3 § 2, 1984)  
3.08.050 - Operative date. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be operative on October 1, 1984. 
(Ord. 3 § 3, 1984)  
3.08.060 - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the town at the rate stated in section 3.08.040 and after the operative date. 
(Ord. 3 § 6, 1984)  
3.08.070 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 3 § 7, 1984)  
3.08.080 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this town of tangible personal property purchases from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this town at the rate stated in Section 3.08.040 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 3 § 8, 1984)  
3.08.090 - State law—Adoption. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 3 § 9, 1984)  
3.08.100 - State law—Substitution of terms. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this town shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when "state" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury or the Constitution of the state of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the town, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter, the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and the substitution shall not be made for "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 3 § 10, 1984)  
3.08.110 - Seller's permit not required when. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 3 § 11, 1984)  
3.08.120 - Exclusions—Exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city or town and county, county or city or town in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city or town in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the United States or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the law of the state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 3 § 12, 1984)  
3.08.130 - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 3 § 13, 1984)  
3.08.140 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this town, or against any officer of the state or this town to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 3 § 14, 1984)  
3.08.150 - Violations—Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 3 § 15, 1984)  
Chapter 3.12 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as "the uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance of the town of Mammoth Lakes." 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings set forth in this section: 
"Enforcement charges" means all costs and expenses including, but not limited to, administrative costs and enforcement costs including the value of staff time, accounting fees, expert witness fees, attorney's fees and court costs. 
"Fraud" has the meanings contained in Sections 1709 and 1710 of the California civil code. 
"Mobile home" shall be construed as defined in Section 18001 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, and the provisions of this chapter shall apply only to such mobile homes as are outside of a mobile home park as defined in the Health and Safety Code, and further, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the renting of a mobile home when the occupant is the owner or operator of the mobile home or his employee. 
"Occupancy" means the use, possession or the right to use or possession of any portion of any transient occupancy facility for overnight sleeping, lodging, dwelling or similar purposes. 
"Operator" means the person who is a legal owner of the transient occupancy facility. "Operator" also means a person who has the legal right to possession of the premises occupied by transients. "Operator" also means any person who, through lease, mortgage, contract, license or similar legal right obtains any right to receive or collect any moneys as rent for the occupancy of the transient occupancy facility by transients. "Operator" also means any manager, agent, representative or other similar person acting on the authority of an owner of a transient occupancy facility or on the authority of any person who by reason of lease, mortgage, contract, license or similar legal right to receive or collect rent for the occupancy of the transient occupancy facility by transients, which agent, manager or representative has been authorized to receive or collect rent for the occupancy of the transient occupancy facility by transients. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by any operator of a transient facility shall be deemed to be in compliance by all operators of such transient occupancy facility. 
"Person" means any person or any group or combination of people acting in a business capacity and shall be considered to include, but not be limited to, the following: individual; firm; partnership, whether limited or general; corporation; real estate or business trust; syndicate; joint tenants; tenants in common; receiver or trustee; unincorporated association; joint venture; joint stock company. 
"Rent" means the charge for the occupancy of any space in any transient occupancy facility and for all services rendered in connection therewith, including but not limited to cleaning services, in the form of money, goods, services or similar payment, including, but not limited to, all receipts, cash, credits, goods, property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction whatsoever, provided that bona fide charges for food and beverages actually consumed, and any amounts paid by the transient occupant which are separately identified on the invoice, receipt, or statement of charges as representing a tourism business improvement district assessment, shall not be considered "rent." The town council may, at any time, remove and/or repeal the exception for tourism business improvement district assessments. 
"Tax collector" means the person designated by the town manager or town council of the town of Mammoth Lakes to administer this chapter and oversee the collection of transient occupancy taxes. 
"Transient" means any person who exercises, or is entitled to exercise, occupancy, whether by agreement (oral or written), concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, payment of rent or similar entitlement, for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any person so occupying space in a transient occupancy facility shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired, unless there is a lease agreement or month-to-month rental agreement in writing between the operator and the transient, providing for a period of occupancy in excess of thirty days. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior to and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter and any amendments hereto, may be considered by the tax collector. 
"Transient occupancy facility" means any place, space or structure, or portion of any place, space or structure, which is or may be occupied, or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for purposes of sleeping, lodging or similar use in conformance with the town's zoning regulations, and shall include, but not be limited to the following: hotel, hotel-motel, lodge; inn; dude ranch; apartment; apartment unit; condominium; condominium unit; triplex; duplex; single-family residence; cooperative; mobile home; dormitory; roominghouse; camping site; space where camping or remaining overnight is permitted at a campground, recreational vehicle park; or other similar structure, facility or space. "Transient occupancy facility" shall not include any of the following: any hospital, sanitarium, medical clinic, convalescent home, rest home, owner-occupied time share estate, owner-occupied time share use, home for aged people, foster home or other similar facility operated for the care or treatment of human beings; any asylum, jail, prison, orphanage or other facility in which human beings are detained or housed under legal restraint; housing owned or controlled by any educational institution and used exclusively by students and employees of such educational institutions, and officially recognized or approved by it; any housing operated or used exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes by an organization having qualified for exemption from property taxes under the laws of the state of California; any housing owned by a governmental agency and used to house its employees or for governmental purposes; any camp as defined in the Labor Code or other housing furnished by any employer exclusively for housing that employer's employees. 
"Primary transient occupancy facility" means any transient occupancy facility which has been designated by the operator as being the primary facility. 
"Secondary transient occupancy facility" means any transient occupancy facility of an operator other than that transient occupancy facility which has been designated by the operator as being the primary facility. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 1(part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 3(Exh. A), 6-15-2011; Ord. No. 11-03, § 3(Exh. A, 1, 2), 11-30-2011; Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 8-7-2013)  
3.12.030 - Operators—Duties. 
Operators shall: 
A.  Assist the town police department with respect to law enforcement problems that might arise in conjunction with the occupancy of the operator's transient occupancy facility; 
B.  Allow inspection of the premises at any time by inspectors of the town and by inspectors of the bureau of fire prevention of the Mammoth Lakes fire protection district as provided by law to determine the compliance of the premises with the codes and ordinances of the town and the codes and ordinances of the Mammoth Lakes fire protection district; 
C.  Take all reasonable and necessary action to assure that transients occupying that operator's transient occupancy facility do not interfere with employees of the town in carrying out their duties; 
D.  Ensure that there is adequate parking space(s) available for transients occupying the transient occupancy facility, pursuant to the requirements of this code. If the transient occupancy facility books rooms with persons who utilize tour bus(es), the operator of the facility shall be required to furnish, or make suitable arrangements for furnishing, adequate parking for the tour bus(es) utilizing either onsite or offsite facilities at locations where tour bus parking is permitted; 
E.  Maintain a set of books and records, which shall contain all of the information necessary for the computation of any tax due pursuant to this chapter, notify the tax collector of the location of such books and records, and permit inspection of such books and records during normal working hours. Upon ten calendar days' written request by the tax collector, such records shall be available at operator's expense, in the town, during normal working hours; 
F.  Accept service of process for the operator's alleged violation of this chapter; 
G.  Not operate any transient occupancy facility in violation of any provision of this chapter; 
H.  Post faithful performance or similar bonds in such amount as may be required by the tax collector. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.040 - Tax imposed. 
For the privilege of occupancy of any transient occupancy facility, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of thirteen percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the town which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the tax collector. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the transient occupancy facility at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, the unpaid tax shall be paid to the operator at the rate of thirteen percent. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the transient occupancy facility, the tax collector may require that such tax be paid by the transient to the tax collector. 
(Ord. 06-07 § 3, 2006: Ord. 05-04 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-11 § 1, 1996; Ord. 96-08 § 1(part), 1996; Ord. 94-10 § 1, 1994; Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.050 - Operator's duties. 
A.  Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a transient occupancy facility shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. 
B.  Each operator shall have a contact person in Mammoth Lakes who is available at all times to respond to questions and issues arising out of the transient occupancy. Any contact person meeting the criteria of Chapter 5.04 requiring a business license must obtain a business license. Any vendor or contractor supplying services to a transient occupancy facility shall obtain a business license if required by Chapter 5.04. Upon request from the town, an operator shall furnish the names of each vendor or contractor supplying services to a transient occupancy facility. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991) 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 3(Exh. A), 6-15-2011; Ord. No. 11-03, § 3(Exh. A, 3), 11-30-2011)  
3.12.055 - Posting requirements. 
A.  Any operator transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the town shall keep the transient occupancy tax certificate(s) posted in a conspicuous place in such place of business, and shall post the information listed in subsection B in a conspicuous place within each transient occupancy facility operated by the operator. 
B.  Postings shall include a copy of the operator's business tax certificate, transient occupancy tax certificate, the maximum legal occupancy limit and maximum rate charged to each transient occupancy facility, phone number for the owner of the transient occupancy facility and for a local contact who will be available to deal with questions and issues arising from the transient occupancy, the transient occupancy facility's address and phone number, waste disposal handling information, and emergency information. 
(Ord. No. 11-03, § 3(Exh. A, 4), 11-30-2011)  
3.12.060 - Registration. 
Each operator of a transient occupancy facility shall register the transient occupancy facility with the tax collector prior to commencing business. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an operator without: (i) having first procured a primary transient occupancy tax registration certificate or a secondary transient occupancy tax registration certificate; (ii) paying the tax prescribed in this title; and (iii) complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter. Upon proper registration, the tax collector shall issue a primary transient occupancy tax registration certificate or a secondary transient occupancy tax registration certificate to the operator, in accordance with the provision of this chapter. The fees for a primary transient occupancy tax registration certificate and for a secondary transient occupancy tax registration certificate shall be established by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991) 
(Ord. No. 11-03, § 3(Exh. A, 5), 11-30-2011)  
3.12.070 - Multiple transient occupancy facilities. 
A.  Any operator who operates more than one transient occupancy facility shall be required to obtain a primary transient occupancy tax registration certificate, which shall be issued to the applicant for the transient occupancy facility designated by the applicant as the primary transient occupancy facility. Every other transient occupancy facility of the operator shall be considered a secondary transient occupancy facility. 
B.  The tax collector shall issue to the operator of more than one transient occupancy facility a secondary transient occupancy tax registration certificate for each secondary transient occupancy facility. 
C.  A secondary transient occupancy tax registration certificate issue under this section does not constitute a primary transient occupancy registration certificate and confers upon the holder no right or privileges in addition to those acquired by the holder of a primary transient occupancy registration certificate. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.075 - Failure to register. 
A.  Any operator who fails to timely obtain a transient occupancy registration certificate shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to all of the provisions of Section 312.280, in addition to being subject to all other remedies provided by law. It shall be a separate violation of this chapter for failure to timely obtain a transient occupancy registration certificate for each month, or portion of each month, during which the operator is required to hold such certificate. 
B.  In addition to the foregoing, the unregistered operator shall be liable to the town for taxes, penalties, interest and enforcement charges, imposed by this chapter which are imposed upon operator's holding a duly issued transient occupancy registration certificate. Such taxes, penalties, interest and enforcement charges, may be collected by the town as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
C.  When any person shall by use of any promotional media—including but not limited to print, audio, visual or electronic media including web sites, web marketing, advertising or promotional websites, social media, or traditional promotional methods, including but not limited to signs, circulars, bills, cards, telephone books, or newspapers—promote, market, advertise, hold out or represent that they or an entity they own, operate, manage, or control can or will rent a transient occupancy facility, and such person fails to deny by a sworn statement given to the collector that they are not acting as an operator, after being requested to do so by the collector, these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person is acting as an operator. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991) 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 3(Exh. A), 6-15-2011; Ord. No. 11-03, § 3(Exh. A, 6), 11-30-2011)  
3.12.080 - Reporting and remitting. 
A.  Operators who have remitted to the town taxes, penalties and interest imposed upon this chapter in an amount less than ten thousand dollars during the entire prior calendar year shall make their return and remittance on or before the last day of the month following the close of the immediately preceding calendar quarter or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax collector. If: (i) the last day of the month following the close of the immediately preceding calendar quarter; or (ii) the deadline established at the close of a shorter reporting period, is a Saturday, Sunday or a federal holiday, the return and remittance will be considered timely filed if received the next working day. 
B.  All other operators shall make their return and remittance on or before the last day of the month following each and every month, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax collector. If: (i) the last day of the month following a particular month; or (ii) the deadline established at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax collector, is a Saturday, Sunday, or a federal holiday, the return and remittance will be considered timely if received the next working day. New operators and operators who have incomplete prior calendar year remittance histories shall be placed on a monthly or quarterly remittance schedule based upon estimated annual remittances for similar size units as determined by the tax collector. 
C.  At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be paid to the tax collector. The tax collector shall establish a shorter reporting period for a certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax or due to previous noncompliance with this chapter by the operator, and the tax collector may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due within fifteen days upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the town until payment thereof is made to the tax collector. The tax collector may, in his or her discretion, require that a separate trust account be established at a financial institution of his choice, the balance of which shall be payable to the town, if he deems it necessary in order to insure remittance of the tax. 
D.  Each return filed pursuant to this chapter shall include the following information, as well as such other information as the tax collector may deem reasonably necessary for the enforcement of this chapter: 
1.  The number of transient occupancy facilities available during the reporting period; 
2.  The number of transient occupancy facilities occupied at any time during the reporting period; 
3.  The number of nights of paid occupancy for each transient occupancy facility; 
4.  The number of room nights reserved, or confirmed sales, presented on a monthly basis for each of the six months following the reporting period; 
5.  And other statistical breakdowns as requested by the tax collector in the regular reporting form. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 1(part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 11-03, § 3(Exh. A, 7), 11-30-2011)  
3.12.090 - Original delinquency. 
Any operator who fails to pay any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay, in addition to such tax and any interest such tax may accrue, an original delinquency penalty of ten dollars or fifteen percent of the amount of the tax, whichever dollar amount is greater; provided, however, that any operator who has not been late in paying any tax imposed by this chapter within the preceding three calendar years shall, upon application of the operator to the tax collector within fifteen days after the date such tax first became due, pay an original delinquency penalty of ten dollars or a total of one percent per day of the amount of tax due for each day such tax is delinquent, whichever dollar amount is greater. Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this chapter, shall become part of the tax required to be paid. Interest shall accrue on all unpaid taxes until paid. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town council may by resolution specify that interest shall accrue on all unpaid taxes until paid, but not on penalties imposed on delinquent amounts. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 1(part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 15-07, § 2, 10-7-2015)  
3.12.100 - Continued delinquency. 
A.  Any operator who fails to pay any delinquent tax, penalties and interest on or before the lapse of thirty days following the date on which the tax first became delinquent, shall pay an additional delinquency penalty, over and above that provided in Section 3.12.090, of ten dollars or fifteen percent of the amount of the tax, penalties and interest then due, whichever is greater. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town council may by resolution specify that the delinquency penalty shall be the greater of ten dollars or fifteen percent of the amount of the tax then due, excluding penalties and interest. 
B.  If the tax, penalties, and interest are not paid within sixty days from the date on which the tax became delinquent, the tax collector shall give written notice to the operator in whose name the transient occupancy registration certificate was issued of his intention to cancel the certificate after fifteen days from the date on the notice should the taxes, penalties, and interest then due not be paid. Written notice shall be deemed given when a copy of same is enclosed in a sealed envelope with postage thereon fully prepaid and certified in the United States mail and addressed to that address given by the operator in the application for the certificate. The transient occupancy registration certificate and the operator's business license tax certificate shall be canceled upon lapse of the fifteen days provided in the notice, if all taxes, penalties, and interest are not paid in full within the fifteen-day period. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991) 
(Ord. No. 14-11, § 2A, 12-3-2014; Ord. No. 15-07, § 2, 10-7-2015)  
3.12.105 - Adjustment of penalty and interest. 
Notwithstanding Sections 3.12.090 and 3.12.100, if the tax collector determines that any of the requirements established by the town for notifying an operator of a transient occupancy facility that the operator is delinquent in remitting a return and paying tax as required by this chapter have not been met, the tax collector may reduce the penalty and interest due on an account to only one month of penalties and interest. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 2, 3-15-2017)  
3.12.110 - Fraud. 
If the tax collector determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to all other penalties provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.120 - Interest. 
In addition to the penalties imposed by this chapter, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, inclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first become delinquent, until paid. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town council may by resolution specify that interest shall accrue on all unpaid taxes until paid, but not on penalties imposed on delinquent amounts. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991; Ord. No. 15-07, § 2, 10-7-2015)  
3.12.130 - Collection and report failure—Tax collector determination. 
If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax imposed by this chapter and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax collector shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax collector procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by an operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest, penalties and enforcement charges provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax collector shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid and certified, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax collector for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest, penalties and enforcement charges, if any, determined by the tax collector, shall become final and conclusive immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax collector shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this chapter to the operator to show cause at the time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed at such tax, interest, penalties and enforcement charges. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest, penalties and enforcement charges should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax collector shall determine the proper amount to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this chapter of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest, penalties and enforcement charges, including enforcement charges related to the hearing. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.12.140. On good cause, the transient occupancy registration certificate of the operator may be suspended by the tax collector pending the hearing as herein provided or any appeal thereof. No enforcement charges shall be imposed if no tax, interest or penalties are found to be due. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.140 - Appeal. 
A.  Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax collector with respect to the amount of such tax, interest, penalties, enforcement charges or suspension, if any, may appeal to the town council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the town council within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due; provided, that he has completed all administrative procedures and sought all administrative remedies in Section 3.12.130 including appearance in person or through legal counsel at all administrative hearings. The town council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the clerk of the town council shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the town council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellate in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
B.  No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the town or an officer thereof, to prevent or enjoin the collection of taxes sought to be collected pursuant to this chapter and payment of all tax, interest and penalties shall be required as a condition precedent to seeking judicial review of any tax liability. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991) 
(Ord. No. 10-10, 9-22-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-10, adopted Sept. 22, 2010, shall become effective and enforceable Nov. 8, 2010.  
3.12.150 - Records required. 
It shall be the duty of every operator to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax, interest, penalties and enforcement charges, as may have been due to the town, which records the tax collector or his agent shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. All tax returns and information furnished by any operator pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential and shall not be open to the public inspection nor the specific contents thereof disclosed by any officer or employee except: (i) as necessary in the performance of official duty pursuant to this chapter; (ii) in the course of proceedings, hearing or litigation involving the existence or amount of tax, interest, penalties or enforcement charges; (iii) to the extent deemed advisable or necessary in connection with the issuance of bonds or completion of other financing arrangements by the town; or (iv) with the written consent of the operator or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 17-06, § 2, 8-16-2017; Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.160 - Refunds—Authorized when. 
Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the town under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in Sections 3.12.170 and 3.12.180, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax collector within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax collector. Persons claiming refunds shall provide all information required by the tax collector to determine the validity of refunds claimed. No refund shall be paid unless the claim has been reviewed and the entitlement to the refund determined to be valid by the tax collector. The tax collector shall not refund any tax, interest or penalties if said tax, interest or penalties have previously been determined as final by the town council. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 1(part), 1993)  
3.12.170 - Refunds—Credit against taxes. 
Any operator may claim or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax collector that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.180 - Refunds—Repayment to transient. 
A transient may obtain a refund of tax, penalty or interest overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the town by filing a claim in the manner provided in Section 3.12.160, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax collector, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax collector that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 1(part), 1993)  
3.12.190 - Refunds—Records required. 
No refund shall be paid under the provisions of Sections 3.12.160 through 3.12.180 unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto by clear and convincing evidence. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.200 - Tax responsibility. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the town. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the town shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the town. Any person owing money to the town under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the town for the recovery of such amount, including interest, penalties and enforcement charges. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.210 - Current business tax certificate required. 
A current business tax certificate for each primary transient occupancy facility must exist before issuance of any transient occupancy registration certificate. A current business tax must be paid for each secondary transient occupancy facility before issuance of any secondary transient occupancy registration card. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 1(part), 1993)  
3.12.220 - Delinquency—Certificate required. 
If any tax, interest or penalty imposed under this chapter is not paid by the last day of the month succeeding the delinquency date, the tax collector may file no sooner than ten days after the mailing of the notice required in subsection B of this section, in the office of the county clerk, without fee, a certificate specifying as follows: 
A.  The fact that a notice of intent to file the certificate had been sent, be certified mail, to the operator, at his last known address, not less than ten days prior to the date of the certificate. 
B.  The fact that the notice required in subsection A of this section set forth the following information: 
1.  The name of the transient occupancy tax registration certificate holder; 
2.  The fact that judgment will be sought in the amount of the tax, penalty, interest and enforcement charges that will remain unpaid at the time of the filing of the certificate; 
3.  The fact that, upon the issuance and recordation of such judgment, additional penalties and interest will continue to accrue at the rate prescribed by law, and that any bond premium posted or other costs to enforce the judgment shall be an added charge; 
4.  The fact that a recording fee of five dollars per page will be required to be paid for the purpose of the recordation of any release of the judgment lien. 
C.  The amount for which judgment is to be entered. 
D.  The fact that there has been compliance with all provisions of this chapter in the computation and the levy of the tax, penalty, interest and enforcement charges. 
E.  The fact that a request is therein made for the issuance and entry of judgment against the transient occupancy tax registration certificate holder. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.230 - Certificate filing—Entry of judgment. 
The county clerk, immediately upon the filing of the certificate, shall enter a judgment for the town against the transient occupancy tax registration certificate holder in the amount of the tax, penalty, interest and enforcement charges set forth in the certificate. The county clerk may file the judgment in a looseleaf book entitled "Town of Mammoth Lakes Transient Occupancy Tax Judgments." 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.240 - Lien on property. 
An abstract or a copy of the judgment shall be recorded, without fee, in the office of the county recorder. From the time of the recording, the amount of the tax, penalty, interest and enforcement charges set forth constitutes a lien upon all property of the transient occupancy tax registration certificate holder, owned by him or afterward acquired by him, and before the lien expires. The lien has the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien and continues for ten years from the date of the recording unless sooner released or otherwise discharged. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.250 - Penalty—Additional. 
In addition to any penalty or fee imposed pursuant to this chapter a penalty equal to the amount of any bond premium posted or other costs incurred to enforce the judgment entered pursuant to this chapter shall be imposed. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.260 - Execution upon judgment. 
Execution shall issue upon the judgment upon request of the tax collector in the same manner as execution may issue upon other judgments, and sales shall be held under such execution as prescribed in the Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.270 - Satisfaction of judgment—Removal of lien. 
A.  The judgment is satisfied and the lien removed when, but not before, the certificate of release or discharge from the judgment lien is recorded in the office of the county recorder. In addition to the judgment amount, and any additional penalty or interest accruing on the judgment, the tax collector shall collect the recording fee of five dollars per page for the recording of the lien release or discharge document and transmit it to the county recorder together with the documents for release or discharge. 
B.  The judgment is also satisfied and the lien removed when, but not before, the tax is legally canceled and a release or discharge from the judgment lien is recorded in the office of the county recorder. A recording under this subdivision shall be made without fee. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.280 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person, including any transient, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and may be punished accordingly. The foregoing notwithstanding, in the discretion of the district attorney or the town attorney, upon a showing of gravity of offense, any violation of any provision of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor. 
B.  Other than delinquent tax remittal addressed in Sections 3.12.080 through 3.12.120, any person, including any transient, who violates any provision of this chapter may be subject to administrative fines as set forth in Chapter 8.32. Any violation of any provision of this chapter which occurs on more than one day shall constitute a separate violation for each day or portion thereof during which such violation occurs. 
C.  1.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax collector, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
2.  Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due as required by this chapter to be made is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
D.  Any transient occupancy facility operated without an approved transient registration certificate or without collecting and paying transient occupancy taxes to the town as required in this chapter is a public nuisance and may be abated as provided for in Chapter 8.20. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991) 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 3(Exh. A), 6-15-2011; Ord. No. 12-01, § 3, 3-7-2012)  
3.12.300 - Registration records. 
At or prior to the time of registration, an operator shall maintain a record of the name and address of the transient occupant to whom every transient occupancy facility unit is let, together with a record of the number of persons who are allowed to occupy the transient occupancy facility unit. The operator shall retain such records for a period of three years. 
(Ord. 91-10 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.12.310 - "Stacking." 
It is a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly aid or engage in the practice commonly known in the lodging industry as "stacking." "Stacking" occurs when a transient occupant who is the registered occupant of a transient occupancy unit, allows other persons to share occupancy of that unit for any night for which those persons are not registered, with intent to defraud the operator of a transient occupancy facility. 
"Stacking" fraudulently deprives the town of tax revenue to which the town is entitled. 
A.  Any transient who allows stacking to take place in the unit for which that person is registered, and any transient who occupies a unit knowing that his or her occupancy has not been paid for, shall be in violation of this chapter. Any such violation shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor, or, in the discretion of the prosecuting attorney, may be prosecuted as an infraction. 
B.  In order to apprise transient occupants of potential violations of this section, and relevant provisions of state law, all transient occupancy facility operators shall require each registered occupant to read and sign, under penalty of perjury, the following declaration: 
I, ___________, having registered as occupant of Room/Unit #_______ at ___________ for the night(s) of ___________, declare under penalty of perjury that not more than _______ person(s), including myself, will be using the room/unit for overnight sleeping purposes on that/those night(s). 
I understand that the Municipal Code of the Town of Mammoth Lakes prohibits transient occupants of lodging facilities from housing additional unregistered guests in a unit and that a violation of the provisions of Chapter 3.12 is a violation of the municipal code, subject to a civil penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100) for each day on which such violation occurs. I further understand that California Penal Code Section 537 prohibits the defrauding of innkeepers and that such fraud is punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000) and/or by imprisonment in the state prison for up to three (3) years. I further understand that I am signing this declaration under penalty of perjury and that perjury is punishable under California Penal Code Section 126 by imprisonment for a period of from two (2) to four (4) years. 
I declare that I have read the above provisions and that I sign this declaration with full knowledge and understanding of the consequences of any violation of the laws noted above. 
_____
Signature 
(Ord. 91-15 § 1(part) Exh. B, 1991)  
3.12.320 - Disclosure of ordinance upon sale of property. 
Pursuant to Section 1102.6(a) of the California Civil Code, sellers of residential property shall disclose to purchasers of such property the provisions of this chapter [ordinance], and shall further disclose to purchasers the residential zones in which transient occupancy is permitted and the zones in which it is prohibited. This disclosure obligation shall be satisfied by providing to each purchaser a "Local Option Real Estate Transfer Disclosure Statement" specified by the town and by providing a copy of this chapter [ordinance]. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 3(Exh. A), 6-15-2011)  
Chapter 3.14 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY FEE AT MAMMOTH-YOSEMITE AIRPORT 
Sections: 
 
3.14.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Mammoth-Yosemite Airport transient occupancy fee ordinance." 
(Ord. 05-09 § 1(part), 2005)  
3.14.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter is to recoup from transients who use transient occupancy facilities at the Mammoth-Yosemite Airport the actual and direct benefits received by such transients arising out of the town's ownership, possession, improvement, operation and maintenance of the Mammoth-Yosemite Airport, and to use such fees solely for the purposes of operation, maintenance and improvement of the Mammoth-Yosemite Airport. 
(Ord. 05-09 § 1(part), 2005)  
3.14.030 - Relationship to transient occupancy tax. 
The fee imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter is not a tax, but rather is a direct quid-pro-quo fee imposed upon transients who use transient occupancy facilities at the Mammoth-Yosemite Airport where such fee pays directly for the benefits received, and where such fee is deposited into an enterprise fund to be used solely for the operation, maintenance and improvement of the Mammoth-Yosemite Airport. The transient occupancy fee is imposed pursuant to Government Code Section 54342. 
The transient occupancy tax imposed by Chapter 3.12 of this code is a tax in that the amount imposed is not directly related to the benefit received, and where such tax revenues are placed in the town's general fund and used for general municipal purposes. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the procedures for processing and collecting the transient occupancy fee shall directly parallel the procedures for processing and collecting the transient occupancy tax. Accordingly, the transient occupancy fee shall be processed and collected, and all disputes handled in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 3.12, Transient Occupancy Tax, Sections 3.12.020, 3.12.030, 3.12.050, 3.12.060, 3.12.070, 3.12.075, 3.12.080, 3.12.090, 3.12.100, 3.12.110, 3.12.120, 3.12.130, 3.12.140, 3.12.150, 3.12.160, 3.12.170, 3.12.180, 3.12.190, 3.12.200, 3.12.210, 3.12.220, 3.12.230, 3.12.240, 3.12.250, 3.12.260, 3.12.270, 3.12.280, 3.12.290, 3.12.300 and 3.12.310 of this code. Wherever such sections apply to transient occupancy tax, they shall also be deemed to apply to transient occupancy fees. 
(Ord. 05-09 § 1(part), 2005)  
3.14.040 - Fee imposed. 
Each transient occupant of a transient occupancy facility at the Mammoth-Yosemite Airport shall pay a transient occupancy fee at a rate equal to, but not greater than, the rate set for imposition of the transient occupancy tax by Section 3.12.040 of this code, except to the extent that such rate would exceed the costs reasonably borne, in which case the rate would be set to such lesser amount as to equal the costs reasonably borne. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the actual cost of providing the services for the transient occupancy fee imposed is less than the rate set for the imposition of the transient occupancy tax, the transient occupancy fee shall be imposed at such lower rate. Establishment of such lower rate shall be by resolution of the town council. The town shall no less than annually determine the actual rate at which the transient occupancy fee shall be imposed. 
(Ord. 05-09 § 1(part), 2005)  
3.14.050 - Transient occupancy tax unaffected. 
Nothing in this chapter shall constitute an actual or implied repeal of the transient occupancy tax or any of the provisions of Chapter 3.12 of the Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 05-09 § 1(part), 2005)  
3.14.060 - Credit for payment of transient occupancy fee against transient occupancy tax. 
The transient occupancy tax imposed upon transient occupants of transient occupancy facilities at the Mammoth-Yosemite Airport pursuant to Chapter 3.12 of the Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code remains in full force and, except as set forth in this chapter, shall be due and payable as provided in Chapter 3.12 of this code. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any transient occupancy fee paid to the town shall constitute a credit against transient occupancy tax otherwise due and payable up to, but not exceeding, the actual amount of transient occupancy tax otherwise due. 
If the amount of transient occupancy fee for any period actually paid equals or exceeds the transient occupancy tax due for that period, then no transient occupancy tax need be paid. If the amount of the transient occupancy fee for any period actually paid is less than the transient occupancy tax due for that period, then credit against such transient occupancy tax due shall be given in the amount of transient occupancy fee actually paid, and the unpaid portion of the transient occupancy tax shall remain due and shall be otherwise timely paid. 
(Ord. 05-09 § 1(part), 2005)  
3.14.070 - Enterprise fund. 
The transient occupancy fees paid under this chapter shall be paid into and constitute an enterprise fund pursuant to Government Code Section 54342. The finance director shall maintain and operate such enterprise fund according to law, and shall use such enterprise fund solely for the purposes of operating, maintaining and improving the Mammoth-Yosemite Airport. Such funds may also be used to repay debt incurred where the funds which gave rise to such debt were used for the purposes of operating, maintaining and improving the Mammoth-Yosemite Airport. 
(Ord. 05-09 § 1(part), 2005)  
Chapter 3.16 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Title—Adoption authority. 
This chapter shall be known as the "real property transfer tax ordinance of the town of Mammoth Lakes." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.22.010)  
3.16.020 - Imposed. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the town shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of the sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents, for each five hundred dollars, or fractional part thereof. Tax revenues shall be placed in the general fund. 
(Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.22.020)  
3.16.030 - Payment. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.16.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.22.030)  
3.16.040 - Exemptions—Instrument to secure debt. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.22.040)  
3.16.050 - Exemptions—Public agencies. 
The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor. 
(Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.22.050)  
3.16.060 - Exemptions—Plans of reorganization or adjustment. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
1.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
2.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 22 of the United States Code, as amended; 
3.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or 
4.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
B.  Subdivisions 1 through 4 of subsection A shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval of change. 
(Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.22.060)  
3.16.070 - Exemptions—Orders of Securities and Exchange Commission. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.22.070)  
3.16.080 - Exemptions—Partnerships. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such containing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.22.080)  
3.16.090 - Marital property. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this part shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing which purports to transfer, divide or allocate community, quasicommunity or quasimarital, or property assets between spouses for the purpose of effecting a division of community, quasicommunity or quasimarital property which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a judgment of nullity, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to Part 5 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 4 of the Civil Code, or by a written agreement between the spouses, executed in contemplation of any such judgment or order, whether or not the written agreement is incorporated as part of any of those judgments or orders. 
B.  In order to qualify for the exemption provided in subsection A of this section, the deed, instrument or other writing shall include a written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument, or other writing is entitled to the exemption. 
(Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.22.090)  
3.16.100 - Conveyance by governmental entity. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument or other writing by which realty is conveyed by the state of California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof, pursuant to an agreement whereby the purchaser agrees to immediately reconvey the realty to the exempt agency. 
(Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.22.100)  
3.16.110 - Conveyance to nonprofit corporation. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this part shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument or other writing by which the state of California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof, conveys to a nonprofit corporation realty the acquisition, construction or improvement of which was financed or refinanced by obligations issued by the nonprofit corporation on behalf of a governmental unit, within the meaning of Section 1.103-1(b) of Title 26 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
(Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.22.110)  
3.16.120 - Administration. 
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provision of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.22.120)  
3.16.130 - Refunds. 
Claims for refund of taxes pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.22.130)  
3.16.140 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the county, pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, or upon the effective date of this chapter, whichever is the later. 
(Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.22.140)  
Chapter 3.20 - PURCHASES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
 Prior history: Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 89-18 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 97-03 § 1, 1997; Ord. 99-05 § 1, 1999; Ord. 00-05 § 1, 2000; prior code §§ 3.12.010-3.12.020, 3.12.040-3.12.130, 3.12.150-3.12.180, 3.12.200-3.12.210, 3.12.270-3.12.280, 3.12.300-3.12.320. 
 
3.20.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish an efficient procedure for the purchase of equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies, materials and services, and to establish a procedure for performing or contracting for the construction of public works consistent with state law, which procedures shall not be overly time consuming and cumbersome, while allowing the town to obtain the best professional services, and acquire quality supplies, general services and equipment in an economic manner, and also to construct public works at the lowest reasonable cost. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.020 - Establishment of purchasing system. 
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, equipment and services, to secure for the town supplies, equipment and services at the lowest competitive cost commensurate with quality needed and with due consideration to disposability, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing functions, to assure the quality of purchases; and to buy without favor or prejudice, a purchasing system is adopted and shall control the procedure for all purchases except as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.030 - Purchasing officer. 
The finance director or the town manager authorized designee will be the purchasing officer. The purchasing officer shall purchase, or cause to be purchased, all equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies, materials and services, and shall have the responsibility and authority to: 
A.  Purchase or contract for supplies, services and equipment; 
B.  Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment; 
C.  Act to procure for the town the needed quality in supplies, services and equipment at least expense for the town; 
D.  Endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases; 
E.  Prepare and recommend to the town manager rules governing the purchase of supplies, services and equipment for the town; 
F.  Prepare and recommend revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules; 
G.  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products; 
H.  Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to insure conformance with specifications; 
I.  Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.040 - Confidential information. 
Information furnished by suppliers and/or contractors regarding price, terms, performance specifications, or other data will be held confidential until after award of an order. After award of bid, all papers pertaining to a transaction are public information and will be released for review upon request by an interested person, unless good cause exists for a bidder to specifically request that certain proprietary information (under patent, trademark or copyright) not be released. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.050 - Employee interest in suppliers/contractors. 
No town employee who participates in the selection or approval of a contractor, products, sources or supply, specifications, or who has supervisory responsibility for such employees, shall have any direct financial interest in the company which furnishes the supplies or services being procured. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.060 - Standards and ethics. 
The purchasing division's functions will be conducted with absolute integrity. The very highest ethical standards will be maintained in all material activities and the purchasing division will be aware of its responsibilities in spending public funds. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.070 - Purchasing for personal use prohibited. 
Purchases will not be made for the personal use of any town employee using the town's procurement personnel or facilities, unless so noted by the town manager. The town's credit or name will not be used for personal purposes by town staff, officers or officials. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.080 - Preference for recycled materials and low environmental impact. 
It is in the public interest to promote the town's purchase of recycled products and recycled materials that are environmentally friendly. This ordinance is enacted to demonstrate compliance with state laws and foster market development for recycled products and materials. As part of the analysis of cost and suitability, the purchase of equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies, materials, and services may take into account the environmental issues of the purchase. Such issues include, but are not limited to, performance standards that are equal to or better, percentage content of recycled materials, non-polluting and/or low-polluting qualities, and low overall impact on the environment. For purposes of this section, recycled products and materials, are anything other than new products or materials. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.090 - Exemption from centralized purchasing. 
The finance director may authorize, in writing, any department to purchase equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies, materials and services independently of the purchasing division, but such purchases shall be made in conformity with the procedures (including methods of procurement) established by this chapter. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.100 - Local preference acceptable when all else equal. 
Local preference is the practice of procurement/contracting from certain suppliers/contractors because they are also town taxpayers. Local preference is not acceptable as a measure of product evaluation or contract performance. All orders/contracts are awarded solely on the basis of quality, delivery, service, price and vendor/contractor qualifications. When these factors are equal, preference will be given to local vendors. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.110 - Annual and multiyear contracts. 
When economically advantageous, repetitively ordered materials will be procured through the use of annual or multiyear contracts. Time and dollar limits will be identified on all such orders. Multi-year contracts will also include terms that specify conditions of renewal each year for the duration of the contract. The purchasing officer and/or the department that administers the contract will make an annual review to determine if the contract will be renewed or terminated. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.120 - Purchase order and contract changes. 
Where a contract is in effect, changes of any kind, which affect the agreements established by a purchase order and/or contract, will only be made by the authority that originally made the award. Authorization for the change given to the supplier/contractor must be supported by a proper change request. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.130 - Petty cash. 
The use of petty cash is available for low-cost items. Petty cash funding must be authorized by division or department heads and in accordance with the petty cash policy. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.140 - Encumbrance of funds. 
Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order for equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies and materials unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the department against which the purchase is to be charged. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.150 - Estimates of requirements. 
All departments shall file detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies and equipment in such manner, at such time, and for such future periods as the purchasing officer shall prescribe. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.160 - Purchase orders. 
Purchases of equipment, furnishings, supplies and materials may be made by purchase orders, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.170 - Inspection of material and return. 
The right is reserved to inspect all equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies and materials for compliance with the specifications of a purchase order or contract. Rejected material normally will be returned to the supplier for disposition or replacement at the supplier's expense. If circumstances warrant, negotiations will be made for acceptance at a reduced cost to the town. The return of purchase material subsequently determined to be in excess of actual requirements will be subject to negotiation by the purchasing officer and supplier. Unacceptable/unauthorized shipments will be returned at the seller's risk and expense. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.180 - Open market or informal bid purchases. 
Purchases of vehicles and equipment, furnishings, supplies and materials in the amount of one hundred twenty-five thousand and no/100ths dollars or less may be made by the purchasing officer in the open market process prescribed in Section 3.20.190, provided, however, all bidding may be dispensed with for purchases of equipment, furnishings, supplies and materials having a total estimated value of less than one thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.190 - Open market or informal bid procedure. 
The open market or informal bid procedure consists of the following: 
A.  Unencumbered budget appropriations must exist in the department requesting the purchase. 
B.  Minimum number of bids. Open market purchases shall, whenever possible, be based on at least three bids. 
C.  Soliciting bids. The bids may be solicited from prospective vendors by any or all of the following: written request, internet posting on the town's official web site, posting of notice on a public bulletin board in the town hall, or telephone request. 
D.  Oral quotes will be accepted for purchases below ten thousand and no/100ths dollars. 
E.  Record retention. All open market orders and quotes shall be retained for a period of ninety days after the submission of quotes or the placing of orders. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.195 - Special equipment/supplies. 
In purchasing any special equipment or supplies needed to be compatible with existing equipment, or to perform complex or unique functions, the purchasing officer may limit bidding to a specific product type, or a brand name product, or utilize a request for proposal approach where warranties, servicing obligations, and product performance will be evaluated in addition to the price of the product. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.200 - Formal bid procedure. 
Formal bid procedure shall apply, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, to public projects (over $5,000), as defined in Section 20161 of the Public Contract Code, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder in accordance with state law. The purchase of vehicles, equipment, furnishings, supplies and materials that exceed the amount authorized in Section 3.20.180 shall be subject to the formal bid procedure. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.210 - Notice inviting formal bids. 
Notices inviting formal bids shall include a general description of the public project and/or article or service desired, shall state where bid documents and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.220 - Approved vendors list. 
The purchasing officer may also solicit formal sealed bids from responsible contractors and/or suppliers whose names are on the approved vendors list, or who have made written request that their names be added thereto. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.230 - Bulletin board and other advertisement of notice. 
The town clerk shall advertise the pending public project and/or purchases by posting a notice on the public bulletin board at the town offices. The town clerk may advertise on the town's official web site and/or other advertising media. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.240 - Bidder's security. 
When a public project is involved, and in other cases when deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, formal bids shall be accompanied by security, either cash, cashier's check, certified check or surety bond, in a sum equal to ten percent of the total aggregate of the bids, and shall be designated in the notice inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid security, provided, however, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon his refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the town is solely responsible for the delay in executing the contract. The town council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to a bidder who is willing to execute the contract, or may reject all bids and re-advertise. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.250 - Additional bond requirements. 
A faithful performance bond and labor and material bond shall be required for all public projects, unless waived by the town council, in an amount reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the town. In addition, the town council shall have authority to require a faithful performance bond or other bonds before entering into a contract. If bonds are required, the form and amount thereof shall be designated in the notice inviting bids. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.260 - Formal bid opening procedure. 
Sealed bids shall be submitted to the town clerk and shall be identified as "bids" on the envelope. The town clerk, or designee, shall publicly open all bids at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection in the town clerk office during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty calendar days after the bid opening. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.270 - Award of formal bid contracts. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, formal bid contracts shall be awarded by the town council to the lowest responsible bidder. The determination of "lowest responsible bidder" shall be at the discretion of the town council pursuant to findings and recommendations presented by the public works director and/or purchasing officer or town manager at the time of award of contract. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.280 - Tie formal bids. 
If two or more formal bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the town council may accept either bid or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tied bidders. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.290 - Exceptions to open market, informal or formal bid competitive bidding procedures and requirements. 
A.  Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the competitive bidding procedures and requirements for the purchase of equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies, materials and services may be dispensed with in any of the following instances: 
1.  When the commodity and/or service can be obtained from only one responsible source. 
2.  Emergency work as provided in Section 20168 of the Public Contract Code. 
3.  Where the acquisition of equipment, supplies, materials and services is necessitated by reason of emergency circumstances. 
4.  When the contract is for professional services such as attorneys, physicians, architects, engineers, consultants, accountants, or other individuals or organizations possessing a high degree of professional, unique, specialized, technical skill or expertise, not adaptable to competitive bidding, or where the service involves a contract for special activities, negotiations for the acquisition of land, insurance bonds or any other service of a similar nature to the above engaged for a particular project or series of projects. The professional services selected shall be of the highest quality together with cost-effectiveness. Such contracts under fifty thousand and no/100ths dollars may be executed by the town manager. 
5.  The town council may authorize the execution of contracts, pursuant to subsection 4 of this section, without observing the bidding procedures provided in this chapter where the amount of the contract exceeds the town manager's authorization. 
6.  Any agreement involving acquisition of equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies, materials or services entered into with another governmental entity. 
7.  The town council may authorize the execution of a lease or leases for office space for the town government without observing the bidding procedures provided in this chapter irrespective of the term of the lease or leases or the amount of rent and other charges to be paid by the town under the lease or leases. 
8.  The town manager is authorized to enter into contracts, pursuant to subsection 4 of this section without observing the bidding procedure provided in this chapter when the amount of the contract does exceed the amount set by subsection 4 of this section, provided, the service is required by a development application and the necessity of the service has been agreed to by the applicant, and the applicant has deposited with the town adequate monies to pay the cost of the services. 
9.  The competitive bid process is not applicable to certain purchases. The following are exempt from bid processes of this chapter: 
a.  Travel/expense advances; 
b.  Subscriptions; 
c.  Trade circulars or books; 
d.  Insurance claims; 
e.  Reimbursement of expenses; 
f.  Food expenses; 
g.  Petty cash reimbursement; 
h.  Medical payments; 
i.  Newspaper advertisements and notices; 
j.  Organization dues and membership; 
k.  Payments to other government entities; 
l.  Utility payments; 
m.  Attorney services; 
n.  Courier/delivery services; 
o.  Land; 
p.  Buildings. 
B.  While such exceptions are permitted, it is the general policy of the town council, the town manager, and the purchasing officer to allow for maximum possible competition in all areas to obtain the best product/service available at a fair and reasonable price. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.300 - Surplus equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies and materials. 
All using departments shall submit to the purchasing officer, at such times and in such forms as the purchasing officer shall prescribe, reports showing all equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies and materials which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.310 - Surplus equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies and materials—Trade ins. 
The purchasing officer shall have authority to exchange for or trade in on new equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies and materials which cannot be used by the department or which have become unsuitable for town use. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.320 - Surplus equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies and materials—Sale. 
The purchasing officer shall also have authority, subject to approval of the town manager, to dispose of surplus equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies and materials by auction, sealed bids, for scrap or negotiated sale, which, in the purchasing officer's judgment, provide the maximum return to the town. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.330 - Surplus equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies and materials disposed as junk. 
When the cost of locating a buyer exceeds the estimated sale price of surplus items or the item is obsolete or worn out or of minimal value, the purchasing officer may destroy or dispose of the item as junk. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
3.20.340 - Surplus equipment, vehicles, furnishings, supplies and materials disposed as gifts. 
The purchasing officer, subject to approval of the town manager, may give surplus items to any fraternal, benevolent, patriotic, charitable or religious organization not organized for profit, or to any other public agency. 
(Ord. 03-03, 2003)  
Chapter 3.24 - DEMANDS AND CLAIMS 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Claims for money or damages. 
As a prerequisite to bringing suit thereon against the town or any officer, department, commission or board of the town, any claim for money or damages (including claims which would otherwise be excepted by Section 905 of the Government Code of California) which is not governed by any other statutes or regulations expressly relating thereto, shall be presented and acted upon in accordance with Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3, Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 900) and Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 910) of the Government Code of California. This section shall relate only to the bringing of suit upon any claim, and shall not be deemed to apply to the authority of the director of finance, the town council, and other officers to process and pay, in the ordinary course of business, the just obligations of the town, such as routine salaries and wages, principal and interest on bonds, payments for purchases, and other like expenditures for which there is an express budget appropriation, and in connection with which there is no dispute as to the obligation and amount being payable. 
(Ord. 89-18 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.16.010)  
3.24.020 - Auditing required. 
No payment shall be made from the town treasury or out of the funds of the town unless the demand which is to be paid is duly audited as prescribed in this chapter or by other provisions of law. 
(Prior code § 3.16.020)  
3.24.030 - Forms. 
Claims against the town shall be paid on demands on the treasury as provided in this chapter on forms to be prescribed by the director of finance. 
(Ord. 89-18 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.16.030)  
3.24.040 - Approval of claims. 
Except for tort claims, every claim and demand received against the town shall be first presented to and approved in writing by the receiving department or office, which shall certify to the actual delivery or rendition of the supplies, materials, property or service for which payment is claimed; that the quality and prices correspond with the original specifications and contracts, if any, upon which the claim is based; that the demand in all other respects is proper and valid, and which shall further indicate the budgetary account to which the demand is to be charged. 
(Ord. 89-08 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.16.040)  
3.24.050 - Director of finance approval. 
Each demand approved by the receiving department or office shall be presented to the director of finance, who shall satisfy himself whether: 
A.  The claim is legally due and owing by the town; 
B.  There are budgeted or otherwise appropriated funds available to pay the claim; 
C.  The claim conforms to a valid requisition or order; 
D.  The prices and computations shown on the claim are verified; 
E.  The claim contains the approval of other departments and officials as requires. 
(Ord. 89-18 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.16.060)  
3.24.060 - Payment of demands. 
A.  Payment of demands shall be made by the director of finance in conformance with the authority provided by Section 37208 of the Government Code of the state. 
B.  Whenever the director of finance determines that refund is due of fees, taxes or other receipts collected in error or in advance of being earned, or of money the refund of which is otherwise due pursuant to specific provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of this town, then any such refund shall be deemed as conforming to the currently approved budget, and may be paid in the same fashion as other demands encompassed within the terms of subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 89-18 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 3.16.060)  
Chapter 3.28 - INVESTMENT OF MONEYS AND FUNDS 
Sections: 
 
3.28.010 - Investment of town moneys—Deposit of securities. 
Pursuant to, and in accordance with, and to the extent allowed by, Section 53607 and 53608 of the Government Code, the authority to invest and reinvest moneys of the town, to sell or exchange securities, and to deposit them and provide for their safekeeping, is delegated to the town treasurer. 
(Prior code § 3.08.010)  
3.28.020 - Authorized investments. 
Pursuant to the delegation of authority in Section 3.28.010, the town treasurer is authorized to purchase, at their original sale or after they have been issued, securities which are permissible investments under any provision of state law relating to the investing of general town funds, including but not limited to Sections 53601 and 53635 of the Government Code, as those sections now read or may hereafter be amended, from moneys in his custody which are not required for the immediate necessities of the town and as he may deem wise and expedient, and to sell or exchange for other eligible securities and reinvest the proceeds of the securities so purchased. 
(Prior code § 3.08.020)  
3.28.030 - Sales of securities. 
From time to time the town treasurer shall sell the securities in which town moneys have been invested pursuant to this chapter, so that the proceeds may, as appropriate, be applied to the purchase for which the original purchase money may have been designated or placed in the town treasury. 
(Prior code § 3.18.030)  
3.28.040 - Town bonds. 
Bonds issued by the town and purchased pursuant to this chapter may be canceled either in satisfaction of sinking fund obligations or otherwise if proper and appropriate; provided, however, that the bonds may be held uncanceled and while so held may be resold. 
(Prior code § 3.08.040)  
3.28.050 - Reports. 
The town treasurer shall make a monthly report to the town council of all investments made pursuant to the authority delegated in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3.08.050)  
3.28.060 - Deposit of securities. 
Pursuant to the delegation of authority in Section 3.28.010, the town treasurer is authorized to deposit for safekeeping, the securities in which town moneys have been invested pursuant to this chapter, in any institution or depository authorized by the terms of any state law, including but not limited to Section 53608 of the Government Code as it now reads or may hereafter be amended. In accordance with the section, the town treasurer shall take from such institution or depository a receipt for the securities so deposited and shall not be responsible for such securities delivered to and receipted for by such institution or depository until they are withdrawn therefrom by the town treasurer. 
(Prior code § 3.08.060)  
3.28.070 - Trust fund administration. 
Any departmental trust fund established by the town council pursuant to Section 36523 of the Government Code shall be administered by the town treasurer in accordance with Sections 36523 and 36524 of the Government Code and any other applicable provisions of law. 
(Prior code § 3.08.070)  
Chapter 3.32 - SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.32.010 - Created. 
To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code of California and to avail the town of its benefits of Section 2106 and 2107 of the code, there is created in the town treasury a special fund to be known as the "special gas tax street improvement fund." 
(Prior code § 3.18.010)  
3.32.020 - Moneys to be included. 
All moneys received by the town from the state of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein, or for engineering, or for the construction, maintenance and improvement of streets or highways by the town shall be paid into the fund. 
(Prior code § 3.18.020)  
3.32.030 - Expenditures. 
All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code of California. 
(Prior code § 3.18.030)  
Chapter 3.36 - DEBT COLLECTION 
Sections: 
 
3.36.010 - Collection of debts to the town. 
The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license or tax of any nature whatsoever imposed by this code or by any other resolution, ordinance, rule, regulation or in any other fashion by the town shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the town. An action may be commenced in the name of the town in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any such delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license or tax, together with any penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this code or any other enactment. Such action may also be commenced for the collection of any other amount or debt determined to be due the town on account of any contractual obligation or on account of any tortious act or conduct by the person. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be cumulative, and the use of an action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this code or by law for the purpose of enforcing the provisions thereof. 
(Prior code § 3.10.010)  
Chapter 3.39 - FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE REVENUE/COST COMPARISON SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
3.39.010 - Findings and intent. 
A.  Pursuant to Article XIIIB of the California Constitution, it is the intent of the town council to require the ascertainment and recovery of costs reasonably borne from fees, charges and regulatory license fees levied therefor in providing the regulation, products or services hereinafter enumerated in this chapter. 
B.  The fee and service charge revenue/cost comparison system set forth in this chapter provides a mechanism for ensuring that fees adopted by the town for services rendered do not exceed the reasonable estimated cost for providing the services for which the fees are charged. 
C.  The adoption of this chapter is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Sections 2100 et seq.), because it approves and sets forth a procedure for determining fees for the purpose of meeting the operating expenses of town departments, as set forth in Public Resources Code Section 21080 (b)(8)(1). 
(Ord. 91-08 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.39.020 - Delegation of authority and direction to manager. 
A.  The town manager is delegated the authority and directed to provide documents to the town council to implement its herein enumerated policy to adjust fees and charges to recover the percentage of costs reasonably borne as established hereby, in providing the regulation, product or service enumerated in this chapter in the percentage of costs reasonably borne and on the schedule of rate review and revision as hereinafter established in this chapter. 
B.  The town manager is delegated authority to issue executive orders defining terms, setting out administrative, fee collection and financial procedures, definitions and establishing effective dates of all fees set by the town council by resolution. All executive orders shall be originated and signed by the affected department head, shall be signed by the finance director certifying that the financial requirements of this chapter are complied with, and shall be signed by the town manager connoting the effective date of the executive order and new or reviewed rate structure, procedure or definition. 
C.  "Costs reasonably borne" shall be as defined in Section 3.39.030. In adjusting fees and charges, the town manager shall act in an administrative and ministerial capacity and shall consider only the standards and criteria established by this chapter, and the procedures set hereby and by applicable state law. All executive orders issued hereunder shall comply in all respects with this chapter, and the several schedules of fees and rates as set by the town council by resolution. 
(Ord. 91-08 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.39.030 - "Costs reasonably borne" defined. 
"Costs reasonably borne," as used and ordered to be applied in this chapter are to consist of the following elements: 
A.  All applicable direct costs including but not limited to salaries, wages, overtime, employee fringe benefits, services and supplies, maintenance and operation expenses, contracted services, special supplies and any other direct expense incurred. 
B.  All applicable indirect costs including but not restricted to building maintenance and operations, equipment, maintenance and operations, communications expenses, computer costs, printing and reproduction, vehicle expenses, insurance, debt service and like expenses when distributed on an accounted and documented rational proration system. 
C.  Fixed asset recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixed assets, and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges calculated on the current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the difference between book value depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash and the full cost of replacement, also shall be calculated and considered a cost so as to recover such unrecovered costs between book value and cost of replacement over the remaining life of the asset. 
D.  General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the town council, town attorney, town administration, town clerk, town treasurer, economic development, finance department, personnel office and town promotion; and all other staff and support service provided to the entire town organization. Overhead shall be prorated between tax-financed services and fee-financed services on the basis of the percentage so that each of taxes and fees and charges shall proportionately defray such overhead costs. 
E.  Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting expenses as enumerated in subsections a, b, c and f of this section. 
F.  Debt service costs, consisting or repayment of principal, payment of interest and trustee fees and administrative expense for all applicable bond, certificate, note or securities issues or loans of whatever nature or kind. Any required coverage factors or required or established reserves beyond basic debt service costs also shall be considered a cost if required by covenant within any securities ordinance, resolution, indenture or general law applicable to the town. 
(Ord. 91-08 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.39.040 - Schedule of fees and service charges. 
a.  The town manager, assistant town manager, and each town department head under the direction of the town manager, shall review annually the town fees and service charges, and provide an adjusted fee or charge schedule to the town council for its consideration so as to recover one hundred percent of costs reasonably borne necessary to provide the regulation, product or service. 
b.  Council by resolution may annually set a subsidy for certain fees or charges, thereby not requiring that one hundred percent of costs reasonably borne is recovered by that certain fee or charge. Council by resolution may set fees and charges that shall not exceed one hundred percent of the costs reasonably borne. 
c.  The regulation, product or service shall be as defined in that certain document entitled "Cost Control System for the Town of Mammoth Lakes" dated June 18, 1990 as produced by Management Services Institute, Incorporated, of Anaheim, California, and in addendum to said document which may be adopted by from time to time by council. 
d.  All fees and charges set pursuant to this chapter and section shall take effect ten days after the town manager signs an executive order stipulating that all provisions of this chapter have been complied with, and no written appeal has been filed. 
e.  The schedule of frequency of rate adjustments may be varied by the town manager to adjust revenues sufficient to meet debt service coverage requirements of any bond, certificate or ordinance, resolution, indenture, contract or action under which securities have been issued by the town which contain any coverage factor requirement. 
f.  The town manager may vary the review schedule listed in this section if, in the judgment of the town manager and a directly affected and requesting department head, a gross inequity would be perpetrated by not revising the rate schedule. Any such rate revision which deviates from the review schedule as set herein shall be reported to the town council at its next succeeding meeting. 
(Ord. No. 08-11, § 1, 10-1-2008) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-11, § 1, adopted Oct. 1, 2008, repealed § 3.39.040, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 3.39.040 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 95-07, § 1(part), 1995 and Ord. 91-08, § 1(part), 1991).  
3.39.050 - Statutory public meeting. 
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 54992, the town clerk shall cause notice to be provided as set out in Government Code Sections 54992 and 6062a, and the town council periodically, at least annually, shall receive at the regularly scheduled meeting oral and written presentations concerning fees and charges proposed to be increased or added. Such notice, oral and written presentation, and public meeting shall be provided prior to the town council taking any action on any new or increased fees or charges. At least one such public hearing shall be held annually, in conjunction with the town annual budget process and hearing. 
(Ord. 91-08 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.39.060 - Provision of data. 
Pursuant to the California Government Code, at least ten days prior to the required public hearing set out herein, the town manager shall make available to the public appropriate data indicating the cost or estimated costs required to support the fees and charges for which changes are proposed to be made or fees or charges imposed. The town manager also shall provide a summary of the present fee and charge schedules and those proposed at such annual public hearing. A general explanation of such changes also shall be published per the requirements of Government Code Section 6062a. 
(Ord. 91-08 § 1(part), 1991)  
3.39.070 - Appeal to town council. 
A.  Any person who feels that any fee or charge determined and set is in excess of the percentage of costs reasonably borne to be recovered as set out in this chapter, or that such fee or charge has been reviewed prior to or has not been reviewed within the review schedule as set out herein, may appeal in writing to the town council. 
B.  No fee or charge for which an appeal has been filed shall take effect until heard by the town council. Such appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next ensuing council meeting. Such appealed fee or charge shall take effect immediately upon hearing by the town council unless ordered otherwise by the town council by ordinance amending this chapter. 
(Ord. 91-08 § 1(part), 1991)  
Chapter 3.44 - MAMMOTH LAKES MOBILITY, RECREATION, AND ARTS AND CULTURE UTILITY USERS TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.44.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the ordinance codified in this chapter to impose a tax upon the users of electrical, liquid petroleum gas and telephone utilities, pursuant to the provisions of the law of the state of California. The proceeds of such tax shall be placed in the town's general fund and utilized for payment of the costs to provide essential governmental services. 
(Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.020 - Findings and determinations. 
The town council finds and determines as follows: 
A.  The town is presently confronted with a fiscal crisis that threatens the continued operation and viability of the town as a governmental organization. The projected operating deficit for the current fiscal year exceeds eight hundred eighty thousand dollars and the town also has a minimal reserve fund under the one million five hundred thousand dollar level. There is a minimal level of administrative and staff personnel in every department of the town and further cutbacks will be required within the immediate future unless general revenues are increased beyond existing levels. The town, as a result of its dependency upon transient occupancy taxes, which, in turn, are dependent on factors beyond town's control, must stabilize its tax base. 
B.  The fiscal crisis will seriously impair the ability of the town to deliver basic and essential governmental services, including, but not limited to, police protection, code enforcement to abate public nuisances, and public works programs to maintain, repair and replace streets, sidewalks, light fixtures, and other public facilities and provide for snow removal, as well as required planning and needed recreational services. The lack of these services will result in a general deterioration of the physical and social condition of the town, a depression of property values, a serious threat to the health, safety and welfare of residents and visitors and a significant decline in the quality of life experienced by those who live or work within the town. These services directly affect every owner or occupant of real property within the town and must be provided by any municipal government as a matter of neces-sity and not individual choice. 
(Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.030 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section. 
"City" means the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Gas" means natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel which may be substituted therefor. 
"Month" means a calendar month. 
"Nonutility supplier" means: (1) a service supplier, other than an electrical corporation serving within the city, which generates electrical energy in capacities of at least fifty kilowatts for its own use or for sale to others; or (2) a gas supplier other than a gas corporation, that sells or supplies gas to users within the town. 
"Person" means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, California business or common law trust, society or individuals. 
"Service supplier" means any entity required to collect or self-impose and remit a tax as imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
"Service user" means a person required to pay a tax imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
"Tax administrator" means the finance director of the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Telephone corporation," "electrical corporation," "gas corporation," "water corporation" and "cable television corporation" shall have the same meanings as defined in Sections 234, 218, 222, 241 and 215-5, respectively, of the California Public Utilities Code except, "electrical corporation" and "gas corporation" shall also be construed to include any municipality, public agency or person engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power or gas or water to a service user. 
(Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  Nothing in the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or that of the state of California. 
B.  The town council may, by order or resolution, establish one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes of persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from such tax. 
C.  The tax administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. 
(Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.050 - Telephone users tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax on the amounts paid for any intrastate telephone services by every person in the town using such services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of three and one-half percent of charges made for such services and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, on and after July 1, 1997, the tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of two and one-half percent of charges made for such services and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. 
B.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall not include charges for directory advertising; nor shall the term "charges" include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due; nor shall the term "charges" include charges for any type of service or equipment furnished by a service supplied subject to public utility regulations during a period in which the same or similar services or equipment are also available for sale or lease from persons other than a service supplier subject to public utility regulation; nor shall the words "telephone communication services" include land mobile service or maritime mobile services as defined in Section 2.1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as said section existed on January 1, 1970. The term "telephone communication services" refers to that service which provides access to a telephone system and the privilege of telephone quality communication with substantially all persons having telephone stations which are part of such telephone system. The telephone users tax is intended to, and does, apply to all charges billed to a telephone account having a situs in the town irrespective of whether a particular communication service originates and/or terminates within the town. 
C.  The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person providing the intrastate telephone communication services, or the person receiving payment for such services. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax collected, measured by the tax bill in the previous month, shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of each month. 
D.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the tax imposed under this section shall not be imposed upon any person for using intrastate telephone communication services to the extent that the amounts paid for such services are exempt from or not subject to the tax imposed under Division 2, Part 20 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, or the tax imposed under Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1(part), 1996; Ord. 96-08 § 1(part), 1996; Ord. 95-04 § 1, 1995; Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.060 - Electricity users tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax upon every person other than an electric or gas corporation using electrical energy in the town. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of three and one-half percent of the charges made for such energy by an electrical corporation providing service in the town and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the energy. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, on and after July 1, 1997, the tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of two and one-half percent of charges made for such services and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. 
The tax applicable to electrical energy provided by a nonutility supplier shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charge the service user would have incurred if the energy used had been provided by the electrical corporation franchised by the town. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the town. Non-utility suppliers shall install, maintain and use an appropriate utility-type metering system which will enable compliance with this section. "Charges," as used in this section, shall include charges made for: (1) metered energy; and (2) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges and all other annual or monthly charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
B.  As used in this section, the term "using electrical energy" shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by him for use in an automobile or other machinery device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include electricity used and consumed by an electric utility supplier in the conduct of its business; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric corporation or governmental agency at a point within the town for resale; nor shall the term include the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a water utility or a governmental agency. 
C.  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or nonutility supplier. The tax imposed in this section on use supplied by self-generation or from a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be collected and remitted to the tax administrator in the manner set forth in Section 3.44.080 of this chapter. The amount of tax collected by a service supplier or a nonutility supplier in one month shall be remitted by United States mail to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, shall be remitted by United States mail to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of each month. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1(part), 1996; Ord. 96-08 § 1(part), 1996; Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.070 - Gas users tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax upon every person in the town other than a gas corporation or electrical corporation, using, in the town, gas which is transported through mains or pipes or by mobile transport. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of three and one-half percent of the charges made for the gas and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the gas. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, on and after July 1, 1997, the tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of two and one-half percent of charges made for such services and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. 
The tax applicable to gas or gas transportation provided by nonutility suppliers shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or gas transportation had been provided by the gas corporation franchised by the town. "Charges," as used in this section, shall include: (1) that billed for gas which is delivered through mains or pipes; (2) gas transportation charges; and (3) demand charges, service charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charge authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
B.  The tax otherwise imposed by this section is not applicable to: (1) charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains and pipes; (2) charges made for gas used and consumed by a public utility or governmental agency in the conduct of its business; (3) charges made by a gas public utility or gas used and consumed in the course of its public utility business; and (4) charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as authorized in the Vehicle Code of the state of California. 
C.  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling or transporting the gas. A person selling only transportation services to a user for delivery of gas through mains or pipes shall collect the tax from the service user based on the transportation charges. The person selling or transporting the gas shall, on or before the twentieth day of each calendar month, commencing on the twentieth day of the calendar month after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, make a return to the tax administrator stating the amount of taxes billed during the preceding calendar month. At the time such returns are filed, the person selling or transporting the gas shall remit tax payments to the tax administrator in accordance with schedules established or approved by the tax administrator. The tax imposed in this section on use supplied by self-production or a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be collected and remitted to the tax administrator in the manner set forth in Section 3.44.090 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1(part), 1996; Ord. 96-08 § 1(part), 1996; Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.080 - Service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of the ordinance codified in this chapter, a service user receiving gas or electricity directly from a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or otherwise not having the full tax due on the use of gas or electricity in the town directly billed and collected by the service supplier, shall report said fact to the tax administrator within thirty days of said use and shall directly remit to the town the amount of tax due. 
B.  The tax administrator may require said service user to provide, subject to audit, filed tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used and the price thereof. 
(Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.090 - Remittance of tax. 
Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in the ordinance codified in this chapter are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return may be postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday/Sunday or legal holiday. 
(Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.100 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the town. Any such tax collected from a service user which has wilfully been withheld from the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the town by the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the town under the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the town for the recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.105 - Appeal. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the town or an officer thereof, to prevent or enjoin the collection of taxes sought to be collected pursuant to this chapter and payment of all tax, interest and penalties shall be required as a condition precedent to seeking judicial review of any tax liability. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, 9-22-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-10, adopted Sept. 22, 2010, shall become effective and enforceable Nov. 8, 2010.  
3.44.110 - Duty to collect—Procedures. 
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be performed as follows: 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3.44.090 of this chapter, the tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the service charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a service user shall be applied to the utility charge first until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall be applied to taxes due. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of his refusal to pay the tax imposed on said energy charges Section 3.44.130(C) of this chapter will apply. 
B.  The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing. 
(Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.120 - Tax administrator—Additional power and duties. 
A.  The tax administrator shall have the power and duty and is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  The tax administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator's office. 
C.  The tax administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of the ordinance codified in this chapter so that collection of any tax imposed here may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of the ordinance codified in this chapter. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator's office. 
D.  The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter. The tax administrator shall provide the service supplier with the name of any person who the tax administrator determines is exempt from the tax imposed hereby, together with the address and account number to which service is supplied to any such exempt person. The tax administrator shall notify the service supplier of termination of any person's right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person. 
E.  The tax administrator shall provide notice to all service suppliers, at least ninety days prior to any annexation or other change in the town's boundaries. Said notice shall set forth the revised boundaries by street and address, along with a copy of the final annexation order from LAFCO. 
(Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.130 - Assessment—Service user administrative remedy. 
A.  Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of tax, such person may be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due under the ordinance codified in this chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods as set forth below. 
B.  The service supplier shall provide the town with amounts refused and/or unpaid along with the names and addresses of the service users neglecting to pay the tax imposed under provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. 
C.  The tax administrator shall notify the service user that the tax administrator assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user's address change, to the last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within fifteen days from the date of the service of the notice upon him, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than five dollars. The penalty shall become part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.140 - Records. 
It is the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the town any tax imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.150 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under the ordinance codified in this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, a service supplier may claim a refund; or take as credit against taxes remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established that the service user from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax erroneously or illegally collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to collect and remit. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter and actually due from a service user, may refund such amount to the service user and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than three years from the date of overpayment. 
C.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to the ordinance codified in this chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit or such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. In the event the ordinance codified in this chapter is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne by the town. 
D.  A service supplier may refund the taxes collected to the service user in accordance with this section or by the service supplier's customary practice. 
(Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.160 - Termination or suspension of tax. 
The service supplier shall, upon notification, terminate or suspend any utility user's tax commencing with the first full billing period which occurs after the effective date of such action by the town council. 
(Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.170 - Effective date. 
The tax imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter shall go into effect on March 1, 1995. 
(Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994)  
3.44.180 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. [20]10-04, § 5, adopted March 17, 2010, repealed § 3.44.180, which pertained to sunset expiration date and derived from Ord. 94-12 § 1(part), 1994; Ord. 96-08 § 1(part), 1996; Ord. 96-12 § 1(part), 1996.  
3.44.190 - Use of special tax proceeds on and after July 1, 2011. 
A.  On and after July 1, 2011 all proceeds of the tax levied and imposed hereunder shall be accounted for and paid into a special fund designated for use by the Town of Mammoth Lakes, and used only for the following purposes: Planning, construction, operation, maintenance, programming and administration of facilities and projects for mobility, recreation, and arts and culture. Such tax proceeds shall not supplant existing funds used for the purposes set forth above. 
B.  The town is hereby authorized to incur indebtedness in the form of bonds, notes, contractual obligations or other evidences of indebtedness authorized by law to finance or refinance the costs associated with the purposes set forth in subsection (A) above, and to pay any and all costs of issuing or incurring such indebtedness, to fund reserve funds, capitalized interest, costs of credit enhancement, costs of interest rate hedging arrangements or any other financing costs associated with such indebtedness. Such indebtedness shall be solely payable from, and may be secured by a pledge and lien on, the proceeds of the tax levied and imposed hereunder. 
(Ord. No. [20]10-04, § 2, 3-17-2010)  
3.44.200 - Annual audit report. 
On or before December 31 of each year, the town's independent auditors shall complete a Mammoth Lakes Mobility, Recreation, and Arts and Culture Utility Users Tax Ordinance audit report. Such report shall review whether the tax revenue collected hereunder is properly managed and expended in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Said report shall be reviewed by the tourism and recreation commission, or such other commission or committee as is hereafter designated by the town council, sitting as an audit committee. Such review shall include confirmation that all tax proceeds of the Mammoth Lakes Mobility, Recreation, and Arts and Culture Utility Users Tax Ordinance are used for the purposes specified in Section 3.44.190. 
(Ord. No. [20]10-04, § 3, 3-17-2010)  
3.44.210 - Recommendation for expenditure of funds. 
The tourism and recreation commission, or such other commission or committee as is hereafter designated by the town council, shall annually conduct at least one public hearing where it takes public testimony as to how tax revenues collected under the Mammoth Lakes Mobility, Recreation, and Arts and Culture Utility Users Tax Ordinance should be expended. After accepting such public input, such commission or committee shall make written recommendations to the town council as to how such tax revenues should be expended. Prior to expending such tax revenues as have not been earlier committed, the town council shall consider the recommendations of such commission or committee report. 
(Ord. No. [20]10-04, § 4, 3-17-2010)  
Chapter 3.48 - TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
 Prior ordinance history: Ord. 06-03. 
 
3.48.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Mammoth Lakes Recreation, Trails and Parks Investment Initiative" transactions and use tax ordinance. The city of Mammoth Lakes hereinafter shall be called "City." This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1, 2008)  
3.48.020 - Operative date. 
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 2, 2008)  
3.48.030 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.91 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if two-thirds of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
B.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 3, 2008)  
3.48.040 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 4, 2008)  
3.48.050 - Transactions tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 5, 2008)  
3.48.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 6, 2008)  
3.48.070 - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one-half of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 7, 2008)  
3.48.080 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 8, 2008)  
3.48.090 - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.  The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California; 
2.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; 
3.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code; 
4.  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 9, 2008)  
3.48.100 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 10, 2008)  
3.48.110 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance; 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California; 
3.  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised; 
6.  Except as provided in subsection (C)(7), a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer; 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 11, 2008)  
3.48.120 - Amendments. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 12, 2008)  
3.48.130 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 13, 2008)  
3.48.140 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 14, 2008)  
3.48.150 - Use of tax proceeds and expenditure plan. 
A.  All proceeds of the tax levied and imposed hereunder shall be accounted for and paid into a special fund designated for use by the town of Mammoth Lakes only for the Mammoth Lakes recreation, trails and parks funding set forth in the expenditure plan for the administration and expenditure of the tax proceeds, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit "1." The expenditure plan may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of the city council, so long as the funds are utilized for recreation, trails and parks funding. For the purposes of this chapter, "recreation, trails and parks funding" means planning, construction, operation, maintenance, programming, and administration of all town recreation facilities and programs, trails and parks managed by the town. 
B.  The city is authorized to incur indebtedness in the form of bonds, notes, contractual obligations or other evidences of indebtedness authorized by law to finance or refinance costs described in subsection A above, and to pay any and all costs of issuing or incurring such indebtedness, to fund reserve funds, capitalized interest, costs of credit enhancement, costs of interest rate hedging arrangements or any other financing costs associated with such indebtedness. Such indebtedness shall be solely payable from, and may be secured by a pledge and lien on, the proceeds of the tax levied and imposed hereunder. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 15, 2008)  
3.48.160 - Annual audit. 
By no later than December 31st of each year, the city's independent auditors shall complete a recreation, trails and parks investment initiative audit report. Such report shall review whether the tax revenue is collected, managed and expended in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 16, 2008) 
EXPENDITURE PLAN 
All proceeds of the tax levied and imposed hereunder shall be accounted for and paid into a special fund designated for use by the Town of Mammoth Lakes only for the planning, construction, operation, maintenance, programming, and administration of all trails, parks, and recreation facilities managed by the Town of Mammoth Lakes without supplanting existing parks and recreation facility maintenance funds. 
The Town is hereby authorized to incur indebtedness in the form of bonds, notes, contractual obligations, or other evidences of indebtedness authorized by law to finance or refinance costs for trails, parks, and recreation facilities and to pay any and all costs of issuing or incurring such indebtedness, to fund reserve funds, capitalized interest, costs of credit enhancement, costs of interest rate hedging arrangements, or any other financing costs associated with such indebtedness. Such indebtedness shall be solely payable from, and may be secured by a pledge and lien on, the proceeds of the tax levied and imposed hereunder. 
The Town Council may designate by resolution a board, commission, or committee to provide recommendations to the Town Council regarding the use of funds after accepting public input. The Town Council may authorize direct funding for such board, commission, or committee to offset the costs of providing such recommendations, including costs for operating and administrative expenses. 
(Ord. No. 14-08, § 2, 9-17-2014)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS TAX 
Sections: 
 
5.04.010 - Title. 
This title shall be known as the business tax ordinance of the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.01.010)  
5.04.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
"Business" includes professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit. 
"Collector" or "tax collector" means the town tax collector, finance director or other town officer charged with the administration of this title. 
"Employee" includes a person who works for an employer, where right or control exists with such employer, where directions on performance of work can be given by employer, and where breach of contract is not involved if work is halted by employer or employee; evidence that a person is included on the payroll of an employer and deductions for federal or state income taxes, disability insurance, social security taxes are taken from the earnings of such person, and the employer pays payroll taxes on the earnings paid such person, is prima facie proof that such person is an employee. 
Gross Receipts. 
1.  "Gross receipts" includes the total of amounts actually received or receivable from sales and the total amount actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of material goods, wares or merchandise. 
2.  Also included in "gross receipts" shall be all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. 
3.  Excluded from "gross receipts" shall be the following: 
a.  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
b.  Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold; 
c.  Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchasers; 
d.  Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit; 
e.  Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, and provided the agent or trustee furnishes the collector with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to the others; 
f.  That portion of the receipts of a general contractor which represents payments to subcontractors, who are not employees, and provided the general contractor furnishes the collector with the names and addresses of the subcontractors and the amounts paid each subcontractor; 
g.  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded; 
h.  As to the real estate agent or broker, the sales price of real estate sold for the account of others except that portion which represents commission or other income to the agent or broker; 
i.  That portion of commission paid by a real estate broker to a real estate agent, provided the broker furnishes the collector with the names and addresses of each agent and the amounts paid to each agent; 
j.  As to a retail gasoline dealer; a portion of his receipts from the sale of motor vehicle fuels equal to the motor vehicle fuel license tax imposed by and previously paid under the provisions of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
k.  As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel tax imposed by Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code if paid by the dealer or collected by him from the consumer or purchaser. 
"Parcel of property" includes all contiguous property under one ownership. 
"Person" includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts, business or common law trusts, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the town, other than as an employee. 
"Sale" includes the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. The foregoing definitions shall not be deemed to exclude any transactions which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law. 
"Sworn statement" means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury. 
"Town" means the town of Mammoth Lakes, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporation form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
"Wholesale business" means every business conducted solely for the purpose of selling goods, wares or merchandise in volume lots for resale, which business conducts such resale under a validly issued resale permit issued by the state of California. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.01.020) 
(Ord. No. 11-03, § 3(Exh. A, 8), 11-30-2011)  
5.04.030 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted both to raise revenue for municipal purposes, and to allow for regulation of businesses, provided that nothing herein shall be construed as regulating any business or profession to the extent such regulation is preempted by state or federal law. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.02.010) 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 3(Exh. A), 6-15-2011)  
5.04.040 - Taxable event. 
In enacting the ordinance codified in this chapter as a revenue measure, the town council has established and set fees as a reasonable exercise of its power to levy taxes, and based upon a classification that is reasonable. In doing so the town has prepared the tax schedules and procedures for levying taxes on the basis of occurrence of a taxable event within the town, and it is only taxable events within the town that are subject to taxation. In that regard, any fixed place of business is a taxable event with the town. Those persons doing business within the town and having a fixed place of business outside the town also are subject to taxation on the basis of the occurrence of a taxable event within the town. Such events include, but are not limited by, manufacturing, construction, services, selling, deliveries and like activities. 
A.  Gross Receipts. 
1.  Where the taxable event is selling a product or service within the town, the percentage of gross receipts subject to taxation shall be apportioned based on the selling activities and taxable events occurring within the town. Where the sale occurs within the town, it shall be reported as taxable event within the town, and subject to taxation. 
2.  A business established outside the town but maintaining a branch office or store within the town or doing business within the town through an agent, broker or employee, shall report as gross receipts its total sales and receipts attributable to the local branch officer store, agent, broker or employee. 
3.  Gross receipts for real estate brokers or agents, travel agents, insurance brokers and bail bond brokers means the total gross commissions of the foregoing having a fixed place of business within the town and, if not, the total gross commissions of the sales or taxable events of the foregoing events within the town. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code § 5.02.020)  
5.04.050 - Effect on other provisions. 
Persons required to pay a business tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this title shall not be relieved from the payment of any business tax for the privilege of doing such business required under the this code or any other ordinance of the town, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of such other ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code Ch. 5.03)  
5.04.055 - Denial or revocation of certificate for violation. 
The town may deny a business license tax certificate to any person or entity who has, within the preceding one year, either: (i) been convicted of a violation of this chapter or any other provision of this code concerning payment or remission of fees, charges, or taxes to the town; or (ii) been fined or penalized by the town using a civil or administrative process for such a violation, and who failed to appeal the imposition of the fines or penalties or whose appeal was denied. In addition, a business license tax certificate may be revoked if: (i) either criterion set forth above for denial of a business license tax certificate is met; or (ii) if the certificate holder is the operator of a transient occupancy facility as defined in Chapter 5.40 and the operator has failed to comply in any respect with the requirements of Chapter 5.40. The collector may send any person or entity meeting any of the revocation criteria described above a notice of intention to revoke the violator's business license tax certificate, provided that the effective date of the revocation shall be not less than thirty days from the date the notice is mailed. The recipient of a notice of intention to revoke may appeal the revocation to the town council within thirty days of the date of the notice pursuant to Section 5.04.260, provided that compliance with Sections 5.04.370—5.04.440 shall not be required, and the revocation shall be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal hearing. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 3(Exh. A), 6-15-2011; Ord. No. 15-05, § 2, 9-16-2015)  
5.04.060 - Certificate—Required. 
Business taxes in the amounts prescribed in this title, are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupancies specified in this title. It shall be unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, professions, calling or occupation in the town without having first procured a business tax certificate from the town and paying the tax prescribed in this title or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code § 5.04.010)  
5.04.065 - Certificate—License requirement. 
Businesses that are not subject to the business tax pursuant to Section 5.04.160 and/or Chapter 5.08 must still apply for and obtain a business tax certificate with the exception of those businesses currently designated as exempt in Section 5.04.150. The business tax rate for such otherwise exempt businesses will be at the rate established in the relevant schedule of Section 5.08.010 for businesses with gross receipts over five thousand dollars but under twenty-five thousand dollars. If none of the schedules in Section 5.08.010 are relevant to a particular business, that business may opt to pay business tax at the rate specified in Schedule B. 
(Ord. No. 08-14, 12-17-2009; Ord. No. 11-03, § 3(Exh. A, 9), 11-30-2011)  
5.04.070 - Certificate—Tax payment. 
This chapter shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a business tax certificate prior to doing business within the town if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California. Persons not so required to obtain a business tax certificate prior to doing business within the town nevertheless shall be liable for payment of the tax imposed by this title. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.04.020)  
5.04.080 - Certificate—Separate for branch establishments. 
A.  A separate certificate must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transaction and carried on and for each separate classification of business at the same location, and each certificate shall authorize the business tax certificate holder to transact and carry on only the business certificated thereby as the location or in the manner designated in such certificate. 
B.  Provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a certificated business under the provisions of this title shall not be deemed to be separated places of business or branch establishment. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.05.010)  
5.04.090 - Certificate—Separate for different business classifications. 
Any person conducting two or more classifications of businesses at the same or separate locations shall obtain a separate business tax certificate for each business classification and pay the tax calculated under the tax rate schedule that applies for that business classification. Separate business classifications which fall into the same tax schedule may pay a combined business tax calculated under the tax rate schedule that applies to the business classifications. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.05.020)  
5.04.100 - Separate location—Combined tax payment. 
Any person conducting the same business at two or more locations may at their option pay a combined business tax calculated under the tax rate schedule that applies to the business classification. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.05.030)  
5.04.110 - Evidence of conducting business. 
When any person shall by use of any promotional media—including but not limited to print, audio, visual, or electronic media including websites, web marketing, advertising or promotional websites, social media, or traditional promotional methods, including but not limited to signs, circulars, bills, cards, telephone books, or newspapers—promote, market, advertise, hold out or represent that they or an entity they own, operate, manage, or control are in business in the town, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that they are in business in the town, and such person fails to deny by a sworn statement given to the collector that they are not conducting a business in the town, after being requested to do so by the collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that they are conducting a business in the town. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: Ch. 5.06) 
(Ord. No. 11-03, § 3(Exh. A, 10), 11-30-2011)  
5.04.120 - Application of provisions—Interstate commerce protection. 
None of the business taxes provided for by this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the constitutions of the United States and the state of California. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.07.010)  
5.04.130 - Appeal for adjustment. 
A.  In any case where a business tax is believed by a certificate holder or applicant for certificate to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, they may apply to the collector for an adjustment of the tax. 
1.  Such application may be made before, at or within six months after payment of the prescribed business tax. 
2.  The applicant shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, show the method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden or violation. 
3.  The collector shall then conduct an investigation and, after having first obtained the written approval of the town attorney, shall fix as the business tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or if the business tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the business tax so fixed. 
4.  In fixing the business tax to be charged, the collector shall have the power to base the business tax upon a percentage of gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the business tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the business tax as prescribed by this title. 
5.  Should the collector determine the gross receipts measure of business tax to be the proper basis, the collector may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant's business in the town, or at the end of each quarter period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of business tax therefor; provided, that no additional business tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the certificate holder shall have paid an amount equal to the annual business tax as prescribed in this title. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.07.020)  
5.04.140 - Exemptions—Payment waiver. 
No person engaged in any business described in Section 5.04.160 shall be required to pay any tax or fee prescribed in this title, and such persons are exempted from payment thereof. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 1(part), 1993)  
5.04.150 - Exemptions—Statement. 
A.  Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this chapter shall file a sworn statement with the collector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed, and in the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such person shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by this title. The applicant shall provide any such other information the collector shall deem necessary in order to determine the validity of any claimed exemption. 
B.  The collector shall, upon a proper showing contained in the sworn statement, issue a certificate to such person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the town of the business tax required by this title. 
C.  The collector, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a certificate holder, may revoke any certificate granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter upon information that the certificate holder is not entitled to the exemption as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.08.020)  
5.04.160 - Exemptions—Business designated. 
The following are the businesses declared to be exempt from payment of business tax by this section: 
A.  Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations. Any church, school, charitable, benevolent or social organization conducting any exhibition, show or performance for the exclusive benefit of such organization. Also any such organization conducting any sale or business for the exclusive benefit of such organization provided such organization is located within the corporate limits of the town. This exemption shall not apply to any person operating any business, show, sale, exhibition or enterprise for profit or who shares such profit with any such organization. The businesses shall be granted an exemption provided they furnish the collector with their correct tax exemption identification number (501(C)(3)) issued by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States. 
B.  Conflict with Federal and State Law. Any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California from the payment to municipal corporations of such taxes as are prescribed by this title. 
C.  Employees. No person who is an employee shall be required to pay a separate tax for doing any part of the work of such certificate holder. 
D.  Minors. Businesses owned and conducted by minors under the age of sixteen years where all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  All persons engaged in the operation of the business shall be under the age of sixteen years. 
2.  All persons engaged in the operation of the business shall have a bona fide ownership interest in the business. 
E.  Newspaper Vending Machines. Newspaper vending machines wherein periodicals published at least once each week are dispensed or sold upon the insertion of a coin or coins. 
F.  Intercity Transportation Business. Nothing contained in this title shall be deemed to levy a business tax upon the intercity transportation business of any express corporation, freight forwarder, motor transportation broker, or person or corporation, not having a fixed place of business with the town, and transporting goods, wares or merchandise through the town where both the original point and destination point of such transported property are not within the boundaries of the town. 
G.  Veterans. Persons honorably discharged or honorably relieved from any of the Armed Forces of the United States of America, who are physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor. Such persons shall be permitted to lawfully hawk, peddle or vend any goods, wares or merchandise (not prohibited by law) owned by him except spirituous, malt, vinous or other intoxicating liquor, without payment of any business tax whatsoever. The town shall issue to the veteran without cost a business certificate; provided, that the applicant has proof of his right to the exemption and has exhibited to the collector or his representative a certificate of honorable discharge from any of the Armed Services of the United States, and a certificate of medical disability connected with such armed service. The exemption applies to the veteran personally and shall not apply to a distributing or other business conducted by such a veteran in which others are employed. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt any person, institution, organization or business from complying with the provisions of this code requiring a permit to conduct, manage or carry on any such lecture, entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition, show or business. 
H.  Public Utilities. There is exempted from the provisions of this title any public utility operating in the town under a franchise or franchises from the town and which make franchise payments thereunder to the town. 
I.  Other Coin-operated Machines. Such as coin toilets, cigarette machines, and coin-operated laundry machines incidental to a separately certificated business and not located in a separate business commonly known as a laundromat. 
J.  Occasional and Incidental Businesses. Any business that is conducted on an occasional basis and is incidental to a business which is certificated under the provisions of this title may not be deemed as a separate business upon review by the board of review (Sections 5.04.370 through 5.04.440) as to the circumstances of the business and determination of application of this exemption. 
K.  Concerts, theatrical performances, dances and similar activities conducted, operated, or sponsored by a nonprofit tax-exempt organization or by a government agency. 
L.  Musicians, bands, and actors that perform in theatre performances, plays, dramas, concerts, or other events are exempt from payment of business tax if their annual gross receipts are less than ten thousand dollars. Gross receipts generated from retail sales are not exempt and a business tax as specified in Section 5.08.010 Schedule A is required. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.08.030) 
(Ord. No. 08-14, 12-17-2009; Ord. No. 11-03, § 3(Exh. A, 11), 11-30-2011)  
5.04.170 - Certificate application—Contents. 
Every person required to have a business tax certificate under the provisions of this title shall make application as prescribed in this chapter for the same to the collector of the town, and upon the payment of the prescribed business tax the collector shall issue to such person a certificate which contain the following information: 
A.  The name of the person to whom the certificate is issued; 
B.  The type of business certificated; 
C.  The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on; 
D.  The date of the expiration of such certificate; and 
E.  Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.09.010)  
5.04.180 - Certificate application—Multiple certificates. 
Whenever the tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter is measured by the number of rental units, vehicles, devices, machines, or other pieces of equipment used, or whenever the business tax is measured by the gross receipts from the operation of such items, the collector shall issue only one certificate; provided, that one identification sticker, tag, plate, or symbol for each item included in the measure of the tax or used in a business where the tax is measured by the gross receipts from such items may be issued for each tax period for which the business tax has been paid. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.09.020)  
5.04.190 - Certificate application—Existing certificate. 
A.  Upon a person making application for a certificate to be issued under this chapter or for a newly established business, such person shall furnish to the collector a sworn statement, upon a form provided by the collector, setting forth the following information: 
1.  The exact nature or kind of business for which a certificate is requested; 
2.  The place where such business is to be carried on, and if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, the places of residences of the owners of same; 
3.  The legal form of the business; 
4.  In the event that application is made for the issuance of a certificate to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and places of residences of those owning the business; 
5.  In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a certificate to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall set forth the names and places of residences of the officers or partners thereof; 
6.  In all cases where the amount of business tax to be paid is measured by gross receipts, the application shall set forth such information as may be therein required and as may be necessary to determine the amount of the business tax to be paid by the applicant; 
7.  Any further information which the collector may require to enable issuance of the type of certificate applied for. 
B.  If the amount of the business tax to be paid by the applicant is measured by gross receipts, the applicant shall use the gross receipts identified on the most recent federal income tax form that was due during the previous calendar year adjusted for taxable events within the town. Such amount, if accepted by the collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of business tax to be paid by the applicant. 
C.  All businesses engaged in the performance of services of a licensed contractor of the state of California shall measure gross receipts by job valuation less amounts paid to subcontractors as provided for in this title. Any contractor who, as a result of higher activity during the period for which a certificate has been issued, is determined to have paid an inadequate tax, shall be required to pay any additional tax due at the time of building permit application. 
D.  The collector shall not issue to any such person another certificate for the same or any other business, until such person shall have furnished a sworn statement and paid the business tax as requiredin this chapter. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 1(part), 1993)  
5.04.200 - Gross receipts computation. 
Until a new business has been established for a full calendar year, the business tax shall be computed and paid as follows: 
A.  At the time an application is made for a business certificate, the certificate holder shall pay the minimum tax for the applicable classification of business or an estimated tax based on the average tax paid by the type of business whichever is greater and prorated on a quarterly basis of the initial business tax period; provided, that the tax shall not be less than twenty-five dollars. 
B.  At the commencement of the second business tax period, the certificate holder shall file with the collector, on a form provided by the collector's office, a verified statement of gross receipts from taxable events within the town for the initial period and based thereon the tax for that period shall be adjusted and the certificate holder shall pay additional tax or receive a credit applicable to the succeeding tax period for any reduction in tax. At the same time, for the renewal period, the certificate holder shall pay the tax based on the verified statement of gross receipts of the initial tax period. 
C.  For each succeeding business tax period, the certificate holder shall file a verified statement of gross receipts from the most recent federal tax form that was due during the previous calendar year adjusted for taxable events within the town and shall pay a business tax computed on such statement at the rate specified for the applicable business category. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 1(part), 1993)  
5.04.210 - Flat rate tax. 
When a new business' classification falls under a flat rate schedule, the tax shall be prorated on a quarterly basis; provided, that the tax shall not be less than twenty-five dollars when the annual rate is twenty-five dollars or greater; further provided, that when the annual tax is less then twenty-five dollars there will be no proration of the tax. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.10.020)  
5.04.220 - Gross receipts statement. 
No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the town from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable under this chapter. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the collector, deputies or authorized employees of the town, who are authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records of any such certificate holder or applicant for a certificate, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amounts of business tax due. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.11.010)  
5.04.230 - Records required. 
All persons subject to the provisions of this title shall keep complete records of business transactions, including sales, receipts, purchases and other expenditures, and shall retain all such records for examination by the collector. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years. No person required to keep records under this chapter shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the collector to examine the records at reasonable times and places. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.11.020)  
5.04.240 - Confidentiality. 
It is unlawful for the collector or any person having an administrative duty under the provisions of this title to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a certificate, or pay a business tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstraction or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.12.010)  
5.04.250 - Disclosure exceptions. 
Provided that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent: 
A.  The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another town official, employee or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter, or collecting taxes imposed under this chapter; 
B.  The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, federal or state officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or court of law upon subpoena; 
C.  The disclosure of information and results of examination of records of particular taxpayers, or relating to particular taxpayers, to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any business tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the town; 
D.  The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, or to his successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and quarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the town attorney approves each such disclosure and that the collector may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when in the collector's opinion the public interest would suffer thereby; 
E.  The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom certificates have been issued, the legal form, and the classification of the business; 
F.  The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary to the town council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of business taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted by the town for business taxes, or when acting upon any other matter; 
G.  The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the town. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.12.020)  
5.04.260 - Appeal—Hearing. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector with respect to any action taken under this title may appeal to the town council by filing a notice of appeal with the town clerk only after exhausting the administrative procedures in Section 5.04.370 through 5.04.440. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The town clerk shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or be depositing it in the United States Post Office at Mammoth Lakes, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such persons at the last known address. The council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of this title. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code Ch. 5.13)  
5.04.270 - Collector—Additional powers. 
In addition to all other power conferred, the collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend by written instrument the time for filing any required sworn statement or application for a period not exceeding thirty days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued, except that twelve percent simple interest shall be added to any tax determined to be payable. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code Ch. 5.14)  
5.04.280 - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the collector and qualified deputies, with the advice and assistance of the town attorney, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this title, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement thereof as may from time to time be required by the collector, the town attorney, or the town council. The collector may have all places of business in the town examined to ascertain whether or not the provisions of this chapter have been complied with, and in connection therewith has the power to enter, free of charge, and to reasonable times, any place of business certificated under this chapter for the purpose of this inspection. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.15.010)  
5.04.290 - Failure to exhibit certificate—Violation. 
A.  Any person who fails to exhibit the business tax certificate as required in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be subject to civil penalties as provided in Chapter 8.32. 
B.  The collector, or his/her designee, may examine the necessary books and records of any certificate holder. Any certificate holder refusing to exhibit the necessary books and records, as required by the collector or deputy, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be subject to civil penalties as provided in Chapter 8.32. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.15.020) 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 3(Exh. A), 6-15-2011)  
5.04.300 - Certificate—Nontransferable. 
A.  No certificate issued pursuant to this title shall be transferable: 
1.  Provided, that where a certificate is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such certificate holder may upon application therefor have the certificate amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under the certificate at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved; 
2.  Provided, further that transfer, whether by sale or otherwise, to another person under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership existing before the transfer, shall not be prohibited by this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the certificate holder is a corporation and more than fifty percent of its stock is sold, transferred or conveyed within one calendar year, such transfer shall constitute a change of ownership requiring issuance of a new certificate. 
3.  For the purposes of this chapter stockholders, bondholders, partnerships, or other persons holding an interest in a corporation or other entity defined in this chapter to be a person are regarded as having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other entity. 
(Ord. 95-06 § 1, 1995; Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.16.010)  
5.04.310 - Certificate—Duplicate. 
A duplicate certificate may be issued by the collector to replace any certificate previously issued under this chapter which has been lost or destroyed upon the certificate holder filing statement of such fact, and at the time of filing such statement paying to the collector a duplicate certificate fee which shall be established by resolution. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.16.020)  
5.04.320 - Certificate—Posting required. 
A.  Any certificate holder transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the town shall keep the certificate posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
B.  Any certificate holder transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the town shall keep the certificate for presentation to the collector or deputy at all times while transacting and carrying on the business for which it is issued. 
C.  Whenever identifying stickers, tags, plates or symbols have been issued for each rental unit, vehicle, device, machine or other piece of equipment included in the measure of a business tax, the person to whom such stickers, tags, plates or symbols have been issued shall keep firmly affixed upon each rental unit, vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment the identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol which has been issued therefor at such locations as are designated by the collector. Such sticker, tag, plate or symbol shall not be removed from any rental unit, vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment kept in use, during the period for which the sticker, tag, plate or symbol is issued. 
D.  No person shall fail to affix as required in this chapter any identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol to the rental unit, vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment, for which it has been issued at the location designated by the collector, or to give away, sell or transfer such identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol to another person, or to permit its use by another person. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.17.010)  
5.04.330 - Payment—Schedule. 
A.  Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual business taxes, under the provisions of this title, shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of January of each year or on the day the business commences operations for the first time, whichever is later. The annual business taxes on businesses subject to a tax under Section 5.08.030(A)(23) shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of October of each year or on the day the business commences operations for the first time, whichever is later. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, business taxes other than annual, required hereunder shall be due and payable as follows: 
1.  Semiannual business taxes, measured by gross receipts, on the first day of January and the first day of July of each year; 
2.  Quarterly business taxes, measured by gross receipts, on the first day of January, April, July and October of each year; 
3.  Monthly business taxes, measured by gross receipts, on the first day of each and every month; 
4.  Weekly flat-rate business taxes on Monday of each week in advance; 
5.  Daily flat-rate business taxes each day in advance; 
6.  Other flat-rate business taxes are payable in advance on the first day of business and thereafter on the first day of any applicable period. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 1(part), 1993)  
5.04.340 - Unlawful business prohibited. 
No certificate issued under this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the conduct of or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business or activity. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code Ch. 5.19)  
5.04.350 - Delinquent tax—Penalty. 
A.  For failure to pay a business tax when due, the collector shall add a penalty of twenty percent of the business tax on the first day of the month following the last timely payment date. For continued failure to pay a business tax in the subsequent months, the tax collector shall add an additional penalty of twenty percent per month; providing, that the amount of such penalty to be added shall in no event exceed one hundred percent of the amount of the business tax. 
B.  In addition to the above penalty, twelve percent simple interest shall be added to any tax amount delinquent and determined to be payable. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 1, 1993)  
5.04.360 - Delinquent tax—Installment payment. 
A.  No certificate or sticker, tag, plate, or symbol shall be issued, nor one which has been suspended or revoked shall be reinstated or reissued, or [to] any person, who at the time of applying therefor, is indebted to the town for any delinquent business tax, other taxes imposed in installments under an agreement as determined by the collector, and/or other fees owed to or collected by the town, including without limitation building permit fees and business improvement district assessments. 
B.  In any agreement so entered into, such person shall acknowledge the obligation owed to the town and agree that, in the event of failure to make timely payment of any installment, the whole amount unpaid shall become immediately due and payable and that the current certificate shall be revocable by the collector upon thirty days' notice. 
C.  In the event legal action is brought by the town to enforce collection of any amount included in the agreement, such person shall pay all costs of suit incurred by the town of its assignee, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
D.  The execution of such an agreement shall not prevent the prior accrual of penalties on unpaid balances at the rate provided in this section, but no penalties shall accrue on account of taxes included in the agreement after the execution of the agreement, and the payment of the first installment and during such time as such person shall not be in breach of the agreement. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.20.020) 
(Ord. No. 14-11, § 2B, 12-3-2014)  
5.04.370 - Assessment—Notice. 
A.  Assessment of Taxes. Whenever the collector determines that any tax is due or may be due to the town under the provisions of this title, the collector may make and give notice of the assessment of such tax. 
B.  The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any tax known or determined by the collector to be due or estimated to be due by the collector, after full consideration of all information with the collector's knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person assessed, to be due under each applica-ble chapter of this title and shall include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the date of the notice of assessment. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.21.010)  
5.04.380 - Assessment—Hearing. 
The notice of assessment shall be served upon the person either by handing it to him or her personally, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, Mammoth Lakes Post Office, California, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the business appearing on the face of the business certificate issued to the business or to such other address as he or she shall register with the collector for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this title; should the person have no certificate issued to him or her and should he or she have no address registered with the collector for such purpose, then to such person's last known address. For the purpose of this section, a service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail. Within fifteen days after the date of service, the person assessed may apply in writing to the collector for a hearing on the assessment. If the person does not request a hearing upon the assessment within the prescribed time, the amount of the assessment shall be final and the amount thereof shall immediately be due and owing to the town, but penalties and interest as provided by this title shall continue to accrue until paid. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.21.020)  
5.04.390 - Assessment—Hearing notice. 
If the person requests a hearing upon the assessment the collector shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before a board of review not later than ninety days after the date of the application. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the person assessed not later than fifteen days before the date set for hearing and, if the collector desires the person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records required to be produced. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.21.030)  
5.04.400 - Administrative hearing. 
The hearing prescribed by this chapter shall be before a board of review. The board of review shall be composed of the town manager, collector and the town attorney, or the duly appointed representative of each. At the hearing the person assessed and the collector may submit such evidence as they believe to be relevant to their respective positions. The board of review may require the presentation of additional evidence from either the person assessed or from the collector, or from both. The board of review may continue the hearing from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.21.040)  
5.04.410 - Administrative hearing—Decision. 
Upon completion of the hearing, the board of review may: 
A.  Affirm the assessment; 
B.  Increase the assessment; or 
C.  Decrease the assessment, as the evidence may require; 
D.  But the amount of the assessment shall not be increased unless the claim for the increase is asserted on behalf of the town either before or during the hearing. Written notice of the decision of the board of review shall be given to the person assessed in the same form and in the same manner as the notice of assessment. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.21.050)  
5.04.420 - Exception filing. 
Within fifteen days from the date of service of the notice of decision of the board of review, the person assessed may file written exceptions to the decision of the board of review, but shall not be required to do so. If the person does not do so, the person shall be deemed to have exhausted the administrative proceedings provided by this chapter. Upon filing of written exceptions, the board of review may either deny the exception or modify its decision, as it deems appropriate. If the board of review modifies its decision, it shall cause a written notice of decision as required by Section 5.04.410, to be given to the person assessed at the time, and in the manner provided therein. If the board of review does not modify its decision within thirty days from the service of the exceptions, the exceptions shall be deemed denied. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.21.060)  
5.04.430 - Delay not to affect validity. 
Failure of the collector to set any hearing within the time prescribed in this chapter and failure of the board of review to complete any procedure prescribed in this chapter within the period stated shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.21.070)  
5.04.440 - Assessment—Additional authorized. 
Acceptance of any payment upon an assessment, the validity of which has not previously been passed upon by the board of review, shall not preclude the collector from subsequently levying another assessment in any case where the original assessment does not truly reflect the correct tax liability. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.21.080)  
5.04.450 - Civil remedy. 
In addition to a misdemeanor prosecution, the collector, with the advice and assistance of the town attorney, may use all civil remedies to obtain payment of the amount of business tax due, including but not limited to imposition of civil penalties and/or administrative citations pursuant to Chapter 8.32. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code Ch. 5.22) 
(Ord. No. 11-03, § 3(Exh. A, 12), 11-30-2011)  
5.04.460 - Refund—Filing request required. 
No refund of any overpayment of taxes imposed by this title shall be allowed in whole or in part unless a claim for refund is filed with the collector within a period of three years from the last day of the calendar month following the period for which the overpayment was made, and all such claims for refund must be filed with the collector on forms furnished by the collector and in the manner prescribed by the collector. Upon the filing of such a claim and when it is determined that an overpayment has been made, the collector may refund the amount overpaid. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.23.010)  
5.04.470 - Refund—Payment. 
Any business tax or portion thereof, or any penalty hereafter paid more than once, or paid illegally, erroneously or wrongfully, may be refunded, provided, that a claim therefor, duly verified by the person paying such tax or penalty, or authorized representative, agent or attorney, shall have been filed with the collector within one hundred days after the date that the business was discontinued or within one hundred days after discovery that the fee was illegally, erroneously or wrongfully paid. Such claims shall be processed in the same manner as other claims for refunds. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.23.020)  
5.04.480 - Rules and regulations promulgation. 
The collector may make rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this title as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code Ch. 5.24)  
5.04.490 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the town shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code Ch. 5.25)  
5.04.500 - Effect on past actions. 
Neither the adoption of this title nor its superceding of any portion of any other ordinance of the town shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any business tax or any penal provisions applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto pertaining shall continued in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code Ch. 5.26)  
5.04.510 - Business not otherwise specified—Tax setting. 
It is the intent and purpose of this title to certificate, for revenue, all businesses, occupations, trades, callings or professions carried on within the town, other than those specifically excepted, and if the application for a business tax certificate is made for any business not specifically referred to in this title or nor included in any of the provisions of this title fixing business taxes, the collector shall cause the applicant to file an application for a business tax certificate and the same shall be considered, and a business tax shall be fixed by the collector classifying the business and applying the tax rate schedule to be paid by such applicant. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code Ch. 5.27)  
Chapter 5.08 - BUSINESS TAX RATES 
Sections: 
 
5.08.010 - Tax based on gross receipts. 
The following tax rates shall be applicable to every business declared to be subject to a tax based upon gross receipts: 
A.  Schedule A. Retail sales, including, but not limited to, auto parts and accessories, sporting goods, restaurants, fast foods, gasoline stations, bakeries, candy and ice cream stores, florists, grocery stores, clothing and hardware stores. 
If Gross Receipts Are 	The Tax Rate Is 
Under $5,000.00 	$0.00 (However, a business license tax certificate is required.) 
Under $25,000.00 	$50.00 
Over $25,000.00 but not over $200,000.00 	$50.00 plus $1.00 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $25,000.00 
Over $200,000.00 but not over $500,000.00 	$225.00 plus $.0.50 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $200,000.00 
Over $500,000.00 	$375.00 plus $0.25 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $500,000.00 
 
B.  Schedule B. Service businesses, including, but not limited to, beauty salons, barber shops, shoe repairs, laundries, travel agents, dry cleaners, laundromats, day care centers, savings and loan associations or financial institutions, contractors/subcontractors, commercial property rental and/or leasing, and all mercantile, manufacturing or other businesses not otherwise listed. 
If Gross Receipts Are 	The Tax Rate Is 
Under $5,000.00 	$0.00 (However, a business license tax certificate is required.) 
Under $25,000.00 	$50.00 
Over $25,000.00 but not over $100,000.00 	$50.00 plus $1.00 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $25,000.00 
Over $100,000.00 but not over $500,000.00 	$125.00 plus $.0.50 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $100,000.00 
Over $500,000.00 	$325.00 plus $0.25 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $500,000.00 
 
C.  Schedule C. Entertainment and recreation, including but not limited to, ski resorts, movie theaters, bowling alleys, roller and ice rinks, shooting galleries, rifle ranges, driving ranges, miniature golf, pools, performing arts theaters, amphitheaters, health clubs, tennis and racquetball clubs: 
If Gross Receipts Are 	The Tax Rate Is 
Under $5,000.00 	$0.00 (However, a business license tax certificate is required.) 
Under $25,000.00 	$50.00 
Over $25,000.00 but not over $100,000.00 	$50.00 plus $1.00 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $25,000.00 
Over $100,000.00 but not over $250,000.00 	$125.00 plus $.0.75 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $100,000.00 
Over $250,000.00 but not over $500,000.00 	$240.00 plus $.0.50 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $250,000.00 
Over $500,000.00 	$365.00 plus $0.25 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $500,000.00 
 
D.  Schedule D. Professional services including, but not limited to, medical or dental offices, chiropractors, optometrists, opticians, veterinary clinics, kennels, law offices, lawyers, accountants, architects, engineers, title companies, surveyors, appraisers and real estate sales. 
If Gross Receipts Are 	The Tax Rate Is 
Under $5,000.00 	$0.00 (However, a business license tax certificate is required.) 
Under $25,000.00 	$75.00 
Over $25,000.00 but not over $200,000.00 	$75.00 plus $1.50 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $25,000.00 
Over $200,000.00 but not over $500,000.00 	$337.50 plus $.0.75 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $200,000.00 
Over $500,000.00 	$550.00 plus $0.375 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $500,000.00 
 
E.  Schedule E. Including hotels, motels, lodges, inns, mobile home parks, RV parks and campgrounds; but not condominium rentals. 
	The Tax Rate Is 
For RV parks and campgrounds 	$25.00 plus $2.50 per space available to rent 
For hotels, motels, lodges, inns and mobile home parks 	$25.00 plus $5.00 per space or room available to rent 
 
F.  Schedule F. Long term rentals (over thirty consecutive days) consisting of two units or more; and all transient units (including single units) whether single-family residence, condominium rentals, apartments, rental management services, reservation services including units rented privately and units under management. 
	The Tax Rate Is 
For the first unit 	$25.00 
Additional amount of the second unit 	$25.00 
Additional amount for each unit over two 	$5.00 
 
G.  Schedule G. Communication businesses, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, radio stations, television stations and telephone services. 
If Gross Receipts Are 	The Tax Rate Is 
Under $25,000.00 	$50.00 
Over $25,000.00 but not over $10,000,000.00 	$50.00 plus $0.10 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $25,000.00 
Over $10,000,000.00 	$1,050.00 plus $0.05 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $10,000,000.00 
 
H.  Schedule H. Vending machines, including all vending machines vending tangible personal property. 
If Gross Receipts Are 	The Tax Rate Is 
Under $25,000.00 	$10.00 
Over $25,000.00 	$10.00 plus $0.50 per $1,000.00 on fraction of the excess over $25,000.00 
 
(Ord. 08-09 § 2, 2008; Ord. 06-01 § 1, 2006; Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.28.010; Ord. No. 08-14, 12-17-2009; Ord. No. 14-11, § 2C, 12-3-2014)  
5.08.020 - Tax based on flat rate. 
A.  Amusement machines: including, but not limited to, electronic games, pinball, pool and billiard tables shall pay a business tax of $10.00 per machine/table in addition to any other applicable business tax for the business where the machine or table is located. 
B.  Transportation services: including passenger and freight service for hire, delivery trucks for hire shall pay a business tax of fifty dollars per business regardless of number of vehicles. 
C.  Daily business tax for those businesses which by nature are conducted from a temporary or nonfixed place of business shall be fifty dollars. 
1.  If the business is conducted as a part of an outdoor/indoor entertainment, festival, or performing arts event then the business shall be included in the business tax schedule in Section 5.08.030(A)(13). The business tax will be for the organizer of the outdoor/indoor entertainment, festival, or performing arts event and for all individual vendors, musicians, artists and actors that are participating in the event. 
(Ord. 94-06 § 1, 1994; Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.28.020; Ord. No. 08-14, 12-17-2009)  
5.08.030 - Business classification-Designated. 
A.  Except where a business shall be specifically taxed pursuant to another chapter of this title, every person conducting, managing or carrying on any business at a fixed place of business with the town shall pay a business tax based upon gross receipts as follows: 
1.  Businesses consisting mainly of selling at retail, shall pay a tax based upon tax rate schedule A. 
2.  Savings and loan associations or financial institutions. Businesses where the principal business activity is the loaning of money, advancing of credit, loaning of credit, or arranging for the loan of money or advancing of credit or loaning of credit and not otherwise specifically certificated by other sections of this chapter shall pay a tax based upon tax rate schedule B. 
3.  Security Brokers/Dealers. For every person in the general business of buying and selling securities, the business tax shall be based upon tax rate schedule B. 
4.  Businesses where the principal business activity is manufacturing, packing, processing, carrying or selling at wholesale any goods, wares, merchandise or produce shall pay a tax based upon tax rate schedule B. 
5.  The professions, vocations or callings referred to in this title include, but are not limited to the following: 
Accountant 
Appraiser 
Architect 
Assayer 
Attorney-at-law 
Auditor 
Bacteriologist 
Bond broker 
Certified public accountant 
Chemist 
Chiropodist 
Chiropractor 
Civil engineer 
Commercial artist 
Commission merchant 
Court reporter 
Credit reporter 
Decorator (interior) 
Dental technician 
Dentist 
Designer 
Doctor-medical 
Draftsman 
Drugless practitioner 
Electrical engineer 
Electrologist 
Financial advisor 
Geologist 
Hypnotist or hypnotherapist 
Insurance broker 
Landscape architect 
Manufacturer's agent 
Mechanical engineer 
Mining engineer 
Oculist 
Optician 
Optometrist 
Osteopath 
Pilot 
Physician 
Psychiatrist 
Publicity agent 
Real estate broker/agent 
Stock broker 
Surgeon 
Surveyor 
Tax counselor 
Veterinarian 
The professions in this subdivision and others not listed shall pay a business tax based upon tax rate schedule D. 
6.  Where the principal business activity is the furnishing of services, and where such business is not specifically certificated by other sections of this chapter, those businesses shall pay a tax based upon tax rate schedule B. 
7.  A business required to be licensed contractor by the state of California is a person, organization, copartnership, corporation, association or other organization, or any combination of thereof, who, for a fixed sum , price, fee, percentage or other compensation, other than wages, undertakes for another the construction, alteration, repair, addition to or improvement of any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project development or improvement of any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project development or improvement other than to personalty, or any part thereof; provided, that "contractor," as used in this chapter, includes subcontractors, but does not include anyone who merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating the same into or consuming the same in the performance of the work of the contractor as defined in this title. Contractors shall pay a tax based upon tax rate schedule B. 
8.  Telephone Services. For every person engaged in the business of providing telephone services, the business tax shall be based upon tax rate schedule G. 
a.  For the purposes of this chapter, "gross receipts" has the same meaning as in Section 5.04.020, except that only those receipts derived from providing telephone services within the town shall be included, and further excepting that only receipts resulting from intrastate telephone services shall be included. 
b.  A "person engaged in the business of providing telephone services" means, for the purpose of this section, a "telephone company" as that term is used in Article XIII, Section 14 of the Constitution of California. 
9.  Commission Agent, Broker or Merchant. 
a.  For every person engaged in the business of a commission agent, broker or merchant, not otherwise specifically taxed by other sections of this title, the person shall pay a tax based on tax rate schedule B. 
b.  For the purpose of this section, the business of a commission agent, broker or merchant shall be deemed to include the buying and selling of goods, wares, or merchandise by a person to the extent that the person: 
i.  Does not engage in the business of manufacturing, refining, fabricating, milling, treating or other processing of the goods, wares or merchandise bought and sold, and does not cause such goods, wares or merchandise to be manufactured, refined, fabricated, milled, treated or otherwise processed; 
ii.  Does not obtain or retain title to the goods, wares or merchandise except in one or more of the following situations: while such may be in transit, or for short periods of time before transportation commences or after it ceases; and 
iii.  Does not store or warehouse such goods, wares or merchandise except during one or more of the following situations: while such goods, wares or merchandise are actually in transit, or for short periods of time before transportation commences or after it ceases. 
10.  Newspapers, Magazines, Radio Stations. 
a.  Newspaper Business. Every person conducting the business of publishing a newspaper, magazine or other periodical, shall pay a business tax based on tax rate schedule G. 
b.  Newspaper or Magazine Distribution. Every person engaged in the business of selling or delivering newspapers, magazines or other periodicals, capable of being entered as second class matter under the provisions of the United States Post Office regulations and federal statutes, through the physical presence of himself, his employees, his agents or his equipment, or regular customers, street hands, or bona fide subscribers within the town, shall pay a business tax based on tax rate schedule G. 
c.  The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to any person who is subject to the tax provisions of subparagraph a of this subdivision, nor shall such provisions be construed to require the payment of any tax by any person who is bona fide employee of the person who by reason of such sales is subject to tax under the provisions of this subparagraph or subparagraph (a) of this subdivision; provided, further, that for the purpose of this subsection, newspaper residential route carriers shall be deemed employees of either the newspaper or the person acting as an independent contractor for the distribution of newspapers. 
d.  Radio Station. Every person conducting the business of a radio station shall pay a business tax based on tax rate schedule G. 
11.  Businesses consisting of the rental of permanent dwellings, such as transient occupancy facilities, shall pay a business tax based upon tax rate schedule F in addition to transient occupancy taxes required by other town ordinances or other jurisdictions. 
12.  Advertising-Use of Billboard and Advertising Signboards. 
a.  Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of billposting, advertising by means of electric signs or signs advertising by means of billboards or advertising signboards shall pay an annual business tax of one hundred dollars. 
b.  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed or construed as applying to the owners of real estate who, by means of billboards or advertising signboards situated upon the property advertised for sale or lease are seeking the sale or lease of the real property. 
13.  Outdoor Entertainment/festival. Except where conducted in a recreation park or amusement center, every person conducting, managing or carrying on any street exhibition, outdoor entertainment, art exhibit, festival or similar enterprise or any tent show where seating accommodations are not provided for which exhibition, entertainment, enterprise or tent show is not specifically provided for in this chapter and for which a charge is made or collected, shall pay a daily business tax of one hundred dollars. 
14.  Nonprofit sponsors of outdoor entertainment. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, upon application by a sponsoring nonprofit organization to and upon permission granted by the town council, the tax on any activity for which a certificate is required by subdivision 13 of this subsection shall be zero dollars per day, provided that the activity for which the permit is granted shall not continue for a period in excess of thirty consecutive days and the sponsoring nonprofit organization shall assume full responsibility for the cleanup at the end of the event. 
15.  Coin-operated Vending Machines. 
a.  Each person engaged in managing, conducting or carrying on the business of leasing, letting the use of, renting and maintaining any vending, weight or merchandise machine or device, not otherwise certified under this chapter, where coins are inserted shall pay an annual business tax based on gross receipts as set forth in tax rate schedule B. 
b.  The collector may issue decals for each vending machine owned or operated by each certificate holder which shall be prominently displayed upon each such machine. 
c.  Stamp vending machines selling or dispensing postage stamps of the United States for mailing purposes are exempt from the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
16.  Junk Collectors and Dealers-Pawnbrokers. Every person conducting, managing or operating any of the businesses enumerated in this subdivision shall pay an annual business tax on gross receipts as set forth in tax rate schedule B. 
a.  The Business of Junk Collecting. For the purpose of this chapter, a junk collector is any person, other than a junk dealer, engaged in the business of buying or selling, at either wholesale or retail, bottles, papers, cans, metals or other articles of junk. 
b.  The Business of Auto Wrecker. For the purpose of this chapter an auto wrecker is defined to be and construed to mean and include any person who buys any motor vehicle for the purpose of dismantling or disassembling, or who dismantles or disassembles any such motor vehicle whether for the purpose of dealing in the parts thereof or using the same for the purpose of reconditioning any other vehicle, or for the purpose of selling or otherwise dealing in the materials of such vehicles. 
c.  The Business of a Junk Dealer. For the purpose of this chapter "junk dealer" is defined to be any person having a fixed place of business in the town engaged in the business of buying or selling, either at wholesale or retail, or storing on any premises, any rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metals or other articles of junk. 
d.  The Business of Pawnbroker. For the purpose of this chapter "pawnbroker" includes every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of loaning money, either for himself or for any other person, upon any personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell such property to the vendor or other assignee at prices previously agreed upon. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to the loaning of money on personal property or personal security by any financial institution authorized to do so under the laws of the state of California or of the United States. 
17.  Theaters. 
a.  Every person conducting, managing or carrying on a theater where moving or motion pictures, legitimate theater or vaudeville shows are exhibited, whether indoors or outdoors, shall pay an annual business tax based on gross receipts as set forth in tax rate schedule C. 
b.  For theaters where moving or motion pictures are shown, the snack bar shall be included in the business certificate and tax for the theater. For all other activities listed in subsection (A)(17)(a) of this section, a separate certificate shall be obtained for snack bars, food stands or other concessions. 
18.  For-hire Vehicles. Every person conducting, managing or operating any of the businesses enumerated in this subdivision shall pay an annual business tax of fifty dollars for each business: 
a.  The business of transporting for hire passengers in a drawn or motor-propelled vehicle over a defined route, which vehicle receives and discharges passengers along the route; 
b.  The business of operating a sight-seeing bus, automobile, sleigh or other motor-propelled or drawn vehicle; 
c.  The business of carrying passengers for hire in vehicles, where the operators are furnished by the person conducting, managing or carrying on the business; 
d.  The operation of a drawn or motor-propelled passenger-carrying vehicle for the transportation of passengers over and along the public streets of the town without charge to the passengers carried for the business benefit of the operator. 
19.  Concessionaires. Every person conducting, managing or carrying on any business as a concession in the premises of a business certificated under this title shall obtain a certificate for such concession as follows: 
a.  If such concession is to be operated for a period of less than thirty days, the business tax shall be fifty dollars; 
b.  If such concession is to be operated for a period of thirty days or more, it shall be certificated as any other business; 
c.  If the concessionaire fails to obtain the certificate required within ten days of commencing operations, the person granting the concession shall be liable for the tax. 
20.  Delivery, service, etc., by vehicles by nonresident businesses. 
a.  Every person not having a fixed place of business within the town who delivers goods, wares or merchandise of any kind by vehicle, other than a certificated highway carrier on a regular route, or who provides any service by the use of vehicles in the town, and who is not otherwise certificated under the provisions of this title, shall pay an annual business tax of fifty dollars, provided that: 
i.  No such business tax shall be required where such service is occasional or incidental to business conducted elsewhere. 
ii.  For the purposes of this section, such service shall not be deemed occasional or incidental to business conducted elsewhere where trips or hauls are made beginning or ending at points within the town upon an average of once a week in any calendar quarter. 
iii.  Any person having an established route within the town or servicing regular customers on a periodic basis shall not be deemed to be occasional or incidental to business conducted elsewhere. 
b.  Exemptions and Exceptions. The business tax imposed under the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person who is subject to tax under the Highway Carriers' Uniform Business License Tax Act, commencing with Section 4301 of the California Public Utilities Code; nor shall the provisions of this section apply to the operation of any motor vehicle operated exclusively in interstate commerce. 
21.  Peddlers and Solicitors. Any person whether a resident of the town or not, traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruit, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales or delivering articles to purchasers, shall pay a business tax as follows: 
a.  Fifty dollars per year, unless the person for whom he is peddling goods has a principal solicitor or peddler business certificate as provided in subdivision 22 of this subsection; 
b.  Five dollars per year if the person for whom he is peddling has a principal solicitor or peddler business certificate as provided for in subdivision 22 of this subsection. 
22.  Principal Solicitor or Peddler. 
a.  Any person either employing or contracting with one or more individuals to solicit the retail sales of any goods, wares, merchandise, services or other things of value for future delivery, or to sell or peddle goods, wares and merchandise as set forth in subdivision 21 of this subsection, not otherwise certificated under the provisions of this chapter and not having a regularly established place of business within the town, may obtain a principal solicitor or peddler business certificate and pay a business tax of two hundred fifty dollars annually, in advance. 
b.  The collector shall not issue such certificate until the applicant files with the collector or with whom the applicant has contracted, and the signed agreement that the applicant, within five days thereafter, will notify the collector, in writing, of every change in personnel of those soliciting and peddling for him. 
23.  Chain Installer. Any person in the business of chain installing on the public right-of-way shall pay a flat fee of twenty-five dollars annually. 
24.  Any business not enumerated or not otherwise classified in this title shall pay a business tax based on tax rate schedule B. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 1(part), 1993; Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.28.010)  
5.08.040 - Reclassification appeal. 
A.  In any case where a certificate holder or an applicant for a certificate believes that his individual business is not assigned to the proper classification under this chapter because of circumstances peculiar to it, as distinguished from other businesses of the same kind, he may apply to the collector for reclassification. Such application shall contain such information as the collector may deem necessary and required in order to determine whether the applicant's individual business is properly classified. The collector shall then conduct an investigation following which he shall assign the applicant's individual business to the classification shown to be proper on the basis of such investigation. The proper classification is that classification or classifications which, in the opinion of the collector, most nearly fits the applicant's individual business or businesses. The reclassification shall not be retroactive, but shall apply at the time of the next regularly ensuing calculation of the applicant's tax. No business shall be reclassified more than once in one year. 
B.  The collector shall notify the applicant of the action taken on the application for reclassification. Such notice shall be given by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office of Mammoth Lakes, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at his last known address. Such applicant may, within fifteen days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make written request to the collector for a hearing on his reclassification. If such request is made within the time prescribed, the collector shall set an administrative hearing as prescribed in Section 5.04.400. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.28.020)  
5.08.050 - Business outside town. 
A.  Every person who at or from the place or base of operations located outside the town conducts, manages, carries on, or engages in, any business, trade, profession, occupation, or calling shall pay a business tax at the same rate as the same type of business having a fixed place of business within the town unless otherwise specifically taxed by some other chapter of this title. 
B.  Provided, however, that nothing in this section shall apply to attorneys whose only business done in the town is in the courts operated in this town, nor to doctors whose only business done in the town is surgery and/or consultation in a regularly established hospital in the town, nor to any other business, trade, profession, occupation or calling where the activity is only occasional and incidental to that at the location outside of the town. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.30.010; Ord. No. 08-14, 12-17-2009)  
Chapter 5.12 - BURGLAR ALARM BUSINESS 
Sections: 
 
5.12.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the burglar alarm business ordinance of the town. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.010)  
5.12.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this chapter and, except to the extent that a particular word or phrase is otherwise specifically defined in this section, the common definitions of such word or phrase shall also govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. The definition of each word or phrase which is derived from it, or from which it is a derivative, as the case may be, is as follows: 
"Alarm agent" means any person who is employed by an alarm business, either directly or indirectly, whose duties include but are not limited to selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system in or on any building or structure in the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Alarm business" means the business of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system in or on any building or structure in the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Alarm system" means any device or system which is designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building or structure or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building or structure or that detects smoke or fire, and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated. Alarm systems include but are not limited to, audible alarms, subscriber and proprietor alarm systems. 
"Alarm user" means any person who uses an alarm system including any subscriber or proprietor alarm system. 
"Audible alarm" means a device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on premises which generates an audible sound on the premises when it is activated. 
"Dial telephone alarm system" means an alarm system which will activate an automatic telephone dialing device programmed to dial a number maintained by an answering service, security agency, police department or other person. 
"False alarm" means an alarm signal necessitating a response by the police department where there has been no unauthorized entry of the premises protected by an alarm system. 
"Proprietor alarm system" means any alarm system which is owned and maintained by the person who exercises ownership, dominion or control over the property which is protected by the alarm system. 
"Police department" means the police department of the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Subscriber" means any subscriber, customer or client of an alarm business. 
"Subscriber alarm system" means an alarm system which is owned or maintained by an alarm business for the protection of the property of any subscriber, customer or client of such alarm business. 
"Tax collector" means the finance director of the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.020)  
5.12.030 - Permit required-Temporary permit. 
A.  Alarm Business Permit. No person shall carry on, conduct or operate any alarm business in the town unless a valid and subsisting alarm business permit has been issued to such person by this tax collector pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for each and every separate office or place of business conducted by such person in the town. 
B.  Alarm Agent Permit. No person shall act as an alarm agent unless a valid and subsisting alarm agent permit has been issued to such person by the tax collector pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Proprietor Alarm System Permit. No person shall install or use a proprietor alarm system unless a valid and subsisting proprietor alarm system permit has been issued to such person by the tax collector pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for each alarm system installed or used by such person in the town. 
D.  Temporary Permit. Any person who has applied for a permit required by this section shall, upon request therefor, be issued a temporary permit by the tax collector for a period not to exceed sixty days pending action on the application; provided, that the tax collector shall not issue such a temporary permit if possessed of information which would be grounds for denial of a permit under Section 5.12.080. The temporary permit, while it is in effect, shall for all purposes have the same force and effect and be subject to the same terms and conditions as any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Any temporary permit shall expire upon the issuance or denial of the permit applied for. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.030)  
5.12.040 - Permit-Application. 
Any person desiring an alarm permit shall file a written application with the tax collector on a form to be furnished by the tax collector. The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of the correct permit fee as provided in Section 5.12.090 and shall furnish the following: 
A.  The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual, partnership, corporation or otherwise; 
B.  The name and physical location of the business and mailing address; 
C.  The name and residence address of every alarm agent and other employee of the business; 
D.  The following information concerning the applicant, if an individual and concerning each person who owns or is beneficially interested in more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the applicant is a corporation; and concerning each partner, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business: 
1.  Name, complete residence address and residence telephone number, 
2.  Age and date of birth, 
3.  The alarm or similar business history and experience, including but not limited to whether such person, in previously operating in this town or another city, county, or state under license or permit, has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor, 
4.  A complete set of fingerprints taken by the police department to be retained on file by the tax collector; 
5.  The taxpayer identification number or social security number of each applicant. 
E.  A certified copy of the applicant's State Contractor's License issued by the State Contractor's Board, and where applicable, a copy of the applicant's State Alarm Company and or Agent License issued by the Collection and Investigative Services Bureau, Department of Consumer Affairs; 
F.  Any relevant evidence requested by the tax collector to enable the tax collector to conduct an adequate independent investigation to determine the accuracy of the information in this section or to evaluate it; 
G.  A statement of all criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, the jurisdiction in which convicted, the offense for which convicted, and circumstances thereof; 
H.  Written authorization for any person to provide the tax collector with information relevant to any of the foregoing; 
I.  Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of California, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, the declaration being duly dated and signed. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.040)  
5.12.050 - Alarm agent permit-Application. 
Any person desiring an alarm agent's permit shall file a written application with the tax collector on a form to be furnished by the tax collector. The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of the correct permit fee as provided in Section 5.12.090 and shall furnish the following: 
A.  Name, residence address and telephone number; 
B.  Business address and telephone number where the alarm will be employed; 
C.  Age and date of birth of applicant; 
D.  Sex, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, marks, scars, tattoos or other identifying characteristics; 
E.  Driver's license number and social security number; 
F.  The formal education, on-the-job training and work experience in the installation and maintenance of alarm systems, and whether such person, in previously being employed in this town or another city or state under an alarm agent's license or permit, has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended and the reason therefor, or whether he has been dismissed from employment as an alarm agent; 
G.  A statement of all criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, the jurisdiction in which convicted, the offense for which convicted and the circumstances thereof; 
H.  Two front-face portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches in size supplied by the applicant within thirty days of the date of application; 
I.  A complete set of fingerprints taken by the police department and to be retained on file by the tax collector; 
J.  A signed statement for the owner or responsible managing employee of the alarm business stating that employment has been offered to the applicant; 
K.  Any relevant evidence requested by the tax collector to enable the tax collector to conduct an adequate independent investigation to determine the accuracy of the information required in this section or to evaluate it; 
L.  Written authorization for any person to provide the tax collector with information relevant to any of the foregoing; 
M.  Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, the declaration being duly dated and signed in the town. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.050)  
5.12.060 - Proprietor alarm system permit. 
Any person desiring a proprietor alarm system permit shall file a written application with the tax collector on a form to be furnished by the tax collector. The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of the correct permit fee as provided in Section 5.12.090 and shall furnish the following: 
A.  The name, residence address and telephone number of the applicant, if an individual; if the applicant is a corporation or a partnership, the name, residence address and telephone number of the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business; 
B.  The name, business address, telephone number and type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual, partnership, corporation or otherwise; 
C.  The type of alarm system to be installed and the alarm business and/or alarm agent, if any, which may service the alarm system; 
D.  The town of Mammoth Lakes business certificate number; 
E.  The names, addresses and phone numbers of at least two persons who will be available on a twenty-four-hour basis to service the alarm system; 
F.  Any relevant evidence requested by the tax collector to enable the tax collector to conduct an adequate independent investigation to determine the accuracy of the information required in this section or to evaluate it; 
G.  Written authorization for any person to provide the tax collector with information relevant to the foregoing; 
H.  Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of California that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.060)  
5.12.070 - Investigation-Alarm system approval. 
A.  Upon receiving the application for a permit, the tax collector shall conduct an investigation of the applicant's qualifications. The tax collector may, in his/her discretion, require a personal interview of the applicant. Before any permit shall issue under this chapter, the tax collector shall first sign his/her approval of the application. 
B.  The chief of police shall approve all alarm systems installed by either the alarm business, alarm agent or a proprietor. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.070)  
5.12.080 - Permit-Issuance-Denial. 
A.  The tax collector shall issue any permit applied for within sixty days of receipt of the application, unless he/she finds that: 
1.  The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the tax collector or, in the case of a check, not paid upon presentment. 
2.  The business, as proposed by the applicant, would not comply with all applicable laws. 
3.  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the tax collector in connection therewith, or has refused to provide all information or documents required pursuant to this chapter. 
4.  The applicant has had a similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended for any cause by the tax collector or any other state or local agency within five years prior to the date of the application. 
5.  The applicant for an alarm business permit or alarm agent permit does not qualify if the applicant for an alarm business permit does not have in his/her possession the required State Contractor's License and/or State Alarm License issued by the State Bureau of Consumer Affairs. 
6.  The applicant for an alarm business permit or alarm agent permit has been convicted of any crime involving burglary, theft, dishonesty, fraud or deceit, or any attempt to commit said crimes, within seven years prior to the date of the application. 
7.  The installation of the alarm system, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The tax collector, upon denying an application, shall state his/her reasons in writing, specifying the particular grounds for such denial. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.080)  
5.12.090 - Permit-Fee. 
A.  Alarm Business Permit Fee. The fee for an alarm business permit shall be set by resolution. 
B.  Alarm Agent Permit Fee. The fee for an alarm agent permit shall be set by resolution. 
C.  Proprietor Alarm System Permit Fee. The fee for a proprietor alarm system permit shall be set by resolution. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.090)  
5.12.100 - Permit-Expiration and renewal. 
Each permit shall expire on February 1st of each year, except that a first permit shall expire on the next ensuing February 1st. Permits may be renewed and, in processing a renewal application, the tax collector shall consider all the elements of Section 5.12.080 in determining whether to renew a permit. An unrevoked permit may be renewed for one year on written application to the tax collector made a least one month before its expiration date and accompanied by the required fee. For failure to pay a permit fee when due, the tax collector shall add a penalty of twenty percent of the fee on the last day of each month after the expiration date thereof, not to exceed one hundred percent of the permit fee. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.100)  
5.12.110 - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
Any alarm business, alarm agent or proprietor alarm system permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the tax collector for violation of any provisions of this chapter, or for any grounds that would warrant the denial of such permit. Such suspension or revocation shall be made only after a hearing by the tax collector. The tax collector shall give written notice of the time, place and nature of the hearing at least ten days prior thereto. Such notice shall also state the reason for the intended revocation or suspension. The notice shall be given in the permit, as issued, or if none, then to the address given in the application. Notice shall be effective immediately upon posting. The tax collector, upon revocation or suspension, shall state his/her reasons in writing, specifying the particular grounds for such revocation or suspension and shall give notice thereof to the permittee. The revocation or suspension shall be effective as the date of the mailing of written notice in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.110)  
5.12.120 - Appeal. 
Any applicant who is denied a permit and any permittee whose permit is revoked or suspended shall have the right to appeal such denial, revocation or suspension to the town council within ten days after notice thereof. An appeal shall be made by filing a notice of appeal with the town clerk. The perfecting of such appeal shall suspend the order of denial, revocation or suspension of such permit. The appeal shall be heard by the town council within a reasonable time. The town clerk shall give notice of the time and place of the hearing at least two days prior thereto. The notice shall be given by regular first class mail to the address given in the permit, as issued, or if none, then to the address given in the application. Notice shall be effective immediately upon posting. The strict rules of evidence shall apply, but the applicant or permittee shall have the right to the assistance of counsel and to he reasonable presentation of witnesses and evidence. The town council may continue the hearing from time to time. The town council shall affirm or overrule the denial, revocation or suspension within ten days from the conclusion of the hearing. The decision of the town council shall be final. The town clerk shall mail written notice of the decision of the town council, which decision shall be effective as of the date of the mailing of such notice in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.120)  
5.12.130 - Permit-Display. 
A.  The alarm business permittee shall display his/her permit, and that of each and every alarm agent employed directly or indirectly by the alarm business permitted, in a conspicuous place on the premises of the alarm business. 
B.  The proprietor alarm system permittee shall display his/her permit in a conspicuous place on the premises wherein the alarm system is installed. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.130)  
5.12.140 - Identification card. 
Every alarm agent and alarm business permittee shall carry on his/her person on all times a valid and subsisting identification card issued to the permittee upon issuance of the permit. The identification card shall bear the name and address of the permittee and the name of the alarm business and it shall be displayed upon request of the tax collector, his/her designee, or any officer of the police department. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.140)  
5.12.150 - Permits nontransferable. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be personal to the permittee and shall be nontransferable. A duplicate permit or identification card may be issued by the collector to replace any permit previously issued under this chapter which has been lost or destroyed upon the permittee filing statement of such fact and at the time of filing such statement paying to the collector a fee set by resolution. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.150)  
5.12.160 - Audible alarm regulations. 
No person shall sell, install or maintain any audible alarm as follows: 
A.  Which creates a sound similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren or a civil defense warning system or is not equipped with an operable device to discontinue the alarm sound within one-quarter hour; or 
B.  Which does not have on the alarm housing or adjacent to the alarm housing on the building or structure a permanent, legible and conspicuous statement of the name and telephone number of the owner or operator of the alarm; or 
C.  Which does not contain a mechanical means to effect an automatic turnoff of the alarm within fifteen minutes after it is first activated. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.160)  
5.12.170 - Subscriber alarm system activation. 
When a subscriber alarm system has been activated, the alarm business which owns, leases or maintains such systems shall have a representative at the location of the alarm system within one-quarter hour after being made aware of the activation or being requested to do so by the police department. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.170)  
5.12.180 - Proprietor alarm system activation. 
When a proprietor alarm system has been activated, the owner of the alarm system or his designated person shall be present at such location within one-quarter hour after being made aware of the activation or being requested to do so by the police department. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.180)  
5.12.190 - Dial telephone alarm system. 
Without the prior written permission of the chief of police no person shall sell, lease, maintain, service, repair, alter, replace, move, install or use any alarm system which directly dials any telephone number into any office of the police department. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.190)  
5.12.200 - Faulty alarm system-Fine-Permit revocation. 
In addition to the grounds set forth in Section 5.12.110, the following are grounds for false alarm fines which shall be set by resolution, or revocation of an alarm business permit or proprietor alarm permit: 
A.  More than three false alarms during any permit period; 
B.  Improper use of the alarm; 
C.  Use or installation of any alarm system not approved by the tax collector. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.200)  
5.12.210 - Recordkeeping requirements. 
Every person who operates an alarm business shall at all times keep a record of all sales and installations of the alarm systems together with the time, date and place of any service or repair. No person shall fail or refuse to make such records available at reasonable time for inspection by the tax collector, his/her designee or officers of the police department. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.220)  
5.12.220 - Change notification. 
A.  Every person who operates an alarm business shall report immediately to the tax collector any change of ownership or management of the alarm business; any change of name, style or designation under which the business is to be conducted; any change of business address or telephone number of the business; and any change in the employment of alarm agents by hiring, terminating or otherwise. 
B.  Every alarm agent shall report immediately to the tax collector any change of his/her employment, whether by new or renewed employment, discharge or termination, or otherwise, giving the name and address of the former employer, if any, and the name and address of the new employer, if any. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.240)  
5.12.230 - Alarm agent employment-Permit required. 
No person shall employ directly or indirectly as an alarm agent any person who does not possess a valid alarm agent permit. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.250)  
5.12.240 - Rules and regulations promulgation-Stan dards. 
The tax collector shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of this chapter. Such rules and regulations may include standards and specifications for the construction, installation and maintenance of any alarm system. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.260)  
5.12.250 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Any alarm system affixed to a motor vehicle; 
B.  Any person who sells alarm systems or component parts thereof from a fixed location and who does not personally or through an agent or employee, visit the property where the alarm sold or repaired is installed; or 
C.  An alarm system which is designed solely to alert the occupants of the building, structure or facility and cannot be heard outside the building or structure. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.270)  
5.12.260 - Enforcement required. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the tax collector and qualified deputies, with the advice and assistance of the town attorney, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this title, and chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement thereof as may from time to time be required by the tax collector, the town attorney, or the town council. The tax collector may have any or all places of business in the town examined to ascertain whether or not the provisions of this chapter have been complied with, and in connection therewith has the power to enter, free of charge and at reasonable times, any place of business permitted under this chapter for the purpose of this inspection. 
B.  Any person who fails to exhibit the permit or agent identification card as required in this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
C.  The tax collector may, with the prior consent of the town attorney, deputize a qualified accountant to examine the necessary books and records of any licensee. Any licensee refusing to exhibit the necessary books and records, as required by the tax collector or deputy, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.280)  
5.12.270 - Failure to pay permit fee. 
In addition to a misdemeanor prosecution, the tax collector, with the advice and assistance of the town attorney, may use all civil remedies to obtain payment of the amount of permit due. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.290)  
5.12.280 - Applicability of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 10.70.300)  
Chapter 5.16 - CARDROOMS 
Sections: 
 
5.16.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following words shall have the meaning set forth in this section: 
"Accessory use" means a use which is subordinate or incidental to that of a main use on the same business premises. 
"Cardroom" means any space, room or enclosure, furnished or equipped with a table used as card table for the playing of cards and similar games, and the use which is available to the public or any portion of the public; provided, however, that "cardroom" shall not include a room to which the public is admitted and in which the sole card game played is duplicate bridge. 
"Public place" means and includes any business place or premises such as a restaurant, bar, cafe or similar facility and excludes a bona fide private dwelling or apartment house, or a suite or room which is used in good faith as a residence of one or more persons in an apartment house, lodging house, hotel or other institution of similar character. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.020)  
5.16.020 - Permit—Required. 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall engage in, carry on, maintain, conduct or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained or conducted any cardroom in any public place in the town without first having secured a permit from the town council to do so in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, nor without complying with the regulations contained in this chapter pertaining to the operation of cardrooms. 
B.  It is the express intent of the town council in enacting this chapter to limit the operation of cardrooms to that of being an accessory use clearly ancillary to a public place such as a restaurant, bar, cafe or similar facility and not to allow the operation of cardrooms as separate or free-standing facilities. 
C.  Cardroom permits may be granted by the town council only when it is found that: 
1.  All applicable provisions of the town's zoning and development code (Title 17) are complied with, and the site of the proposed accessory use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the accessory use and to accommodate the necessary parking and other required features in connection therewith; and 
2.  The site of the proposed accessory use related to streets and highways is adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and kind of traffic generated by the proposed accessory use; and 
3.  The proposed accessory use will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvement in the area in which the property is located. 
(Ord. 89-16 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.010)  
5.16.030 - Permit—Application. 
Applications for cardroom permit shall be executed under penalty of perjury and submitted to the town on forms to be obtained from the license collector upon payment of the permit fee prescribed in Section 5.16.050. Application shall require that the applicant provide the following information and identification: 
A.  The particular place of premises, including the street name and address, or equivalent, where such game is to be conducted or carried on; 
B.  The name and address of the owner or owners, or lessee or lessees, of the place or premises where the game is to be carried on at, the location together with the written consent of same for the operation of a cardroom; 
C.  The names and addresses of all persons financially interested in the cardroom business or enterprise. "Persons financially interested" includes all persons who hold notes or other evidence of indebtedness against the business, and also other includes all persons who share in the profits of the business whether on the basis of its gross or net revenue or otherwise; 
D.  The names and addresses of all persons who shall have charge of or be involved in the actual operation, management and supervision of the cardroom and the game or games therein. Applicant shall specify the extent of the authority of each person so identified; 
E.  The past criminal record, if any, of the applicant, of all persons financially interested in the business, and of all persons involved in the actual operation, management and supervision of the cardroom; 
F.  The applicant's citizenship and length of resident in the town; 
G.  The application shall be accompanied by fingerprints and recent photograph of the applicant. The applicant must also contain the applicant's acknowledgement that if a permit is granted thereon applicant expressly consents to inspection of the cardroom and business premises at any time by the chief of police or any regularly appointed officer of the Mammoth Lakes police department (M.L.P.D.), and that the cardroom and business premises shall at all times be operated, managed and supervised in strict compliance with the laws, rules and regulations of the state and of the town. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.030)  
5.16.040 - Permit—Applicant investigation—Issuance—Denial. 
Upon receiving such application the license collector shall deliver a copy to the town planning director and the M.L.P.D. who shall conduct an investigation of the applicant and whether the proposed location is a suitable and proper place for conducting the cardroom and it shall report thereon to the town council within such time as is practicable. 
A.  The town council may deny an application for a cardroom permit if the person: 
1.  Is under the age of twenty-one years; 
2.  Makes a false statement required to be revealed in an application for permit issued pursuant to this chapter; 
3.  Has been convicted of a crime punishable as a felony; 
4.  Has engaged in an act involving dishonesty charged or chargeable as a criminal offense relating to the acquisition or ownership or the operation of a cardroom, or has been convicted of an offense involving dishonesty; 
5.  Has engaged in bookmaking or other illegal gambling activities or has been convicted of an offense involving such activities; 
6.  Has any financial or other interest in any business or organization outside the state of California which is engaged in any form of gambling or gaming not authorized by the laws of the state; 
7.  The cardroom is to be located within any area of the town which is not zoned for such an activity; 
8.  The applicant has been a resident of the town for less than one year; 
B.  The town may impose any condition upon permit issuance reasonably necessary for implementation of this chapter. 
C.  Denial of an application for any of the reasons specified in subsection A of this section shall not preclude the police department from filing criminal charges for any act which is a ground for denial of a permit which act might otherwise constitute a public offense. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.040)  
5.16.050 - Permit—Hearing. 
A public hearing shall be held by the town council after the filing of the application and after determination by the police department and the town planning director that the information submitted by the applicant is sufficient to consider the matter. After making such determination, the town shall give notice of the time, place and subject matter of a public hearing at least ten days prior to the date set therefor, as herein provided. Errors in the giving of notice or the failure of any person to receive notice shall not invalidate the proceeding. Notice shall be given as follows: 
A.  By publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the subject applicant; 
B.  By mailing through the United States mail: 
1.  To every person whose name and address appears on the last equalized county assessment roll as the owner of any property within the territory covered by the proceedings and within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of such territory; 
2.  To every person filing with the town a written request for notice with respect to an identified proceeding specified in such request; 
3.  To any person designated in any application to receive such notice. 
C.  By posting with a single notice all property which is the subject of the matter, as far as physically possible. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.045)  
5.16.060 - Permit—Findings required. 
Before granting approval of the required permit, the town council shall make the following findings that: 
A.  The proposed location of the cardroom is consistent with the purposes of the zone in which the site is located; 
B.  The proposed location of the cardroom and the conditions under which it will be operated will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity; and 
C.  The operation of the cardroom is compatible with other businesses in the same building, shopping area or neighborhood. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.046)  
5.16.070 - Permit—Fee. 
A.  Cardroom permits may be issued for a period not to exceed twelve months from the date of issuance. 
B.  The initial fee and renewal fee shall be paid by the applicant to the collector upon obtaining the initial application form or renewal form. The fees for each table shall be two hundred fifty dollars for a period not to exceed twelve months from the date of issuance. 
C.  No part of the fee set forth in subsection B of this section shall be refunded except in the event of denial of an initial application, in which event, the fee posted by the applicant will be refunded, less the sum of fifty dollars, which shall be retained by the town. 
D.  Renewal of a permit may be for a period of twelve months per renewal period with a renewal fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars per renewal. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.050)  
5.16.080 - Permit—Exemptions. 
Constituent lodges of fraternal organizations who have lodges in California for twenty-five years or more shall not be required to apply for or obtain a cardroom permit so long as: 
A.  The card tables are for the exclusive use of members of the fraternal organization or nonpaying guests; and 
B.  No charge is made for the use of the card tables. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.060)  
5.16.090 - Permit—Nontransferable. 
No person shall be granted a permit to conduct more than one cardroom, or have financial interest in other cardrooms in the county. No cardroom permit shall be assignable or transferable from one person to another, nor shall a cardroom permit be transferable from one location to another. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.070)  
5.16.100 - Operation requirements. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall operate a cardroom in violation of any of the following regulations: 
A.  Not more than one cardroom shall be located at any one address. 
B.  No person shall deal, play or carry on, open or cause to be opened, or conduct, either as owner or employee, whether for hire or not, any game of faro, monte, roulette, lansquenet, rouge-et-noir, rondo, fan, fan-tan, seven and one-half, twenty-one, hokey-pokey, or any banking or percentage game played with cards, dice, dominoes or any device, for money, chips, checks, credit or other representative of value, or bet at or against any of the prohibited games in any cardroom. 
C.  Not more than one table shall be permitted in any cardroom. 
D.  No more than eight players shall be permitted at any card table. 
E.  No minor shall be permitted in any cardroom or participate in any game thereat. 
F.  All cardrooms shall be open to the police department's inspection during all hours of operation. 
G.  The cashing of bank checks for players shall not be permitted in any cardroom. 
H.  Each card table shall be assigned to a person whose duty shall be to supervise the game and see to it that it is played strictly in accordance with the terms of this chapter, and with the provisions of the Penal Code and the Business and Professions Code of the state. 
I.  No signs or other insignia advertising or relative to cardrooms shall be permitted upon the exterior of any premises occupied as a cardroom; except a sign located in the interior of the premises with the wording "Club Room" or "Cardroom" not to exceed four square feet in size. 
J.  No person who is in a state of intoxication shall be permitted in a cardroom. 
K.  The deal must pass each hand; no one person will be allowed to deal for another. 
L.  No owner, operator or employee of a cardroom will buy, accept in hock or pawn or take in exchange for credit or chips, any merchandise or article of value, new or used. 
M.  No owner, operator or employee of a cardroom will issue chips or money to a patron on credit or loan (including, but not limited to, IOU's and checks to be held) or allow any patron to play on credit. 
N.  Each cardroom permittee shall post in a conspicuous place on the premises rules and regulations of the game being played. 
O.  Cardrooms or card tables shall not be located in the same room as dance floors, restaurants, cafes or other rooms where minors are admitted, unless separated therefrom by a wall or partition at least six feet in height, and cardrooms or card tables shall be so arranged that they shall not be open to view with the street or sidewalk. 
P.  For games of stud, draw or hold 'em, the only rental fees for table space shall be the maximum rate of two dollars for every half hour, or four dollars maximum for every hour, or fraction thereof; for all other card games allowed by California cardroom regulations, the fee shall be a maximum of one dollar per hand to be collected prior to the playing of the hand. 
Q.  No change shall be made from the pot. The betting limit shall be a maximum of five dollars, unless unanimous agreement by all players at the table. The maximum number of raises shall be three per round. 
R.  No person shall carry on, maintain or conduct any cardroom business or activity between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m., local time. 
S.  The provisions of subsections A, C, F, G, H and I of this section shall not apply to a nonprofit society, fraternal or labor organization. 
(Ord. 97-18 § 1, 1997; Ord. 94-11 § 1, 1994; Ord. 91-16 § 1 Exh. A, 1991; Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.080)  
5.16.110 - Permit—Suspension—Revocation. 
A.  A cardroom permit or work permit may be suspended or revoked, in whole or part, if the permittee has done any of the following: 
1.  Committed any act which would constitute grounds for denial of registration as set forth in Section 5.16.040; 
2.  Violated any federal, state or local statute, rule or ordinance regulating gambling; 
3.  Engaged in false or misleading advertising in connection with gambling; 
4.  Failed to take reasonable steps to prevent any dishonest acts or illegal activities occurring on the gaming premises committed by any patron or other individual or employee licensed pursuant to this chapter; 
5.  Failed to pay any monetary penalty levied pursuant to this chapter; 
6.  Had his or her authorization to operate a gaming club suspended or revoked or otherwise restricted by any state authority; 
7.  Denied the police department access to any place within a gaming club establishment or failed to promptly provide for inspection or audit any book, record or document requested by the police department; 
8.  Failed to comply with any condition of the cardroom permit; 
9.  Obtained a permit by fraud, misrepresentation, concealment or through inadvertence or mistake; 
10.  Made a misrepresentation of, or failed to disclose, a material fact to the town. 
B.  Suspension or revocation of a registration for any of the reasons specified in subsection A shall not preclude the police department from filing criminal charges for any act done which is grounds for suspension or revocation, which act might otherwise constitute a public offense. 
C.  Any act of an employee permitted or not permitted pursuant to this chapter which constitutes a violation of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter by the owner or operator of the cardroom whether or not the owner or operator had knowledge of the act of the employee or participated in the act. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.085)  
5.16.120 - Employee work permit—Required. 
No person shall be employed in any cardroom in any public place in the town in any capacity directly connected without first having secured a permit from the town so to do in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. For the purpose of this chapter, "cardroom employees" includes dealers, overseers and others directly connected with the operation and supervision of card tables and games but shall not include waitresses, bartenders, culinary workers or other employees whose duties are not involved in the operation and supervision of tables and games. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.090)  
5.16.130 - Employee work permit—Application—Issuance. 
Applications for such work permits shall be executed under penalty of perjury and contain the past criminal record, if any, of the applicant and such other information as may be deemed by the town necessary to determine whether the applicant is a proper person to be issued a cardroom work permit. The application shall also be accompanied by fingerprints and recent photograph of the applicant. A work permit shall be issued only to citizens of the United States who have resided in town for at least three months immediately preceding the issue of such work permit. This residency requirement may be waived upon proper application to the town council if all other requirements of this section are met and the applicant can show similar employment within the town or adjacent communities, and obtains the recommendation of one or more residents of the town. The town shall deny to such applicant a work permit if any of the following appear: 
A.  The applicant has previously been convicted of a felony or other crime or moral turpitude not amounting to a felony. 
B.  The applicant has been previously convicted of any narcotics violation or violation of gambling laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.100)  
5.16.140 - Employee work permit—Fee. 
Each application for a work permit shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty dollars and permit shall be valid for a period of one year. The fifty dollar fee is to cover the costs of investigation and handling and shall not be returned in the event that the work permit is refused, revoked or suspended as provided in this chapter. Only such work permit shall be required each year, even though the holder of such work permit may change his place of employment within the town. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.110)  
5.16.150 - Employee work permit—Denial appeal. 
The action of the town in denying such a work permit on the basis of the applicant not being a fit and proper person shall be subject to appeal to the town council. Notice of each appeal shall be filed with the clerk of the town council within ten days after denial of such work permit. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the town in denying such work permit shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.120)  
5.16.160 - State law violations. 
The town council declares that it is not the intention of this chapter to sanction the issuance of a permit to any cardroom for the playing of any games prohibited by the laws of this state, including but not limited to those games enumerated in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state, which section includes banking and percentage games. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.36.130)  
Chapter 5.20 - BINGO GAMES 
Sections: 
 
5.20.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
"Authorized organization" means any organization exempted from the payments of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23071b, 23071d, 23071e, 23701f, 23701g and 23701(l) of the Revenue and Taxation Code and by mobile home park associations and senior citizens' organizations. 
"Bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. 
"Minor" means any person under the age of eighteen years. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.37.020)  
5.20.020 - Bingo authorized. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 19 of Article IV of the California Constitution in order to make the game of bingo lawful under the terms and conditions in the following sections in this chapter. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.37.010)  
5.20.030 - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person to conduct any bingo game in the town unless such person is a member of the authorized organization acting on behalf of such organization which has been issued a license as provided by this chapter to conduct the bingo game. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.37.030)  
5.20.040 - Application. 
Application for license shall be made to the collector on forms set forth below, and shall be filed not less than ten days prior to the proposed date of any bingo game or games. Such application form shall require from the applicant the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant, which in all cases shall be the authorized organization on behalf of which the application is submitted; 
B.  The name, address and title of the individual who prepared the application; 
C.  A list of the full names of all members who will conduct the bingo game or games; 
D.  The date(s) and place(s) of the proposed bingo game or games; 
E.  Proof that the applicant is an authorized organization as defined in Section 5.20.010; 
F.  Such other information as the collector may deem necessary in order to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.37.040)  
5.20.050 - License—Term. 
The term of a bingo license shall be for a period of twelve months from its date of issuance. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.37.050)  
5.20.060 - License—Issuance. 
If the collector determines that a proper application has been submitted, that the applicant qualifies under the provisions of this chapter, and that the conducting of bingo games at the particular location stated in the application will not violate any other ordinance of the county, a bingo license shall be issued. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.37.060)  
5.20.070 - Restrictions. 
A.  The authorized organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, which property is used by such organization for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization. 
B.  No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo games. 
C.  All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the authorized organization. 
D.  A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the authorized organization which organized it. 
Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. 
E.  No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the organization authorized to conduct a game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
F.  With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. 
G.  With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows: 
1.  Such proceeds may be used for prizes; 
2.  A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed ten percent of the proceeds after the deduction for prizes, or five hundred dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead and administration expenses. 
H.  It is unlawful for any person to receive or pay a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized by this chapter. 
I.  No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place at which the bingo game is being conducted. 
J.  The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
K.  No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of midnight and eight a.m. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.37.070)  
5.20.080 - Inspection. 
Any peace officer of the town shall have free access to any bingo game licensed under this chapter. A license shall post and maintain its bingo license in a conspicuous place on the premises at all times during any bingo game. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.37.080)  
5.20.090 - License—Denial—Suspension. 
A.  The collector may deny any application for a bingo license, or suspend or revoke a license if he finds the applicant or licensee, or any agent or representative thereof, has: 
1.  Knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application or in any record or report required under this chapter; or 
2.  Violated any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  If the collector determines that a bingo license should be suspended or revoked or an application for such license denied, he shall prepare a notice of suspension, revocation or denial of application setting forth the reasons for such suspension, revocation or denial of application. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant's last address provided in the application or shall be personally delivered to it. Any applicant who has had an application for a business license denied or which has had a bingo license suspended or revoked by the collector may appeal that decision in the manner provided in Section 5.20.100. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.37.090)  
5.20.100 - Appeal procedure. 
Whenever an appeal is provided for in this chapter, such appeal shall be filed and conducted as prescribed in this section: 
A.  Within fifteen calendar days after the day of any denial of an application, or suspension or revocation of a license by the collector, an aggrieved party may appeal such action by filing with the clerk of the town council a written appeal briefly setting forth the reasons why such denial, suspension or revocation is not proper. 
B.  Upon receipt of such written appeal, the clerk of the town council shall set the matter for hearing before the town council. The hearing shall be held within thirty days after the date of the filing of the appeal. At least one week prior to the date of the hearing on the appeal, the clerk of the town council shall notify the appellant and collector of the date and place of the hearing. At such hearing the collector and the appellant may present any evidence relevant to the decision appealed. The formal rules of evidence applicable in a court of law shall not apply to such hearing. 
C.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the town council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed. The decision of the town council is final. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.37.100)  
5.20.110 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.37.110)  
Chapter 5.24 - OUTDOOR FESTIVALS 
Sections: 
 
5.24.010 - Definitions. 
"Outdoor festivals" means any music festival, dance festival, "rock" festival or similar musical activity at which music is provided by paid or amateur performers or by prerecorded means, which is held at any place other than in a permanent building or permanent installation which has been constructed for the purpose of conducting such activities or similar activities, and to which members of the public are invited or admitted for a charge or free of cost. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.010)  
5.24.020 - License—Required. 
No person shall operate, maintain, conduct, advertise or sell or furnish tickets for an outdoor festival in the town unless he first obtains a license from the town to operate or conduct such festival. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.020)  
5.24.030 - License—Application—Contents. 
Application for a license to conduct an outdoor festival shall be made in writing to the clerk of the town council at least sixty days prior to the time indicated for the commencement of the planned activity and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred dollars and shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making the application. If the application is made by a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners must appear. Where the applicant is a corporation, the application must be signed by the president, vice-president and secretary thereof and must contain the addresses of the corporate officers; and a certified copy of the articles of incorporation shall be submitted with the application; 
B.  A statement of the kind, character or type of festival which the applicant proposes to conduct, operate or carry on; 
C.  The address or legal description of the place where the proposed festival is to be conducted, operated or carried on. Additionally, the applicant must submit proof of ownership of the place where the festival is to be conducted or a statement signed by the owner of the premises indicating his consent that the site be used for the proposed festival; 
D.  The date or dates and the hours during which the festival is to be conducted; 
E.  An estimate of the number of customers, spectators, participants and other persons expected to attend the festival for each day it is conducted; 
F.  The applicant shall provide names and addresses of anyone contributing, investing or having a financial interest greater than five hundred dollars in producing the festival; 
G.  At the time of making application the applicant shall arrange to be fingerprinted by the office of the Mammoth Lakes police department. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.030)  
5.24.040 - License—Application—Accompanying festival plans. 
A detailed explanation of the applicant's plans to provide security and fire protection, water supply and facilities, food supply and facilities, sanitation facilities, medical facilities and services, vehicle parking space, vehicle access and on-site traffic control, and, if it is proposed or expected that spectators or participants will remain at night or overnight, the arrangements for illuminating the premises and for camping or similar facilities. The applicant's plans shall include what provisions shall be made for numbers of spectators in excess of the estimate, provisions for clean-up of the premises and removal of rubbish after the event has concluded. A plot plan showing arrangement of the facilities including those for parking, egress and ingress shall be submitted with the application. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.040)  
5.24.050 - License—Application—Processing. 
Upon receipt of a complete application and the application fee, the clerk of the town council shall set the application for public hearing at a regular meeting of the town council, not less than fifteen days nor more than thirty days thereafter, and shall give not less than ten days' written notice thereof to the applicant. The clerk shall promptly give notice of hearing and copies of the application to the police chief, the county health officer, the directors of planning and public works who shall investigate the application and report in writing to the town council not later than the hearing with appropriate recommendations concerning the activity. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.050)  
5.24.060 - License—Application—Consideration. 
Based upon the testimony of the witnesses and evidence presented at the hearing provided for in Section 5.24.050, including the report of the department heads, the town council shall grant the license, deny the license or set conditions which must be met, or security given that they will be met, before a license may be granted. If conditions are imposed by the town council, the applicant shall furnish or cause to be furnished to the directors of planning and public works proof that all conditions have been met before the license may be issued. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.060)  
5.24.070 - License—Issuance—Fee—Transfer. 
When the directors of planning and public works certify that conditions have been met, the tax collector shall, upon payment of one hundred dollars per day of operation, issue a license to the applicant for the specific location authorized for the festival, specifying the name and address of the licensee, the kind of festival licensed and the number of days operation authorized. The licensee shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises at which the festival is conducted. No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable or removed to another location. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.070)  
5.24.080 - License—Conditions imposed. 
At the hearing required under Section 5.24.050, the town council may establish conditions which must be met prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter, except that the town council may take a matter under submission before determining which conditions shall be imposed. Where the town council takes a matter under submission, written notice of any conditions imposed as prerequisite to the issuance of a license must be mailed to the applicant within fifteen days of the original hearing. The conditions which may be imposed by the town council pursuant to the town's general police power for the protection of health, safety and property of local residents and property attending festivals in the town shall include but not be limited to the conditions set forth in Section 5.24.090 through 5.24.230. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.080)  
5.24.090 - Police protection required. 
Every licensee shall employ, at his own expense, police protection. The number and type of officers shall be determined and specified by the police chief to provide for the preservation of order and protection of property in and around the place of the festival. Funds to employ this specified number of law enforcement officer at the current hourly salary rate for peace officers shall be deposited with the town at least ten days prior to the specified date the activity is to occur. A minimum of one law enforcement officer for every five hundred persons expected to be in attendance shall be required. Where the police chief specifies the employment of off-duty peace officers to meet the requirements of this chapter, the peace officers shall be under the complete direction and control of the police chief. The police chief must be satisfied that the requisite number of peace officers will be provided at all times of operations, plus any specified time prior to and following the event, before a license is issued. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.090)  
5.24.100 - Water facilities. 
Water for human consumption shall be provided in a manner and amount as approved by the health officer sufficient to serve the expected spectators and participants. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.100)  
5.24.110 - Food concessions. 
Where the proposed festival is to be held a substantial distance from public eating places, food handling places or like establishments, applicant shall be required to demonstrate that food will be available at the premises for each day of operation to adequately feed the number of persons expected to be in attendance. Concessionaires must be licensed and operate under a valid health department permit pursuant to local ordinances and state laws. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.110)  
5.24.120 - Sanitation facilities. 
Every licensee shall provide at least one enclosed flush-type water closet facility marked "Women" and one such facility marked "Men" on the premises of a festival on the basis of one flush-type water closet for each forty females and one for each forty males expected to be in attendance. Urinals may be substituted for the required flush-type water closets for men on the ratio of one urinal and one flush-type water closet per sixty males. Lavatories provided with cold water under presssure, soap and paper towels shall be provided on the basis of one lavatory for each seventy-five persons expected to be in attendance. Where flush-type water closets cannot be made available for the persons in attendance, the town council may allow the use of portable chemical toilets. Such chemical toilets must meet the approval of the county health officer before any license may be issued. Chemical toilets shall be emptied and recharged at the licensee's expense as necessary pursuant to procedures established by the county health officer. Every licensee shall be required to furnish at least one trash can with thirty-six gallon capacity with a tight-fitting lid for each twenty-five persons expected to be in attendance, an adequate supply of plastic bag liners to the fit the trash receptacles shall be provided and each container shall at all times have a plastic bag liner inserted and when full, it shall be tied, removed and a new plastic bag liner inserted. The pickup and removal of refuse, trash, garbage and rubbish shall be at least once a day and more often if required by the health officer. A signed contract with a licensed refuse collector shall be submitted to the county health officer and a copy of same filed with the health officer. Removal of all trash and refuse shall be at the licensee's expense. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.120)  
5.24.130 - Medical facilities. 
A.  Where a proposed festival is expected to attract a large number of persons for a site located a substantial distance from adequate existing treatment facilities the applicant shall be required to provide emergency medical treatment facilities on the premises of the festival. Where the proposed festival is located close to adequate existing facilities the applicant shall provide, as required by the health officer, emergency treatment facilities on the premises of the festival. 
B.  The location of such facilities, number of doctors, psychiatrists, psychologists, nurses and other aides needed to staff the facilities and the quantity of medical drugs, supplies, ambulances and other equipment that must be on the site shall be approved by the county health officer prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter. The county health officer shall calculate the need for medical services, based on the number of persons expected to attend a festival, their expected age group, the duration of events planned and the possibility of exposure to inclement weather and outdoor elements. 
C.  Traffic lanes and other adequate space shall be designated and kept open for access and travel for ambulance, helicopter and other emergency vehicles to transport patients or staff to appropriate on-site and off-site treatment facilities. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.130)  
5.24.140 - Parking areas. 
Every licensee shall provide adequate parking space for persons attending the festival by motor vehicle. Persons desiring to operate or conduct a festival may be called upon to provide a separate parking space for every two persons expected to attend the festival by motor vehicle. Such individual parking spaces shall be clearly marked and shall not be less than twelve feet wide and twenty feet long. The directions of planning and public works must approve an applicant's parking plan before a license shall be issued. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.24.140)  
5.24.150 - Access and parking controls. 
Every licensee shall provide adequate ingress and egress to festival premises and parking areas therefor. Necessary roads, driveways and entranceways shall exist to insure orderly flow of traffic into the premises from a highway or road which is a part of the town system of highways, or which is a highway maintained by the state. A special accessway for fire equipment, ambulances and other emergency vehicles may be required. The public works director must approve the licensee's plan for ingress and egress before a license shall be issued. Additionally, any applicant may be required to show that traffic guards are under his employ to insure orderly traffic movement and relieve traffic congestion in the vicinity of the festival area. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.150)  
5.24.160 - Hours of operation. 
All festivals which are subject to license under this chapter shall close and cease operation continuously between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of each and every day. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.160)  
5.24.170 - Illumination. 
A.  Every licensee planning to allow persons who attend the festival to remain on the premises after dark shall provide electrical illumination to insure that those areas which are occupied may be lighted at all times. The directors of planning and public works must approve an applicant's lighting plan as a prerequisite to issuance of a license under this chapter. 
B.  A licensee may be required to illuminate specific areas on the premises in accordance with the following scale of lighting intensity: 
Illumination 	Watts/Square Foot 
Open areas reserved for spectators 	0.50 
Stage areas 	5.00 
Parking and overnight areas 	0.25 
Restroom and concession areas 	1.00 
 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.170)  
5.24.180 - Overnight camping facilities. 
Overnight camping facilities shall be provided as required by the directors of planning and public works. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.180)  
5.24.190 - Bonds. 
Any licensee may be required to post an indemnity bond and/or a performance bond in favor of the town in connection with operation of a festival. Bonds required by this chapter must be approved by the town attorney prior to the issuance of a license. An applicant may be required to submit a surety bond written by a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in the state by the Department of Insurance, in an amount determined by the town council. The bond shall indemnify the town, its agents, officers, servants and employees and the town council against any and all loss, injury and damage of any nature whatsoever arising out of or in any way connected with the festival, and shall indemnify against loss, injury and damage to both person and property. Additionally, the town may demand that applicant provide a corporate surety bond written by a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in the state, indemnifying the town and the owners of property adjoining the festival site for any costs necessitated for cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash and other waste from, in and around the premises. The bond shall be in an amount determined by the town council. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.190)  
5.24.200 - Fire protection. 
Every licensee shall provide, at his own expense, adequate fire protection as determined by the fire protection agency or agencies having jurisdiction where the event is to be conducted. If the event is located in a hazardous fire area, a suitable number of fire guards shall be employed by the licensee who shall be approved by the responsible fire protection agency or agencies. Flammable vegetation and other fire hazards shall be removed in a manner and such quantity as determined by the agency. First aid fire extinguishment equipment shall be provided as directed by the agency. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.200)  
5.24.210 - Financial statements. 
Each licensee shall be required to provide a financial statement to give assurance of the ability of the promoters and/or applicants to meet the conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.210)  
5.24.220 - Communication. 
Licensee shall be required to establish a communication system for public use where ordinary communications are not available. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.220)  
5.24.230 - Additional requirements. 
Any applicant may be required to meet any other condition prior to receiving a license to conduct a festival which is reasonably calculated as necessary to protect the health, welfare and property of local residents and persons attending a festival. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.40.230)  
5.24.240 - License denial—Grounds. 
A.  After holding the required public hearing, the town council may deny issuance of license if it finds any of the following, that: 
1.  The applicant fails to meet the conditions imposed pursuant to the chapter; 
2.  The proposed festival will be conducted in a manner and/or location not meeting the health, zoning, fire or building and safety standards established by the ordinances of the town or the laws of the state; 
3.  The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for license or in any other document required pursuant to this chapter; 
4.  The applicant, his employee, agent or any person connected or associated with the applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate or manager has previously conducted the type of festival being applied for which resulted in the creation of a public or private nuisance; 
5.  The applicant, his employee, agent or any person associated with applicant as partner, director, officer, associate or manager has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction, within one year of date of the application, by final judgment, involving a similar activity, of: 
a.  An offense involving the presentation, exhibition or performance of an obscene production, motion picture or play, or of selling obscene matter, or 
b.  An offense involving lewd conduct. 
B.  Where the application is denied, the clerk of the town council shall mail to the applicant written notice of denial within fourteen days of the action, which notice shall include a statement of the reasons the application was denied. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.24.240)  
5.24.250 - License revocation—Complaint hearing. 
Any person may file a complaint with the clerk of the town council, or may petition the town council to conduct a hearing concerning the revocation of the license of any licensee. The clerk of the town council shall notice the petition for hearing in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.24.050. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.24.250)  
5.24.260 - License revocation—Revocation. 
The town council shall have the power to revoke any license, or to revoke and reinstate any license upon suitable conditions, when the following causes exist: 
A.  The licensee fails, neglects or refuses to pay to the tax collector the fee prescribed by this chapter; 
B.  The licensee, his employee or agent fails, neglects or refuses to fulfill any or all of the conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter; 
C.  The licensee allows the festival to be conducted in a manner which violates any law or regulation established by the ordinances of the town or the laws of the state; 
D.  The licensee allows the festival to be conducted in a disorderly manner or knowingly allows any person to remain on the premises of the festival while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any narcotic or dangerous drug; 
E.  The licensee, his employee or agent is convicted of any of the offenses enumerated under Section 5.24.240, subsequent to the issuance of the license. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code § 5.24.260)  
5.24.270 - License revocation—Hearing notice. 
Notice of intent to revoke any license shall be given and the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing. The clerk of the town council shall give notice, setting forth the cause for revocation and shall state the time and place at which the matter of revocation will be heard before the town council. The notice shall be mailed not later than five days prior to the date set for hearing. The town council shall hear all interested parties and may revoke a license only for one or more causes enumerated by Section 5.24.260. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.24.270)  
5.24.280 - Waiver for nonprofit organizations. 
When such festival is to be conducted by a nonprofit organization and has a community endorsement, application may be made to the town council for a waiver of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.24.290)  
5.24.290 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful for any licensee, employee, agent or person associated with the licensee to do any of the following: 
1.  Conduct or operate a festival without first procuring a license to do so; 
2.  Sell tickets to a festival without a license first having been obtained; 
3.  Operate, conduct or carry on any festival in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or private nuisance; 
4.  Allow any person on the premises of the licensed festival to cause or create a disturbance in, around or near any place of festival by offensive or disorderly conduct. 
B.  Any of the violations enumerated in subsection A of this section constitutes a criminal act and is punishable pursuant to this code and the laws of the state; provided, however, that the town retains any and all civil remedies, including the right of civil injunction, for the prevention of the violations and for the recovery of money damages therefor. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.24.280)  
Chapter 5.28 - AMPLIFIED PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT 
Sections: 
 
5.28.010 - Definitions. 
As utilized in this chapter, the following terms shall be construed to have the following meanings: 
"Amplified public entertainment" means public entertainment which is augmented, rebroadcast or amplified through the use of electrically powered microphones or speakers. 
"Amplified public entertainment establishment" means any place of business open to the general public, with or without the requirement of an admission fee, providing amplified public entertainment. Such establishments include, but are not limited to, restaurants, nightclubs, concert halls, bars, coffee houses or clubs providing amplified public entertainment. 
"Public entertainment" means an act, song, musical instrumental performance, recitation, dance or acting performance conducted in person by one or more persons for compensation before or for the benefit of an audience consisting of two or more persons. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.41.010)  
5.28.020 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to the following activities: 
A.  Any house of worship, church or religious service; 
B.  Any meeting or activity sponsored by a religious group, or bona fide charitable organization, fraternal service organization, Chambers of Commerce or other nonprofit organization recognized as such by the California State Franchise Tax Board and/or the Internal Revenue Service; 
C.  Any outdoor festival regulated by the provisions of Chapter 5.24. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.41.020)  
5.28.030 - Applicability—Compliance. 
A.  Within thirty days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, any person or entity owning, operating or participating in the ownership or operation of an amplified public entertainment establishment within the town shall apply to the tax collector for an amplified public entertainment license pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 5.28.040. 
B.  The operation of an amplified public entertainment establishment without a properly issued license as required by this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by up to a five hundred dollar fine and/or up to six months' incarceration in the county jail. The operation of an amplified public entertainment establishment without a properly issued license as required by this chapter shall also constitute an "unlawful public assembly" as defined by California Penal Code Section 407 subject to disbursement upon the order or any sworn peace officer of the town. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.41.030)  
5.28.040 - License—Application. 
In addition to any other licensing requirements established by town ordinances or applicable state and federal law, any person or entity presently owning or operating, or intending to own or operate, any amplified public entertainment establishment, as defined in Section 5.28.010, shall submit a license application and processing fee as prescribed in Section 5.28.050 to the town tax collector. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.41.040)  
5.28.050 - License—Control—Fee. 
Any person or entity submitting an application for an amplified public entertainment license shall submit a license application processing fee of fifty dollars. Unless the license provided in this chapter is suspended, modified or revoked, pursuant to Section 5.28.090, the fee is to be paid by the person or entity only upon application. The license is not assignable or transferable. Any successor in interest must make a new application and pay a new fee. All applications shall contain the following information in writing: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number of the license applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall supply the name of the corporation set forth in its articles of incorporation; the name and business addresses of each of its officers and holders of more than ten percent of its common stock. If the applicant is a partnership or limited partnership, the applicant shall supply the name of the partnership and the names and addresses of each of the partners. If one or more of the partnership is a corporation, the information provisions of this section, pertaining to a corporate applicant, shall apply; 
B.  The type of activity to be conducted pursuant to the license, specifically the type of entertainment to be presented (i.e., stage show, dance music, musical review, etc.); 
C.  The maximum seating capacity as approved by the building department for the type of activity contemplated under the license; 
D.  The hours of proposed operation and days of proposed operation; 
E.  The zoning and land use designation of the property for which the license is sought; and 
F.  Any previous or other business locations of the applicant in the town which require or which would have required the obtaining of an amplified public entertainment establishment license. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.41.050)  
5.28.060 - Application—Hearing. 
A.  Upon submission of the application and application fee required by Section 5.28.050, the tax collector shall review that application and any protests thereto. 
B.  An application shall be denied if the proposed establishment is: 
1.  Within an area not properly zoned for the type of activity contemplated; or 
2.  If there have been within the past five years complaints concerning amplified entertainment activity on the premises. 
C.  The decision of the tax collector to grant or deny the license application shall be made in writing and shall specify the reasons for any denial of application. The written decision of the tax collector shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the premises of the proposed activity within ten days of issuance and shall remain posted there for ten days. 
D.  1.  Within ten days of the posting of the decision to grant or deny the license application, any person interested in the grant or denial of the license may appeal the decision of the tax collector, in writing, to the town council who will schedule the same for hearing within thirty days. 
2.  In hearing any protest, the town council shall consider the original decision of the tax collector, the criteria set forth in subsection B of this section, and other evidence presented at the time of hearing. If on the basis of these criteria, it appears that the decision of the tax collector was substantiated by evidence, as a whole, the appeal shall be denied. 
E.  The decision of the tax collector to grant or deny the license application shall be given interim effect pending appeal hearing and decision by the town council. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.41.060)  
5.28.070 - License—Contents. 
An amplified public entertainment license shall contain the following: 
A.  The name and address of the licensed establishment; 
B.  The name and address of the owner and/or operator of the establishment; 
C.  The hours of permitted licensed activities; and 
D.  A notice that the license is nontransferable and that a new license application is required upon any change of the business license. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.41.070)  
5.28.080 - Licensed establishment—Operation. 
The operation of an amplified public entertainment establishment is subject to the restrictions imposed by California state law and this code, particularly the noise regulation provisions of Chapter 8.16, as well as such other regulations and restrictions as may be adopted pursuant to resolution by the town council. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.41.080)  
5.28.090 - License—Suspension—Revocation. 
A.  In addition to any criminal actions against the licensee arising out of a violation of Section 5.28.080, a license may be suspended, modified or revoked by the tax collector if, after due notice and hearing as provided in subsection B of this section, he or she finds that: 
1.  The applicant or licensee, or any agent or representative thereof has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application; or 
2.  The applicant or licensee, or any agent or representative thereof has violated any of the provisions of this chapter; or 
3.  The tax collector finds that there is substantial evidence to support any written complaint alleging a violation of this chapter. 
B.  In the event that the tax collector believes that there has been a violation of subsection A (1) or (2) of this section, or has received a written complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, the tax collector shall fix a time and place for a public administrative hearing on the alleged violation within thirty days of receipt of any information of an alleged violation. Not less than ten days prior to the date of the public hearing, the tax collector shall cause notice of the time, place and location of the public hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation and to cause the notice of the hearing to be posted by the police chief in a conspicuous place on the property on which the amplified public entertainment is being conducted. 
C.  If the tax collector determines after a public hearing that there has been a violation of this chapter, he or she shall suspend, modify or revoke the license and shall prepare a notice of the suspension, modification or revocation setting forth the reasons therefor. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the licensee, any interested party or any agent or representative thereof at the last known addresses of the foregoing. Any interested party who is dissatisfied with the decision of the tax collector may appeal the decision in the manner provided in Section 5.28.100. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.41.090)  
5.28.100 - Appeals. 
Whenever an appeal is provided for in this chapter, such appeal shall be filed and conducted as prescribed in this section: 
A.  Within fifteen calendar days after receipt of the decision of the tax collector, any person or entity which is dissatisfied with the decision, may appeal such action by filing with the clerk of the town council a written appeal briefly setting forth reasons why such a decision is not proper and shall enclose a copy of the certified receipt. 
B.  Upon receipt of such a written appeal, the clerk of the town council shall set the matter for hearing before the town council. The hearing shall be held within thirty days after the date of filing of the appeal. At least one week prior to the date of the hearing on the appeal, the clerk of the town council shall notify the appellant, the tax collector, and all interested persons who made appearances before the tax collector of the date and the place of the hearing. At such hearing, all interested persons may present any evidence relevant to the decision appealed. The formal rules of evidence applicable in a court of law shall not apply to such hearing. 
C.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the town council may affirm, reverse, modify or remand the decision appealed. Unless remanded, the decision of the town council is final. 
(Ord. 89-20 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 5.41.100)  
Chapter 5.32 - CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-14, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 17, 2014, repealed the former Ch. 5.32, §§ 5.32.010—5.32.240, and enacted a new Ch. 5.32 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.32 pertained to Community antenna television systems and derived from Ord. 99-09, § 1, adopted 1999. 
 
5.32.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
The purpose of this Chapter 5.32 is to implement the requirements of California's Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (the "Act"). The Act removed the town's jurisdiction over most aspects of cable television and similar video services, but did require the town to adopt certain requirements by ordinance to implement the Act's terms. The provisions of this title are designed to regulate video service providers holding state video franchises and operating within the town. Pursuant to the Act, the town shall receive a franchise fee from all state video franchise holders operating within the town. Additionally, the town has the responsibility to establish and enforce penalties, consistent with state law, against all state video franchise holders operating within the town for violations of customer service standards, but the Act grants all authority to adopt customer service standards to the state. 
(Ord. No. 14-14, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
5.32.020 - Franchise required. 
No person or entity shall provide cable television service or video services for which a state-issued franchise is required under the Act without obtaining and maintaining a franchise therefor. No person or entity shall construct, install or maintain within any public right-of-way in the town, any equipment or facilities for provision of cable television service or video services without obtaining and maintaining a franchise therefor. 
(Ord. No. 14-14, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
5.32.030 - State video franchise fee. 
For any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the town of Mammoth Lakes, there shall be a fee paid to the town equal to five percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder. In addition to such fee, there shall be an additional fee paid to the town equal to one percent of the gross revenue of that state franchise holder for purposes of supporting PEG channel facilities consistent with state and federal law. Gross revenue, for the purposes of this section, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code 5860. 
(Ord. No. 14-14, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
5.32.040 - Audit authority. 
Not more than once annually, the town manager or his or her designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of all holders of a state video franchise operating within the boundaries of the town of Mammoth Lakes to ensure compliance with Section 5.32.030 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-14, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
5.32.050 - Customer service standards. 
(a)  Any holder of a state video franchise operating within the boundaries of the town of Mammoth Lakes shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service, including without limitation the standards set forth in Government Code Sections 53055, 53055.1, 53055.2, and 53088.2. 
(b)  The town manager shall monitor the compliance of holders of a state video franchise operating within the boundaries of the town of Mammoth Lakes with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The town manager, or his or her designee, will provide the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the town, or such different penalties as may be established by state law: 
(1)  For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. 
(2)  For a second violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of one thousand dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each violation. 
(3)  For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. 
(c)  A holder of a state video franchise operating within the boundaries of the town of Mammoth Lakes may appeal a penalty assessed by the town manager to the town council within sixty days of the initial assessment. The town council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The town council's decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 14-14, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
5.32.060 - Town response to state video franchise applications. 
(a)  Applicants for state video franchises, or amendments to existing franchises, that will authorize the applicant to operate within the boundaries of the town of Mammoth Lakes must concurrently provide complete copies to the town of any application or amendments to applications filed with the public utilities commission. At a minimum, one complete copy must be provided to the town manager. 
(b)  Within thirty days of receipt, the town manager will provide any appropriate comments to the public utilities commission regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. 
(Ord. No. 14-14, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
5.32.070 - Notice prior to installation of video services facilities. 
(a)  Any holder of a state video franchise that proposes to install above-ground facilities in the public right-of-way shall, not less than twenty days prior to installing such facilities, provide written notice to the owner of the private or public property (excluding the public right-of-way) nearest to the proposed facility. For purposes of this subsection, "above-ground facilities" shall include only those facilities that are located on the ground or on a base or pedestal that is on the ground, and shall exclude aerial or pole-mounted facilities. 
(b)  Any franchisee to which this section applies shall provide the town with a copy of the proposed form of notice to be used in compliance with subsection (a), not less than ten days prior to mailing or delivering the notice. The town may require the franchisee to amend the form of the notice. Once the town has approved the form of the notice, the franchisee shall not be required to obtain additional approvals of notice from the town, so long as the franchisee does not materially deviate from the form of notice approved by the town. 
(Ord. No. 14-14, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
5.32.080 - System construction. 
(a)  No facilities governed by the Act shall be constructed without securing all encroachment permits necessary for the placement of facilities and equipment within public rights-of-way. The town reserves all rights it has under state and federal law to regulate any state franchisee, including without limitation the town's authority under public utilities code section 7901.1. 
(b)  In those areas of Mammoth Lakes where the transmission lines and distribution facilities of public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, any state franchisee shall likewise construct, operate, and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground. 
(c)  No changes in, extensions of, or construction of new poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or other fixtures and equipment (collectively, "structures"), in, upon, along, across, under or over any street, alley, or right-of-way shall be commenced until the town's public works director or his or her designee has been notified, and any required encroachment permit obtained. All construction and facilities shall comply with California Public Utilities Commission General Orders 95 (underground facilities) and 128 (overhead lines), as they may be amended or superseded. 
(d)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by a state franchisee shall be located so as not to interfere with the proper use of the public rights-of-way, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of such rights-of-way, and not to materially interfere with existing public and municipal utility installations. 
(e)  In the event that any property or improvement of the town or any other public entity or public utility in the public rights-of-way is disturbed or damaged by a state franchisee or any of its contractors, agents or employees in connection with undertaking any and all work pursuant to the rights granted to the state franchisee, the state franchisee shall promptly, at its sole cost and expense, restore to the owner's satisfaction such property or improvement which was so disturbed or damaged. If such property or improvement shall within two years (or in the case of street improvement, until the street is resurfaced if resurfaced prior to the expiration of the two years) of the date the restoration was completed, become uneven, unsettled or otherwise require additional restorative work, repair or replacement because of the initial disturbance or damage to the property by the state franchisee, then the state franchisee, as soon as reasonably possible, shall, promptly upon receipt of written notice from the town or other owner and at the state franchisee's sole cost and expense, restore to the town or other owner's satisfaction the property or improvement which was disturbed or damaged. Any such restoration by the state franchisee shall be made in accordance with such materials and specifications as may, from time to time, be established by the town. 
(f)  Prior to performing any work in the public right-of-way, a state franchisee shall give appropriate notice to the "Underground Service Alert" ("USA"), or any similar type service provider as designated by the town. 
(g)  There shall be no unreasonable or unnecessary obstruction of the public rights-of-way by a state franchisee in connection with any of the work provided for herein. The state franchisee shall maintain any barriers, signs and warning signals during any work performed on or about the public rights-of-way or adjacent thereto as may be necessary to reasonably avoid injury or damage to life and property. 
(h)  If the town lawfully elects to alter or change the grade or location of any public right-of-way, the state franchisee shall, upon reasonable notice by the town, and in a timely manner, remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. 
(i)  A state franchisee shall not place poles, conduits or other fixtures above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrants or other utility, and all such poles, conduits or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to comply with all ordinances of the town. 
(j)  In accordance with applicable law, a state franchisee or any utility user of the public rights-of-way may be required by the town to permit joint use of its poles and/or conduit located in the public rights-of-way, insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of a reasonable rental fee for such usage. In the absence of agreement regarding such joint use, each party shall be entitled to exercise any rights and defenses provided by applicable law. 
(k)  A state franchisee, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the town, shall temporarily raise or lower its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires or fixtures shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the state franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The state franchisee shall be given not less than five business days prior written notice to arrange for the temporary wire or equipment changes. 
(l)  A state franchisee shall have the authority to trim any trees or other natural growth overhanging the public rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees or other natural growth from coming in contact with the state franchisee's wires, cables and other equipment. The town may require all trimming of trees and natural growth to be done under its supervision and direction. 
(Ord. No. 14-14, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
5.32.090 - Technical standards. 
A state franchisee shall construct, install, operate and maintain any facilities and equipment authorized by its state franchise in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, and any detailed standards required by the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 14-14, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
5.32.100 - Effect of title on former ordinances. 
By adopting this Chapter 5.32, the town council does not waive or excuse any violation of Chapter 5.32 as it existed immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Chapter 5.32, or any obligation of any person or entity to which the former version of this Chapter 5.32 applied. To the extent not superseded by state or federal law, the former provisions of this Chapter 5.32 shall be deemed to have remained in effect continuously until the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Chapter 5.32. 
(Ord. No. 14-14, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
Chapter 5.36 - TAXICABS 
Sections: 
 
5.36.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
"Convicted of moving traffic violations" means a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or a judgment of guilty, whether probation is granted or not, or a forfeiture of bail. 
"Driver" means every person driving a taxicab, whether as agent, employee or otherwise. 
"Owner" means every person having use or control of any taxicab, whether as owner, lessee or otherwise. 
"Tax collector" means the finance director of the town. 
"Taxicab" means every vehicle, whether motor driven or otherwise, which carries or transports passengers over the streets of the town for hire, whether or not the operation extends beyond the boundaries of the town. "Taxicab" shall not include courtesy cars or other vehicles which transport passengers and for which such transportation a consideration is not directly paid to the driver of the vehicle. 
"Taximeter" means any instruments or device attached to a taxicab and designed or intended to measure mechanically the distance traveled by such taxicab, to record the time the vehicle is in waiting and to indicate upon such record by figures or designs the fare to be charged in dollars and cents. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.010)  
5.36.020 - Permit required. 
No person shall solicit or pick up passengers in the town, or engage in the business of operating any taxicab within the town, without having first obtained a separate taxicab permit for each such business as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.020)  
5.36.030 - Application for taxicab permit. 
Application for the issuance or transfer of a taxicab permit shall be filed with the tax collector upon forms provided by him and shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name or names and complete addresses and telephone numbers of all persons who have any interest in the business; 
B.  The number of vehicles proposed to be operated; 
C.  The name under which the business is to be conducted; 
D.  A description of every vehicle which the applicant proposes to use, including the trade name, year, make, body style, motor or serial number, and state license number; 
E.  The peculiar or distinguishing color scheme or design or dress (including any monogram or insignia) intended to be used upon the vehicles and by their drivers; 
F.  The address at which the business is to have its principal office; 
G.  The address and location of the place where the applicant proposes to keep such taxicab(s), vehicle(s) for hire, or other vehicle(s); 
H.  A statement for each person having a financial interest in the business as to all convictions of crimes involving moral turpitude or lack thereof; 
I.  Such other information as the tax collector or the police chief may require. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.030)  
5.36.040 - Fingerprinting. 
Before a taxicab permit may be issued or transferred, all persons having a financial interest in the operation of the business for which the permit is requested shall be fingerprinted by the police department. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.040)  
5.36.050 - Conditions precedent to issuance. 
No taxicab permit shall be issued or transferred to any person if it appears that the vehicles proposed to be operated by the applicant are inadequate or insufficient for the purpose intended or are insufficiently equipped with reasonable safety devices. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.050)  
5.36.060 - Liability insurance. 
A.  Every owner operating under the provisions of this chapter shall keep and maintain insurance against liability for bodily injury and property damage with limits as follows: 
1.  For all vehicles of eight passengers or less: 
a.  No less than five hundred thousand dollars per accident for bodily injury liability, and 
b.  No less than one hundred thousand dollars per accident for property damage liability. 
2.  For all vehicles of eight or more passengers: 
a.  No less than one million dollars per accident for bodily injury liability, and 
b.  No less than three hundred thousand dollars per accident for property damage liability. 
The town of Mammoth Lakes shall be an insured on all policies required by this chapter. 
B.  No permit shall be granted under this chapter until a policy for such insurance has been secured and the same or a copy thereof is filed with the tax collector's office, which policy shall contain an endorsement that the insurance company issuing the policy will not allow it to be cancelled for any purpose without service of thirty-day written notice of cancellation upon the tax collector's office. In the event of failure of the permittee to keep the policy in full force or to properly renew the policy, the tax collector shall immediately cancel and revoke the permit to operate taxicabs. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.060)  
5.36.070 - Office required. 
No person shall engage in the business of operating taxicabs within the town pursuant to a taxicab permit unless there is first established and maintained within the town by such person an office where some person in charge can be contacted in person or by telephone and where taxicab records required by Section 5.36.130 shall be kept. Notwithstanding any other town ordinance, the office portion of this business may be conducted within the home of the permittee. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.070)  
5.36.080 - Suspension or revocation. 
The permit required by this chapter may be suspended or revoked by written notice to the permittee of such suspension or revocation by the tax collector when he finds any of the following: 
A.  Any person with interest in the business for which the taxicab permit is issued has been convicted of any felony or any crime involving moral turpitude after the issuance of the permit; 
B.  Any person with interest in the business for which the taxicab permit is issued has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, or has knowingly allowed employees to violate the provisions of this chapter; 
C.  For nonpayment of any town business tax or other applicable fee provided by this chapter; 
D.  For the violation of any of the laws of the state of California or the town with respect to the operation of the business by any permit holder, or repeated violations by owners or drivers of any vehicle covered by such permit; 
E.  For failure to maintain satisfactory service to the public, or for failure to keep any such vehicle in a safe and sanitary condition and good repair, or for failure to use the distinctive coloring, monogram, or insignia described in the application, or for deviation from the schedule or rates and fares set forth in the application; 
F.  For any cause which the town council finds makes it contrary to the public health, interest, convenience, necessity or general welfare for the permit to be continued; 
G.  There is discovered that false answers have been given in the application for the taxicab permit provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.080)  
5.36.090 - Revocation—Appeal. 
If the permittee is dissatisfied with the action of the tax collector in suspending or revoking the permit, such person may appeal to the town council by filing a notice of appeal in writing with the town clerk not more than ten days after the action of the tax collector becomes effective. The clerk shall transmit the appeal to the town council forthwith, and the town council shall set the matter for hearing. The town council shall cause written notice of the time and place of the hearing to be mailed to the permittee so appealing to his last known address. The person(s) appealing shall have a right to present witnesses on his own behalf at the hearing. If no appeal is taken within ten days, the action of the tax collector shall be final. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.09)  
5.36.100 - Appeal—Action by town council. 
The town council may either sustain, reverse or modify the action of the tax collector in suspending or revoking the permit provided for in Section 5.36.080. During the time such appeal is pending before the town council, and until final determination thereof, the action of the tax collector in suspending or revoking the permit, as provided in this chapter, shall be stayed. However, if the tax collector makes a finding in his order of suspension that the health, safety, or welfare of the people of the town will be endangered if the taxicab permit is not suspended or revoked during an appeal, then the tax collector's action suspending or revoking the permit shall not be stayed pending appeal. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.100)  
5.36.110 - Substitution of vehicles. 
Should any person holding a taxicab permit desire to substitute a vehicle or vehicles which are presently licensed pursuant to an existing permit, he may do so by making application to the tax collector on such form as shall be prescribed by him. The tax collector shall require the proposed substitution vehicles to be inspected by the police department pursuant to Section 5.36.120. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.110)  
5.36.120 - Mechanical inspection. 
Before a permit required by Section 5.36.020 is issued or transferred to any owner, the taxicab for which permit is requested shall be delivered by the owner to a place designated by the police department for inspection, and the police chief shall designate persons to inspect the taxicab, its equipment and taximeter, to determine whether such taxicab complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.120)  
5.36.130 - Daily records. 
A.  Every person holding a business permit to operate taxicabs shall keep and maintain a daily record of the origin and destination of each trip for hire made by the driver of each vehicle in operation. 
B.  Such record shall be kept for the period of one year and shall be open to inspection and use by any member of the tax collector's office or police department. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.130)  
5.36.140 - Hiring unlicensed drivers. 
It is unlawful for any person who conducts, manages or carries on a taxicab business to employ as a driver of any taxicab any person who does not hold a valid California state driver's license of a type and class appropriate to the type of vehicle being operated during the time of such employment. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.140)  
5.36.150 - Driver permit required. 
Application for a taxicab driver permit shall be filed with the tax collector upon forms provided by him and shall contain such information as required by the tax collector and the police chief. No person shall act as a driver of a taxicab unless he holds a valid driver's license from the state of a type and class appropriate to the type of taxicab permitted, complies with all applicable laws of the state, and secures a taxicab driver's from the tax collector prior to operating any taxicab. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.150)  
5.36.160 - Number of passengers. 
No driver of a taxicab shall accept, take into his vehicle or transport any larger number of passengers than the rated seating capacity of his vehicle. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.160)  
5.36.170 - Suspension or revocation of driver permit. 
Any driver or permittee operating a taxicab may have the taxicab driver permit provided in this chapter suspended or revoked for the following reasons after a hearing before the tax collector and findings made as provided in this chapter: 
A.  Any person who has been twice convicted of moving traffic violations which moving traffic violations occur within a period of six months may have his taxicab driver permit suspended for ten days. 
B.  Any person who has been three times convicted of moving traffic violations which moving traffic violations occur within a period of six months may have his taxicab driver permit suspended for thirty days. 
C.  The permit provided for in this chapter may be revoked or not renewed when a taxicab driver has since the granting of the permit: 
1.  Been convicted of a felony; 
2.  Had his state driver's license revoked or suspended; 
3.  Been convicted of driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquors; 
4.  Been convicted of driving while under the influence of narcotics; 
5.  Is discovered to have given false answers in the application for the taxicab driver permit provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.170)  
5.36.180 - Driver permit revocation—Appeal. 
If the permittee is dissatisfied with the action of the tax collector in suspending or revoking the taxicab driver permit, such person may appeal to the town council by filing a notice of appeal in writing with the town clerk not more than ten days after the action of the tax collector becomes effective. The clerk shall transmit the appeal to the town council forthwith, and the town council shall set the matter for hearing. The town council shall cause written notice of the time and place of the hearing to be mailed to the permittee so appealing to his last known address. The person(s) appealing shall have a right to present witnesses on his own behalf at the hearing. If no appeal is taken within ten days, the action of the tax collector shall be final. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.180)  
5.36.190 - Driver permit appeal—Action by town council. 
The council may either sustain, reverse or modify the action of the tax collector in suspending or revoking the permit provided for in Section 5.36.180. During the time such appeal is pending before the town council, and until final determination thereof, the action of the tax collector in suspending or revoking the permit, as provided in this chapter, shall be stayed. However, if the tax collector makes a finding in his order of suspension that the health, safety, or welfare of the people of the town will be endangered if the taxicab driver permit is not suspended or revoked during an appeal, then the tax collector's action suspending or revoking the permit shall not be stayed pending appeal. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.190)  
5.36.200 - Refusal to pay fare. 
Any person who wilfully refuses to pay the legal fare for a taxicab which has been hired for use as prescribed in this chapter is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.210)  
5.36.210 - Disabled vehicle. 
Should a taxicab become disabled or break down while conveying any passenger for hire, the time of stoppage shall be deducted from the time charged for. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.220)  
5.36.220 - Answering calls. 
The owner shall cause to be answered, and the driver of any taxicab shall answer, all calls received in the order of their receipt. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.230)  
5.36.230 - Continuing vehicle inspection. 
The police department shall have the authority to designate agents who may inspect taxicabs and their equipment at any time if it is found that the taxicab or equipment is in such condition that its operation is unsafe for the passengers or for the public, the chief of police shall prohibit the use of such taxicab until such time as it is made safe for operation. The operation of any taxicab which has been designated as unsafe by the chief of police is unlawful. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.240)  
5.36.240 - Property left in taxicab. 
It is unlawful for the driver or operator of a taxicab to fail to report to the owner at once all property of value left in his vehicle by passengers and not returned to the lawful owner, and it is unlawful for the owner to fail to report the existence of such property to the police department after the expiration of twenty-four hours. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.250)  
5.36.250 - Display of information. 
A.  There shall be displayed in the passenger compartment of each public vehicle for hire, in full view of the passenger(s), a card not less than two inches by three and one-half inches in size, which shall have plainly printed thereon the name of the owner(s) and the fictitious name under which such owner operates, the business address and telephone number of the owner and a correct schedule of the rates to be charged for conveyance in the vehicle. 
B.  Each taxicab licensed to operate in the town shall have located in a convenient place in the driver's compartment and in view of the passenger(s) therein, containers of the type and design approved by the tax collector. Such containers shall contain cards bearing the following information: 
One such container shall have a card in it bearing: 
1.  The permit number issued for each individual taxicab licensed to operate in the town; 
2.  The name of the company to whom it is issued; 
3.  The date of issuance; 
4.  The state license plate number and engine number of the taxicab displaying it. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.260)  
5.36.260 - Fees. 
There shall be a fee established for the taxicab permit and for a taxicab driver permit and there shall be fees established for the necessary fingerprinting and vehicle inspections required by this chapter. Such fees shall be established by resolution of the town council after one public hearing at a meeting of the town council and notice to any existing permittee. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.270)  
5.36.270 - Rates. 
The town council may establish a schedule of rates for conveyance in a taxicab. Such rates shall be established by resolution of the town council after one public hearing at a meeting of the town council and notice to any existing permittee. 
(Ord. 92-01 § 1 Exh. A(part), 1992: prior code § 7.34.280)  
Chapter 5.38 - COMMERCIAL CANNABIS PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), adopted Mar. 13, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 5.38, §§ 5.38.010—5.38.140, and enacted a new Ch. 5.38 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.38 pertained to medical marijuana cooperatives and derived from Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1(Exh. A), adopted June 2, 2010; and Ord. No. 15-11, § 2, adopted Nov. 18, 2015. 
 
5.38.010 - Applicability. 
The requirements in this chapter apply to all commercial cannabis business within the town. These requirements do not apply to personal use of cultivation and cannabis. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), 3-13-2018)  
5.38.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, wherever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings set forth below. 
"Applicant" means a person who has submitted an application for a permit or renewal of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. If the applicant is an entity and not a natural person, applicant shall include all persons having a twenty percent or more financial interest in the entity. 
"Application" means the form provided by the town in accordance with this chapter for the purpose of seeking a commercial cannabis permit. 
"Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this division, "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Cannabis product" means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. 
"Cannabis review authority" is comprised of town staff that have the responsibility and authority to review and approve or deny commercial cannabis permits. The review authority includes, but is not limited to, town staff from the community and economic development department, the finance department, and the police department. "Review authority" shall have the same meaning. 
"Canopy" means all areas occupied by any portion of a cannabis plant, inclusive of all vertical planes, whether contiguous or noncontiguous on any one site. 
"Chief of police" means the chief of police for the town police department or his/her designee. 
"Commercial cannabis activity" means any commercial activity (i.e., non-personal use) involving the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery, or sale of cannabis and cannabis products. 
"Commercial cannabis operation" means an entity that engages in commercial cannabis activities. 
"Commercial cannabis permit" means a permit issued by the town to an applicant to perform commercial cannabis activities under this chapter. "Permit" shall have the same meaning. 
"Hearing officer" means the designated person that conducts administrative hearings for appeals of any action taken pursuant to this chapter. The person designated as the hearing officer for appeals pursuant to this chapter is the town manager. 
"Medicinal cannabis" or "medicinal cannabis product" means cannabis or a cannabis product, respectively, intended to be sold for use pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at Section 11362.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, by a medicinal cannabis patient in California who possesses a physician's recommendation. 
"Owner" shall mean any of the following: 
1.  A person with an aggregate ownership interest of twenty percent or more in the person applying for a permit or a permittee, unless the interest is solely a security, lien, or encumbrance; 
2.  The chief executive officer of a nonprofit or other entity; or 
3.  An individual who will be participating in the direction, control or management of the person applying for a permit. 
"Permittee" means the person issued a town permit under this chapter. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. 
"Premises" means the designated structure or structures and land specified in the application that is owned, leased, or otherwise held under the control of the applicant or permittee where the commercial cannabis activity will be or is conducted. 
"Primary caregiver" shall have the same meaning as in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code, as it may be amended from time to time. A person asserting primary caregiver status must establish by written documentation that (1) he or she has been designated as such by the medicinal cannabis patient, and (2) he or she is a person "who has consistent assumed responsibility for the housing, health, or safety of the patient." 
"Property owner" means the individual or entity who is the record owner of the subject property or premises where commercial cannabis activities are located or are proposed to be located. 
"Qualified patient" shall have the same meaning as in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code, as it may be amended from time to time. 
"State" means the state of California. 
"State license" means a state license issued pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Sections 26000, et seq. 
"Town" means the Town of Mammoth Lakes. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), 3-13-2018)  
5.38.030 - Commercial cannabis permit. 
A.  Any person who intends to engage in a commercial cannabis activity shall obtain a commercial cannabis permit for the fixed location in which the commercial cannabis activity is to occur. Each separate location where commercial cannabis activities are to occur will require a separate commercial cannabis permit. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in, or allow to be conducted or engaged in a commercial cannabis activity within the town, unless the town has issued such person a permit under this chapter and the permit is in effect. Notwithstanding the above, the permits issued under this chapter do not provide any protection or immunity for any person from state or federal laws, or from protection pursuant to any applicable state or federal laws. 
C.  The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or town permits or licenses, shall not exempt the applicant from obtaining a commercial cannabis permit under this chapter, nor shall the terms and conditions of any other such permit or license modify the requirements of a permit granted under this chapter, except that the commercial cannabis permit must be consistent with the land use entitlement issued by the town pursuant to Title 17. 
D.  The applicant must receive all necessary land use entitlements as required by Title 17 before the town will issue a commercial cannabis permit under this chapter. 
E.  All of the following activities are exempt from the commercial cannabis permit requirements under this chapter: 
1.  Possession, storage, manufacturing, or transportation of medicinal cannabis, or cultivation of medical cannabis in an amount consistent with Section 11362.77 of the California Health and Safety Code by a qualified patient, as that term is defined in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code, provided the qualified patient possesses, stores, manufactures, transports, or cultivates cannabis exclusively for his or her personal medical use, and does not provide, donate, sell, or distribute cannabis to any other person. Qualified patients shall, upon request, provide appropriate documentation to law enforcement demonstrating that they have a valid physician's recommendation to use cannabis for medicinal purposes. 
2.  Possession, storage, manufacturing, or transportation of medicinal cannabis, or cultivation of medicinal cannabis in an amount consistent with Section 11362.77 of the California Health and Safety Code by a primary caregiver on behalf of a qualified patient, within the meaning of Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code, provided the primary caregiver does not receive remuneration for these activities except for compensation in full compliance with Subdivision (c) of Section 11362.765 of the California Health and Safety Code and the primary caregiver does not act on behalf of more than three qualified patients. Primary caregivers shall, upon request, provide appropriate documentation to law enforcement demonstrating that they are a primary caregiver for a maximum of three qualified patients. 
3.  Possession, processing, storage, transportation, or donation of not more than twenty-eight and one-half grams (i.e., one ounce) of cannabis or not more than eight grams of concentrated cannabis to persons twenty-one years of age or older by persons twenty-one years of age or older pursuant to Section 11362.1 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
4.  The cultivation of up to six living cannabis plants by persons twenty-one years of age or older as allowed pursuant to Section 11362.1 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), 3-13-2018)  
5.38.040 - Commercial cannabis permit application process. 
A.  Each application for the establishment of a commercial cannabis permit shall be filed with the town's community and economic development department on the form and in the manner prescribed by the cannabis review authority. The cannabis review authority shall be responsible for administering the application process set forth in this chapter. 
B.  In all cases, the application shall contain, without limitation, the following documentation: 
1.  All applicants' and owners names, mailing addresses, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses. 
2.  A twenty-four hour or night-time contact phone number. 
3.  The physical address and assessor parcel number (APN) of the property upon which the proposed commercial cannabis operation will be located. 
4.  Proof of ownership of the premises, or if the premises on which the commercial cannabis operation is to occur is rented or leased, a copy of the lease signed by the property owner. A signed affidavit from all persons and entities having a right, title, or interest in the premises that is the subject of the application consenting to the application and the operation of the proposed commercial cannabis activity on the subject premises is required. 
5.  A scaled diagram of the premises, showing, without limitation, a site plan of the entire property, all entry ways and exits to the building(s), parking areas, delivery/truck loading areas, trash enclosures, fences, walls, site lighting, and a floor plan showing the layout of the interior space(s) and identifying all areas where commercial cannabis activities will occur. 
6.  If the applicant is a business entity or any form of entity, information regarding the entity, including, without limitation, the name and address of the entity, its legal status, and proof of registration with, or a certificate of good standing from, the California Secretary of State, if applicable. 
7.  The full name, date of birth, present address and previous addresses for the past five years of all owners, supervisors, and employees of the commercial cannabis activity that is the subject of the application or, if the applicant is an entity, having a twenty percent or more financial interest in the entity. 
8.  The businesses, occupations, and employment history for the ten years immediately preceding the date of the application that all persons responsible for the operation of the commercial cannabis activity, including owners and managers, have been involved in. 
9.  All owners, supervisors, and employees of the commercial cannabis activity shall submit the following information to allow the chief of police to conduct a background check and investigation: 
a.  The name, address, phone number, and fingerprints of each person identified above. 
b.  For each person identified above, a list of each criminal conviction, if any, whether each such conviction was by verdict, plea of guilty, or plea of nolo contendere. The list shall, for each such conviction, set forth the date of arrest, the location of the arrest, the offense charged, the court in which the applicant was prosecuted, and the offense of which the applicant was convicted. 
c.  Such other information as may be required by the chief of police. 
10.  A copy of all applicants', supervisors', and employees' state issued driver's license or other form of identification. 
11.  The names and address of any other commercial cannabis operations currently being operated by the applicant or owner, or that had previously been operated by the applicant or owner, and a statement of whether the authorization for any such operation had been revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason therefor. 
12.  A complete description of the type, nature, and extent of the commercial cannabis activities to be conducted. 
13.  A description of the type of state license(s) that will be required for the proposed operations pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Sections 26000, et seq., including a description of the proposed total canopy area of any cultivation or nursery operation. 
14.  A detail of the procedures to be utilized at the premises including a description of how chemicals, pesticides and fertilizers will be stored, handled, used and disposed of; and if applicable, manufacturing methods, the transportation process, inventory procedures, and quality control procedures. 
15.  A security plan outlining the on-site security measures, both physical and operational, that ensure the safety of persons and the protection of the premises from theft. The plan shall include, at a minimum, installation of security cameras, installation of electronic locking mechanisms, continuous operation of a commercial burglary and robbery alarm system that is monitored by a state-licensed operator, use of security guards when required by state regulations, and an annual written security assessment of the site by a qualified professional. The security plan must also include a lighting plan showing exterior and interior lighting that will be implemented to provide adequate security. 
16.  Proposed hours of operation. 
17.  A waste disposal plan. 
18.  If applicable, provide the applicant's seller's permit number issued pursuant to Part 1 (Commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code or indicate that the applicant is currently applying for a seller's permit. 
19.  A statement by the applicant that it has the ability to comply with all laws regulating businesses in the state and that it shall maintain compliance during the term of the permit. 
20.  Authorization for the town, its agents, and employees to seek verification of the information contained in the application. 
21.  Certification, under penalty of perjury, that all the information contained in the application is true and correct. 
22.  Any other information required by the town. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), 3-13-2018)  
5.38.050 - Review of application for commercial cannabis permit. 
A.  The review authority shall review the application for a commercial cannabis permit and associated documents and shall require, if he or she deems necessary, additional information to complete the application. The review authority may deem the application incomplete if it does not contain all required information and documents. Upon notification that an application is incomplete, the applicant shall have ten calendar days to submit all materials required to complete the application. If the application remains incomplete in excess of ten calendar days, the application shall be deemed withdrawn. 
B.  An application shall not be deemed complete unless all required application fees have been paid. 
C.  Each commercial cannabis permit shall be granted for a one year period and shall expire one year after the date of its issuance. 
D.  Upon review of a complete application for a commercial cannabis permit, the review authority shall grant the application if: 
1.  The proposed commercial cannabis activities will comply with all the requirements of the state and this Code; 
2.  The applicant has received all necessary land use entitlements as required by Title 17; 
3.  The proposed commercial cannabis activity will comply with all provisions of this chapter; 
4.  The chief of police has approved the application based on the following criteria: 
a.  Whether the location is identified as having calls for police services significantly in excess of the average number of calls for services for similar businesses during the most recent reporting period for which statistics are available. 
b.  Whether the floor plan, security plan and lighting plan incorporate features sufficient to reduce or eliminate potential crime-related problems. 
c.  Whether any of the owners, supervisors, or employees of the commercial cannabis activity have violated any local or state law, statute, rule or regulation respecting the distribution, possession or consumption of illegal drugs or controlled substances. 
d.  Whether any of the owners of the commercial cannabis activity have engaged in unlawful, fraudulent, unfair, or deceptive business practices or acts. 
e.  Whether any of the owners, supervisors, or employees of the commercial cannabis activity have knowingly made a false statement of material fact or have knowingly omitted to state a material fact in a permit application, or have provided false, inaccurate, or otherwise misleading information, or failed to submit or otherwise refuse to submit to fingerprinting. 
f.  Whether any of the owners, supervisors, or employees of the commercial cannabis activity have committed any act involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit with intent to substantially benefit him or herself, or another, or substantially injure another, or has engaged in illegal use, possession, distribution, or similar action relating to illegal drugs or controlled substances. 
g.  Notwithstanding the above, an applicant shall not be denied solely on the basis that the applicant or any of the owners, supervisors, or employees have been convicted of a felony if the applicant has obtained a certificate of rehabilitation under state law or solely on the basis that the applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor if the applicant has met all applicable requirements of rehabilitation pursuant to state law. 
5.  If applicable, the applicant has obtained a valid seller's permit required pursuant to Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code. 
E.  The review authority may deny any application that meets any of the following criteria: 
1.  The applicant has knowingly made a false statement of material fact or has knowingly omitted a material fact from the application; 
2.  Any owner, supervisor, or employee of the commercial cannabis activity has been convicted of a felony, as specified in subdivision (c) of Section 667.5 and subdivision (c) of Section 1192.7 of the California Penal Code, or a drug related misdemeanor reclassified by Section 1170.18 of the California Penal Code (Proposition 47) within the past ten years. A conviction within the meaning of this section means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere; 
3.  If the chief of police determines that there is a substantial risk to the community based on the criteria in Section 5.38.050. 
4.  If applicable, the applicant failed to obtain or maintain a valid seller's permit required pursuant to Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code. 
5.  If any person who is listed on the application is less than twenty-one years of age; 
6.  If the proposed commercial cannabis activity does not comply with the provisions of this chapter or state law; or 
7.  If the applicant has not received all necessary land use entitlements as required by Title 17. 
F.  If the review authority intends to deny the application, the review authority shall specify in writing the reason for the denial of the application, and notify the applicant that the decision shall become final unless the applicant seeks an appeal pursuant to Section 5.38.130 within ten calendar days of the date of service of the review authority's decision. Service of the decision shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 5.38.140. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), 3-13-2018)  
5.38.060 - Commercial cannabis permit renewal and grounds for denial. 
A.  Each commercial cannabis permit shall expire one year after the date of its issuance. Any permit may be renewed by the review authority upon the submission of a renewal application by the permittee and upon determination by the review authority that the applicant meets the standards for grant of application pursuant to Section 5.38.050. At the time of consideration of a renewal application, the review authority shall consider compliance with conditions in the prior term. 
B.  An application for renewal shall be filed with the review authority at least sixty calendar days before expiration of the permit. If any of the documentation and information supplied by the applicant pursuant to Section 5.38.040 has changed since the grant of the permit, the applicant shall submit updated information and documentation with the application for renewal and shall provide such other information as the review authority may require. 
C.  If a commercial cannabis permit expires without being renewed, the permittee of the expired permit must apply for a new permit pursuant to this chapter. Operations at the location shall cease until such new permit is issued. 
D.  Any application for renewal may be denied if: 
1.  The application is filed fewer than sixty calendar days before its expiration: 
2.  The permittee fails to conform to the criteria set forth in this chapter; 
3.  The permittee is delinquent in payment of town taxes on commercial cannabis activity; or 
4.  The permit is suspended or revoked at the time of the application. 
E.  If a renewal application is denied, an applicant may file a new application pursuant to this chapter. 
F.  An application for renewal shall not be deemed complete until all application fees have been paid. 
G.  If the review authority intends to deny the renewal, the review authority shall specify in writing the reasons for the denial of the renewal, and notify the permittee that the decision shall become final unless the permittee seeks an appeal pursuant to Section 5.38.130 within ten calendar days of the date of service of the review authority's decision. Service of the decision shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 5.38.140. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), 3-13-2018)  
5.38.070 - Fees. 
The filing of an application for a commercial cannabis permit and for the renewal of a commercial cannabis permit shall be accompanied by payment of such fees as the town council may establish to recover the cost of administration of this chapter. Permit applicants and permittees are responsible for the costs of inspections, regulatory audits, financial audits, investigations, and any other fee-associated activity established by this chapter. Fees, fines, and costs specified by this chapter shall be as established by the town council and as set forth in the town schedule of fees, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), 3-13-2018)  
5.38.080 - Commercial cannabis permit nontransferable. 
A.  A commercial cannabis permit does not create any interest in value, is not transferrable, and automatically terminates upon transfer of ownership. 
B.  Whenever any individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or other type of business entity permitted under this chapter sells or transfers all or part of its corporate stock, partnership interest, or other business interest in a commercial cannabis operation, a new commercial cannabis permit shall be obtained pursuant to Section 5.38.40. 
C.  A commercial cannabis permit is issued to and covers only the permittee identified on the permit with respect to the premises identified on the permit. The commercial cannabis permit does not run with the land. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), 3-13-2018)  
5.38.090 - Commercial cannabis operating requirements. 
A.  Throughout the term of the commercial cannabis permit, each permittee shall not violate this chapter and shall comply with all of the following: 
1.  A permittee shall not change or alter the premises in a matter which materially or substantially alters the premises, the usage of the premises, or the mode or character of the business operation conducted form the premises, from the site plan contained in the diagram on file with the application, unless and until written approval by the review authority has been obtained. For purposes of this section, material or substantial physical changes of the premises, or in the usage of the premises, shall include, but not be limited to, a substantial increase or decrease in the total area of the licensed premises previously diagrammed, or any other physical modification resulting in substantial change in the mode or character of business operation. 
2.  No cannabis shall be smoked, ingested, or otherwise consumed on the premises. 
3.  No person who is less than twenty-one years of age may be employed or otherwise engaged in the operation of the commercial cannabis permit. 
4.  No person under the age of twenty-one years of age shall be allowed on the premises. 
5.  Each permittee shall conspicuously display its permit on the premises. Each commercial cannabis operation that engages in transportation shall carry a copy of the permit in all vehicles that transport cannabis or cannabis products. 
6.  Odor prevention devices and techniques, such as a ventilation system with a carbon filter, shall be incorporated to ensure that odors from cannabis are not detectable off-site. 
7.  A permittee shall not allow any alcohol to be stored, sold, displayed, or consumed on the premises. 
8.  A permittee shall not allow any tobacco products to be stored, displayed, sold, or consumed on the premises. 
9.  No cannabis or cannabis products, or graphics depicting cannabis or cannabis products shall be visible from the exterior of the premises. 
10.  All cannabis and cannabis products shall be stored in a secured and locked safe room, safe, or vault, and in a manner to prevent diversion, theft, and loss, except for limited amounts of cannabis used for display purposes, samples, or immediate sale. 
11.  Each permittee shall keep accurate records of its commercial cannabis activities pursuant to the requirements of Sections 26120 and 26162 of the California Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended. 
12.  Each permittee shall be responsible and liable for safety and security in an around the commercial cannabis operation, and shall provide adequate security on the premises, including lighting and alarms, to ensure the safety of the persons and to protect the premises from theft and other crimes. Each permittee shall install and maintain in proper working order, video monitoring equipment capable of providing surveillance of both interior and exterior areas of the permitted establishment. Each permittee shall maintain such surveillance video tapes for a period of at least ninety days and shall make such videotapes available to the town upon demand. 
13.  Each permittee shall notify the town police department immediately after discovering any of the following: diversion, theft, loss, or any criminal activity involving the commercial cannabis operation; significant discrepancies identified during inventory, or any other breach of security. 
14.  Each permittee shall provide the review authority with the name, telephone number, and e-mail address of a community relations contact to whom the public can provide notice of problems associated with the commercial cannabis operation. The permittee shall make a good faith effort to resolve problems without the need for intervention by the town. 
15.  Any new owners, employees, or other persons otherwise engaged in the operation of the commercial cannabis operation must submit their information to the review authority within ten days prior to their new employment or engagement, including fingerprints and other necessary information for a criminal background check. 
16.  No owner, supervisor, or employee may have been convicted of a felony, as specified in subdivision (c) of Section 667.5 and subdivision (c) of Section 1192.7 of the California Penal Code, or a drug or a drug related misdemeanor reclassified by Section 1170.18 of the California Penal Code (Proposition 47) within the past ten years. A conviction within the meaning of this section means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere. 
17.  A permittee shall not be delinquent in the payment of all applicable state and town taxes and fees. 
18.  A permittee shall follow all local and state requirements for waste disposal. 
19.  The premises where the commercial cannabis operation is located must at all times have valid land use entitlements as required by Title 17 and the land use entitlements must be operative. 
20.  When applicable, the permittee must legally hold all required state licenses under the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulatory and Safety Act (MAUCRSA) (California Business and Professions Code Sections 26000, et seq.), as it may be amended, and under all other applicable state codes. 
B.  At any time between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. and without notice, town officials may enter the premises for the purpose of observing compliance of the commercial cannabis operation with this section, including access to and inspection of the commercial cannabis operation's records, books, accounts, financial data, and any and all data relevant to its permitted activities for the purpose of conducting an audit or examination. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person having any responsibility over a commercial cannabis operation to refuse to allow, impede, obstruct, or interfere with an inspection, or the review of the copying of records and monitoring (including recordings) including, but not limited to, the concealment, destruction, and falsification of any recordings or records. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), 3-13-2018)  
5.38.100 - Additional cultivation, manufacture, and testing requirements. 
A.  The canopy area of cannabis located at any cultivation facility shall not exceed the maximum canopy limits set by state law. The commercial cannabis permit shall specify the maximum canopy limit allowed by the permit. 
B.  Each permittee must follow all pesticide use requirements of local, state, and federal law and pesticides and fertilizers shall be properly labeled and stored to avoid contamination through erosion, leakage, or inadvertent damage from rodents, pests, or wildlife. A permit from the state department of food and agriculture is required for the use of pesticides. 
C.  Each permittee must maintain all weighing devices in compliance with local, state, or federal law and comply with the registration requirements of the state department of food and agriculture. 
D.  In no case shall any hazardous, flammable, or explosive substances be used to process or manufacture cannabis products on-site unless all necessary permits have been obtained from the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District, and any other appropriate agencies. 
E.  All food products, food storage facilities, food-related utensils, equipment, and materials shall be approved, used, managed, and handled in accordance with Sections 113700—114437 of the California Health and Safety Code, and California Retail Food Code. All food products shall be protected from contamination at all times, and all food handlers must be clean, in good health, and free from communicable diseases. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), 3-13-2018)  
5.38.110 - Suspension or revocation of a commercial cannabis permit. 
Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a commercial cannabis permit, based on substantial evidence and following the procedures outlined in Section 5.38.130. 
A.  Failure to comply with one or more of the terms and conditions of the commercial cannabis permit. 
B.  The commercial cannabis permit was granted on the basis of false material information, written or oral, given willfully or negligently by the applicant. 
C.  Any act or omission by a permittee in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Any act or omission by a permittee in violation of state law, or this Code. 
E.  Any act or omission by a permittee that results in the suspension or revocation of the applicable use permit issued under Title 17 for the commercial cannabis activities. 
F.  Any act or omission by a permittee that results in the denial, revocation, or suspension of that permittee's state license. 
G.  Failure to pay applicable state or town taxes or fees on commercial cannabis activity. 
H.  Conduct of the commercial cannabis operations in a manner that constitutes a nuisance, where the permittee has failed to comply with reasonable conditions to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), 3-13-2018)  
5.38.120 - Procedures for suspension or revocation. 
A.  Upon determining grounds for suspension or revocation of the commercial cannabis permit exist pursuant to Section 5.38.110, the town will issue the permittee a written notice of intention to suspend or revoke the permit, as the case may be. The notice of intention shall be served on the permittee, as reported on the permit, and on the property owner. The notice of intention shall describe the premises, the intention to revoke or suspend the permit, the time limit for compliance, and the right to an appeal hearing. The notice of intention shall notify the permittee and the property owner to request an appeal hearing before the board of review to present evidence as to why the permit should not be suspended or revoked, and shall notify them of the ten-day deadline to submit a written request for an appeal hearing. 
B.  The permittee shall have ten calendar days from the service of the notice of intention to submit a written request for an appeal hearing before the board of review. Failure to submit the written request for an appeal hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to challenge the suspension or revocation of the commercial cannabis permit and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. If the request is not timely requested, the town may suspend or revoke the permit in accordance with the notice of intention. If the permittee files an appeal hearing request within the time and manner prescribed, the permit shall remain in effect until the appeal is finally determined. 
C.  If a written request for an appeal hearing is submitted, the processing of the appeal shall be conducted as set forth in Section 5.38.130. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), 3-13-2018)  
5.38.130 - Appeals. 
Appeals of any action taken pursuant to this chapter shall be heard by the hearing officer at an administrative hearing. 
A.  Upon receipt of a timely written request for an appeal hearing, the review authority shall set a date for an administrative hearing to be held within thirty days of receipt of the request, unless an immediate threat to the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates an earlier hearing date. Notice of the administrative hearing, including the time, date, and location of the hearing, shall be served in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 5.38.140. 
B.  Administrative Hearing. 
1.  At the hearing, the permittee, or their representative, and the review authority representative shall have the opportunity to testify and submit evidence as they believe to be relevant to their respective positions. The hearing officer may require the presentation of additional evidence from either the permittee or the review authority representative, or both. The hearing officer may continue the hearing from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. 
2.  Upon completion of the hearing, the hearing officer may: 
a.  Affirm the decision of the review authority; 
b.  Reverse the review authority's decision; or 
c.  Refer the matter to the town council. 
3.  Written notice of the hearing officer's decision shall be given to the permittee and the written decision shall constitute the final administrative decision of the town. 
4.  In the event a civil action is initiated to obtain enforcement of the decision of the hearing officer, and judgment is entered to enforce the decision, the person against whom the order of enforcement has been entered shall be liable to pay the town's total costs of enforcement, including reasonable attorney fees. 
5.  If the permittee, or their representative, fails to appear at the noticed hearing, such failure to appear shall constitute an abandonment of the appeal hearing request and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), 3-13-2018)  
5.38.140 - Service requirements. 
Wherever this chapter requires the town to serve notice to an applicant, permittee, or property owner, such notice shall be given by the review authority, in writing, and shall be delivered either by personal delivery or by certified U.S. Mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. In addition, any such notice may be posted at the physical address of the premises on the date of the mailing of notice. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), 3-13-2018)  
5.38.150 - Enforcement and penalties. 
A violation of this section is unlawful and any person that violates any of the provisions of this section may be prosecuted for an infraction or a misdemeanor pursuant to Title 1, Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 6(Exh. D), 3-13-2018)  
Chapter 5.40 - TRANSIENT RENTALS OF RESIDENTIAL UNITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-12, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 2, 2015, amended Ch. 5.40 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5.40, §§ 5.40.010—5.40.070, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 15-05, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 16, 2015. 
 
5.40.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter is intended to provide a procedure to ensure that transient rental use does not create adverse impacts to neighboring properties due to excessive traffic, noise, trash, and similar issues. Additionally, this chapter is intended to ensure that the number of occupants within such rental units does not exceed the design capacity of the structure or cause health and safety concerns and that minimum health and safety standards are maintained in such units to protect the visitor from unsafe or unsanitary conditions. This is consistent with the General Plan Vision Statement that the town of Mammoth Lakes is committed to providing the very highest quality of life for our residents and the highest quality of experience for our visitors. 
(Ord. No. 15-12, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2015)  
5.40.020 - Permitted use. 
Transient use of residential property shall be permitted as allowed by Title 17, Zoning, upon the issuance of a Business Tax Certificate and Transient Occupancy Tax Certificate pursuant to Municipal Code Sections 5.04 and 3.12. The Business Tax and Transient Occupancy Tax Certificates shall be maintained at all times. Transient uses shall comply with all applicable codes including the California Building Code and the California Residential Code and local amendments. 
(Ord. No. 15-12, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2015)  
5.40.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
A.  "Transient Rental" means a residential structure, which is occupied, or intended or designed for occupancy, by persons for purposes of sleeping, lodging, or similar reasons for a period of thirty consecutive days or less in exchange for a fee or other consideration. 
B.  "Transient occupancy facility" means any place, space or structure, or portion of any place, space or structure, which is or may be occupied, or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for purposes of sleeping, lodging or similar use in conformance with the town's zoning regulations, and shall include, but not be limited to the following: hotel, hotel-motel, lodge; inn; dude ranch; apartment; apartment unit; condominium; condominium unit; triplex; duplex; single-family residence; cooperative; mobile home; dormitory; roominghouse; camping site; space where camping or remaining overnight is permitted at a campground, recreational vehicle park; or other similar structure, facility or space. "Transient occupancy facility" shall not include any of the following: any hospital, sanitarium, medical clinic, convalescent home, rest home, owner-occupied time share estate, owner-occupied time share use, home for aged people, foster home or other similar facility operated for the care or treatment of human beings; any asylum, jail, prison, orphanage or other facility in which human beings are detained or housed under legal restraint; housing owned or controlled by any educational institution and used exclusively by students and employees of such educational institutions, and officially recognized or approved by it; any housing operated or used exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes by an organization having qualified for exemption from property taxes under the laws of the state of California; any housing owned by a governmental agency and used to house its employees or for governmental purposes; any camp as defined in the Labor Code or other housing furnished by any employer exclusively for housing that employer's employees. 
C.  "Operator" means the person who is a legal owner of the transient occupancy facility. "Operator" also means a person who has the legal right to possession of the premises occupied by transients. "Operator" also means any person who, through lease, mortgage, contract, license or similar legal right obtains any right to receive or collect any moneys as rent for the occupancy of the transient occupancy facility by transients. "Operator" also means any manager, agent, representative or other similar person acting on the authority of an owner of a transient occupancy facility or on the authority of any person who by reason of lease, mortgage, contract, license or similar legal right to receive or collect rent for the occupancy of the transient occupancy facility by transients, which agent, manager or representative has been authorized to receive or collect rent for the occupancy of the transient occupancy facility by transients. 
D.  "Residential property" means any single- or multiple-family dwelling units, duplexes, guesthouses, caretaker units, or other dwelling unit or structure located on one or more contiguous lots of record in any of the zoning districts in Title 17 which allow residential uses. This does not include condominiums that function as hotels (i.e. condo hotels). 
(Ord. No. 15-12, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2015)  
5.40.040 - Sign and Notification Requirements. 
Required interior and exterior notices must be posted as described in Sections A and B below and the address of each unit must be legible from public view. Exterior signage requirements shall become effective on July 1, 2016. Exterior signage is not required for transient rental units within condominium complexes. 
A.  Exterior Notice. Each transient rental shall be equipped with not more than one weatherproof identification sign, not to exceed two square feet/two hundred eighty-eight square inches in area. The identification sign shall be displayed during time the transient rental is being rented on a transient basis (i.e. if unit is only rented out two weeks a year, identification sign only needs to be displayed during those two weeks). By offering transient rentals the operator shall be deemed to have consented to entry upon the property by any person in order to read the identification sign. The required identification sign shall be attached to the transient rental in a location which is clearly visible from public view and shall clearly display all of the following information in lettering of sufficient size to be easily legible: 
1.  The name of the operator and a telephone number at which that party can be reached on a twenty-four-hour basis; 
2.  The maximum number of occupants permitted to stay overnight in the unit; 
3.  The maximum number of vehicles associated with the transient rental allowed to be parked on the property; and 
4.  The telephone number of the police department and the town finance department's TOT compliance hotline. 
B.  Interior Notice. Each transient rental unit shall have a notice posted within the unit in a location clearly marked and accessible to the tenant (e.g. posted on the refrigerator, included within a binder with additional information on the unit, etc.), containing all of the following information: 
1.  The maximum number of occupants permitted to stay overnight in the unit; 
2.  The maximum number of vehicles associated with the transient rental allowed to be parked on the property; 
3.  The location of on-site parking spaces and the parking rules for seasonal snow removal; 
4.  Notification that an occupant, as a person responsible for an unlawful large party, may be cited and fined for creating a disturbance or for violating other provisions of this article; 
5.  Notification that trash and refuse shall not be left or stored on the property unless it is deposited in bear resistant containers intended for pickup by the town's solid waste contractor. Alternatively, trash may be deposited within a dumpster serving the property or at the transfer station for a fee. Trash information should include specific instructions on opening and securing the animal resistant dumpsters; 
6.  Notification that failure to conform to the parking and occupancy requirements for the transient occupancy facility is a violation of the town's Municipal Code; 
7.  The name of the managing agency or agent and a telephone number at which that party may be reached on a twenty-four (24) hour basis; and 
8.  Physical street address of the unit and emergency contact information consisting of 911 and non-emergency contact information for the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District and Mammoth Lakes Police Department. 
9.  Evacuation plan for the unit showing exit routes, exits, and fire extinguisher locations. Evacuation plan may be hand-drawn and does not need to be drawn to scale but should clearly show occupants how to exit the premises in the case of an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 15-12, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2015)  
5.40.050 - Standards and Conditions Of Operation. 
Transient uses shall comply with all of the following standards and conditions of operation. 
A.  All applicable codes regarding fire, building and safety, health and safety, noise, and other relevant laws. 
B.  Information on the permitted occupancy, parking capacity for each unit, and trash disposal requirements shall be stated in the rental information and agreement provided to prospective renters, prior to their occupancy of the unit. The operator shall restrict the parking for the transient rental so that tenants will not exceed the number of parking spaces allocated to the unit. 
C.  Each operator shall have a local contact person who is available at all times to respond to questions and issues arising out of the transient occupancy. The operator shall be personally available by telephone on a twenty-four-hour basis to respond to calls regarding the condition and/or operation of the unit. Failure to respond to calls in a timely and appropriate manner on more than two occasions may result in revocation of the Business Tax Certificate authorizing the use. For purposes of this chapter, responding in a timely and appropriate manner shall mean that a response to an initial call shall be made within one hour of the time the call was made, and within twenty-four hours of the initial call, corrective action shall be commenced to address any violation of this section. 
D.  The number of occupants in any residential unit for transient use shall not exceed the limits set forth in the California Health & Safety Code and the 1997 Uniform Housing Code. Each business tax certificate for a transient occupancy facility shall specify the maximum number of occupants allowed. 
E.  Any advertisement, including web advertising, for the rental unit must include the Transient Occupancy Tax Certificate number. 
F.  All activities shall be in compliance with the town's Noise chapter (Municipal Code Chapter 8.16) and the town's Solid Waste chapter (Municipal Code Chapter 8.12). 
G.  Occupancy Limitations 
1.  Single-Family Home, Town Home, Duplex. The maximum number of persons who may occupy the property as transient renters or their overnight guests shall be limited to two persons per bedroom, plus two. Lofts that meet California Building Code egress requirements are considered a bedroom for the purposes of this occupancy calculation. In no event may the maximum occupancy exceed ten (10) persons in any rental unit unless the unit is approved by the town of Mammoth Lakes Community and Economic Development Director for such occupancy. 
2.  Condominiums and All Other Unit Types. The maximum number of persons who may occupy the property as transient renters or their overnight guests shall be limited to two persons per bedroom, plus two, unless the unit is approved for a higher maximum number of persons by the town of Mammoth Lakes Community and Economic Development Director. Lofts that meet California Building Code egress requirements are considered a bedroom for the purposes of this occupancy calculation. 
H.  Transient rental units shall not be used for activities that would exceed the maximum permitted number of occupants unless a special event permit is reviewed and approved by the Town. 
(Ord. No. 15-12, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2015)  
5.40.060 - Inspection Requirements. 
Any transient use requesting a new business tax certificate and/or transient occupancy tax certificate within a residential structure shall be inspected, prior to commencement of the use, by a qualified inspector authorized and approved by the town to conduct such inspections. The inspection shall verify compliance with all standards and conditions of operation including signage requirements as well as applicable safety requirements. The operator shall submit a completed inspection form to the town showing that the unit has passed inspection and is approved for rental. The actual cost of such inspection, plus any administrative charges, shall be paid by the operator directly to the inspector. A unit shall not be required to be inspected more than once every three years regardless of the changes in business tax certificates and/or transient occupancy tax certificates. 
(Ord. No. 15-12, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2015)  
5.40.070 - Violations. 
A.  A violation of any provision of this chapter, and/or the renting of any property in a zoning district that does not allow for such transient rental, or without proper land use approvals, is subject to the general penalty provisions and/or the administrative citation provisions set forth in Chapter 1.12 and Chapter 8.32 of the Municipal Code, respectively, and any other civil or administrative remedy allowed by law. 
B.  Notwithstanding Chapter 1.12, the administrative fine for the operation of any transient occupancy facility without a valid business tax certificate, or the operation of any transient occupancy facility in violation of applicable zoning requirements of the town shall be five hundred dollars for the first violation and one thousand dollars for a second or subsequent violation within three years. 
C.  Non-compliance by an operator of the requirements for registration and operation of transient rental units may result in the revocation of the business tax certificate authorizing the use, and no new business tax certificate may be issued to the same licensee for operation of a transient occupancy facility for a period of twelve months following such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 15-12, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2015)  
Chapter 5.42 - CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX 
 
5.42.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Cannabis Business Tax Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.020 - Authority and purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt a tax, for revenue purposes, pursuant to Sections 37101 and 37100.5 of the California Government Code, upon cannabis businesses that engage in business in the town. The cannabis business tax is levied based upon business gross receipts. It is not a sales and use tax, a tax upon income, or a tax upon real property. 
The cannabis business tax is a general tax enacted solely for general governmental purposes of the town and not for specific purposes. All of the proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the town's general fund and be available for any legal municipal purpose. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.030 - Intent. 
The intent of this chapter is to levy a tax on all cannabis businesses that operate in the town, regardless of whether such business was operating legally at the time the ordinance from which this chapter is derived was adopted. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to authorize or permit any business activity that would not otherwise be legal or permissible under laws applicable to the activity at the time the activity is undertaken. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.040 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below when used in this chapter: 
"Business" shall include all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in within the town, including any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, vocation, calling, or livelihood, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, but shall not include the services rendered by an employee to his or her employer. 
"Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufactured product, salt, derivative, mixture, tincture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" also means marijuana as defined by Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code and is not limited to medical cannabis. For purposes of this title, "cannabis" does not include "industrial hemp" as defined by Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Cannabis business" means any business activity involving cannabis, including but not limited to cultivating, transporting, distributing, manufacturing, compounding, converting, processing, preparing, storing, packaging, delivering, testing, dispensing, retailing and wholesaling of cannabis, of cannabis products or of ancillary products and accessories, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, whether for medical or recreational use, and whether or not such business possesses a license or other authorization to operate issued by the State of California. 
"Cannabis business tax" means the tax due pursuant to this chapter for engaging in cannabis business in the town. 
"Cannabis permit" means a permit issued by the town to a person to authorize that person to operate or engage in a cannabis business. 
"Cannabis product" means raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, an edible product, or a topical product. "Cannabis product" also means marijuana products as defined by Section 11018.1 of the California Health and Safety Code and is not limited to medical cannabis products. 
"Commercial cannabis cultivation" means cultivation in the course of conducting a cannabis business. 
"Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis and includes, but is not limited to, the operation of a nursery, but does not include personal medical cannabis cultivation for which the cultivator receives no compensation whatsoever, or cultivation for personal recreational use as authorized by Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1 et seq. for which the cultivator receives no compensation whatsoever. 
"Employee" means each and every person engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, member of the owner's family, partner, associate, agent, manager or solicitor, and each and every other person employed or working in such business for a wage, salary, commission, barter or any other form of compensation. 
"Engaged in business as a cannabis business" means the commencing, conducting, operating, managing or carrying on of a cannabis business, whether done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee, or otherwise, whether operating from a fixed location in the town or coming into the town from an outside location to engage in such activities. A person shall be deemed engaged in business within the town if: 
1.  Such person or person's employee maintains a fixed place of business within the town for the benefit or partial benefit of such person; 
2.  Such person or person's employee owns or leases real property within the town for business purposes; 
3.  Such person or person's employee regularly maintains a stock of tangible personal property in the town for sale in the ordinary course of business; 
4.  Such person or person's employee regularly conducts solicitation of business within the town; or 
5.  Such person or person's employee performs work or renders services in the town. 
The foregoing specified activities shall not be a limitation on the meaning of "engaged in business." 
"Evidence of doing business" means evidence such as, without limitation, use of signs, circulars, cards or any other advertising media, including the use of internet or telephone solicitation, or representation to a government agency or to the public that such person is engaged in a cannabis business in the town. 
"Gross receipts," except as otherwise specifically provided, means, whether designated a sales price, royalty, rent, commission, dividend, or other designation, the total amount (including all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature) received or payable for sales of goods, wares or merchandise or for the performance of any act or service of any nature for which a charge is made or credit allowed (whether such service, act or employment is done as part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or not), without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses or any other expense whatsoever. However, the following shall be excluded from gross receipts: 
1.  Cash discounts where allowed and taken on sales. 
2.  Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser. 
3.  Such part of the sale price of any property returned by purchasers to the seller as refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances or return of refundable deposits previously included in gross receipts. 
4.  Receipts derived from the occasional sale of used, obsolete or surplus trade fixtures, machinery or other equipment used by the taxpayer in the regular course of the taxpayer's business. 
5.  Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or units of the same business, except that if the same business is engaged in two or more taxable activities (e.g. cultivation, manufacturing, distribution, and/or retail sales) tax shall be imposed and payable on each such activity regardless of whether sales, trades, or transactions occur between departments or units of the same business. 
6.  Whenever there are included within the gross receipts amounts which reflect sales for which credit is extended and such amount proved uncollectible in a subsequent year, those amounts may be excluded from the gross receipts in the year they prove to be uncollectible; provided, however, if the whole or portion of such amounts excluded as uncollectible are subsequently collected they shall be included in the amount of gross receipts for the period when they are recovered. 
7.  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that such deposits when forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded when in excess of one dollar. 
8.  Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee and to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected. These agents or trustees must provide the finance department with the names and the addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them. This exclusion shall not apply to any fees, percentages, or other payments retained by the agent or trustees. 
9.  Retail sales of t-shirts, sweaters, hats, stickers, key chains, bags, books, posters or other personal tangible property, which the tax collector has excluded in writing by issuing an administrative ruling per Section 5.42.140, shall not be subject to the cannabis business tax under this chapter. However, any retail sales not subject to this chapter as a result of the administrative ruling shall be subject to the appropriate business tax under Chapter 5.04 through Chapter 5.08 or any other chapter or title as determined by the tax collector. 
"Nursery" means a facility or part of a facility that is used only for producing clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of cannabis. 
"Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, whether organized as a nonprofit or for-profit entity, and includes the plural as well as the singular number. 
"Sale" means and includes any sale, exchange, or barter. 
"State" means the State of California. 
"State license," "license," or "registration" means a state license issued pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Sections 19300, et seq. or other applicable state law. 
"Tax collector" means the finance director of the town or his or her designee. 
"Testing laboratory" means a cannabis business that (i) offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products, (ii) offers no service other than such tests, (iii) sells no products, excepting only testing supplies and materials, (iv) is accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in the cannabis industry in the state and (v) is registered with the state department of public health. 
"Town" means the Town of Mammoth Lakes, a municipal corporation of the State of California, in its present incorporation form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.050 - Tax imposed. 
A.  Beginning July 1, 2018, or ten days after certification of the result of the election adopting this chapter, whichever is later, there is imposed upon each cannabis business a cannabis business tax regardless if the business has been issued a permit to operate lawfully in the town or is operating unlawfully. 
B.  The initial rate of the cannabis business tax shall be as follows: 
1.  For every cannabis business engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation in the town: Two percent of gross receipts. 
2.  For every cannabis business engaged in the operation of a testing laboratory: One percent of gross receipts. 
3.  For every cannabis business engaged in the retail sales of cannabis as a retailer (dispensary) or non-store front retailer (delivery) or microbusiness (retail sales): Four percent of gross receipts. 
4.  For every cannabis business engaged in cannabis distribution: Two percent of gross receipts. 
5.  For every cannabis business engaged in cannabis manufacturing, processing, or operating as a microbusiness (non-retail), or any other type of cannabis business not described in Section (B) (1), (2), (3) or (4): Two percent of gross receipts. 
C.  The town council may, by resolution or ordinance, adjust the rate of the cannabis business tax. However, in no event may the town council set any adjusted rate that exceeds the maximum rate calculated pursuant to Subdivision (D) of this section for the date on which the adjusted rate will commence, nor shall the town council set a minimum tax rate for any business described in Section (B) less than one percent of gross receipts. 
D.  The town council shall review the cannabis business tax on an annual basis as part of the budget adoption process and may, by resolution, increase the tax rates by up to one percent each year, not to exceed a maximum rate of eight percent for retail sales and four percent for all other cannabis businesses. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.060 - Reporting and remittance of tax. 
A.  The cannabis business tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid, in arrears, on a monthly basis. The tax due for each month shall be based on the gross receipts for the month. 
B.  Each person owing cannabis business tax for a month shall, no later than the last day of the month following the close of the month, file with the tax collector a statement of the tax owed for that month and the basis for calculating that tax. The tax collector may require that the statement be submitted on a form prescribed by the tax collector. The tax for each month shall be due and payable on that same date as the statement for the month is due. 
C.  Upon cessation of a cannabis business, tax statements and payments shall be immediately due for all months up to the month during which cessation occurred. 
D.  The tax collector may, at his or her discretion, establish shorter report and payment periods for any taxpayer as the tax collector deems necessary to ensure collection of the tax. The tax collector may also require that a deposit, to be applied against the taxes for a calendar quarter, be made by a taxpayer at the beginning of that calendar quarter. In no event shall the deposit required by the tax collector exceed the tax amount he or she projects will be owed by the taxpayer for the calendar quarter. The tax collector may require that a taxpayer make payments via a cashier's check, money order, wire transfer, or similar instrument. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.070 - Payments and communications—Timely remittance. 
Taxes collected from a cannabis business, which are not remitted to the tax collector, or postmarked, on or before the due dates provided in the ordinance codified in this chapter are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a Saturday, Sunday, or town holiday, the return may be postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday/Sunday or town holiday. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.080 - Notice not required by the town. 
The town may as a courtesy send a tax notice to a cannabis business for which payment of taxes is delinquent. However, the tax collector is not required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill to any person subject to the provisions of this chapter. Failure to send such notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.090 - Payment delinquency. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to pay any tax or file any return imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay, in addition to such tax and any interest such tax may accrue, an original delinquency penalty of ten dollars or fifteen percent of the amount of the tax, whichever dollar amount is greater; provided, however, that any operator who has not been late in paying any tax imposed by this chapter or late filing any return within the preceding three calendar years shall, upon application of the operator to the tax collector within fifteen days after the date such tax first became due, pay an original delinquency penalty of ten dollars or a total of one percent per day of the amount of tax due for each day such tax is delinquent, whichever dollar amount is greater, up to fifteen percent. Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this chapter, shall become part of the tax required to be paid. Interest shall accrue on all unpaid taxes until paid. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to pay any delinquent tax, penalties and interest on or after the next business day of the following return period due date, shall pay an additional delinquency penalty, over and above that provided in Paragraph A, of ten dollars or fifteen percent of the amount of the tax, penalties and interest then due, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.100 - Refunds. 
A.  No refund shall be made of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter, except as provided in Section 5.42.120. 
B.  No refund of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter shall be made because of the discontinuation, dissolution, or other termination of a business. 
C.  Whenever the amount of any cannabis business tax, penalty or interest has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or received by the town under this chapter, it may be refunded to the claimant who paid the tax provided that a written claim for refund is filed with the tax collector within one year of the date the tax was originally due and payable. 
D.  The tax collector, his or her designee or any other town officer charged with the administration of this chapter shall have the right to examine and audit all the books and business records of the claimant in order to determine the eligibility of the claimant to the claimed refund. No claim for refund shall be allowed if the claimant refuses to allow such examination of claimant's books and business records after request by the tax collector to do so. 
E.  In the event that the cannabis business tax was erroneously paid, and the error is attributable to the town, the town shall refund the amount of tax erroneously paid up to one year from when the error was identified. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.110 - Personal cultivation not taxed. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to personal cannabis cultivation that meets the definition of personal cultivation under state law and is consistent with the maximum number of living cannabis plants allowed per single private residence specified in Title 17 of this Code and Section 11362.2 of the California Health and Safety Code. This chapter shall not apply to personal use of cannabis that is specifically exempted from state licensing requirements, that meets the definition of personal use or equivalent terminology under state law, and for which the individual receives no compensation whatsoever related to that personal use. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.120 - Administration of the tax. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the tax collector to collect the taxes, penalties, fees, and perform the duties required by this chapter. 
B.  For purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter generally, the tax collector may from time to time promulgate such administrative interpretations, rules, and procedures consistent with the purpose, intent, and express terms of this chapter as he or she deems necessary to implement or clarify such provisions or aid in enforcement. 
C.  The tax collector may take such administrative actions as needed to administer the tax, including but not limited to: 
1.  Provide to all cannabis business taxpayers forms for the reporting of the tax; 
2.  Provide information to any taxpayer concerning the provisions of this chapter; 
3.  Receive and record all taxes remitted to the town as provided in this chapter; 
4.  Maintain records of taxpayer reports and taxes collected pursuant to this chapter; 
5.  Assess penalties and interest to taxpayers pursuant to this chapter; 
6.  Determine amounts owed and enforce collection pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.130 - Appeal procedure. 
Any taxpayer aggrieved by any decision of the tax collector with respect to the amount of tax, interest, penalties and fees, if any, due under this chapter may appeal to the town council by filing a notice of appeal with the town clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The town clerk, or his or her designee, shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the town clerk, or his or her designee, shall give notice in writing to such operator at the last known place of address. The finding of the town council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed by this chapter for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.140 - Enforcement—Action to collect. 
Any taxes, penalties and/or fees required to be paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the town. Any person owing money to the town under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the town for the recovery of such debt. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed a limitation upon the right of the town to bring any other action including criminal, civil and equitable actions, based upon the failure to pay the tax, penalties and/or fees imposed by this chapter or the failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.150 - Apportionment. 
If a business subject to the tax is operating both within and outside the town, it is the intent of the town to apply the cannabis business tax so that the measure of the tax fairly reflects the proportion of the taxed activity actually carried on in the town. To the extent federal or state law requires that any tax due from any taxpayer be apportioned, the taxpayer may indicate said apportionment on his or her tax return. The tax collector may promulgate administrative procedures for apportionment as he or she finds useful or necessary. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.160 - Constitutionality and legality. 
This tax is intended to be applied in a manner consistent with the United States and California Constitutions and state law. None of the tax provided for by this chapter shall be applied in a manner that causes an undue burden upon interstate commerce, a violation of the equal protection or due process clauses of the Constitutions of the United States or the State of California or a violation of any other provision of the California Constitution or state law. If a person believes that the tax, as applied to him or her, is impermissible under applicable law, he or she may request that the tax collector release him or her from the obligation to pay the impermissible portion of the tax. Pursuant to Article XIIIB of the California Constitution, the appropriation limit for the town is hereby increased to the maximum extent over the maximum period of time allowed under law by the amount of the revenues generated by the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.170 - Audit and examination of premises and records. 
A.  For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of cannabis business tax owed or verifying any representations made by any taxpayer to the town in support of his or her tax calculation, the tax collector shall have the power to inspect any location where commercial cannabis cultivation occurs and to audit and examine all books and records (including, but not limited to bookkeeping records, state and federal income tax returns, and other records relating to the gross receipts of the business) of persons engaged in cannabis businesses. In conducting such investigation, the tax collector shall have the power to inspect any equipment, such as computers or point of sale machines that may contain such records. 
B.  It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the town of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the town, which records the tax collector or his/her designee shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.180 - Other licenses, permits, taxes, fees or charges. 
A.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any requirements for any permit or license required by, under or by virtue of any provision of any other chapter of this Code or any other ordinance or resolution of the town, nor be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any tax, fee or other charge imposed, assessed or required by, under or by virtue of any other chapter of this code or any other ordinance or resolution of the town. Any references made or contained in any other chapter of this code to any licenses, license taxes, fees, or charges, or to any schedule of license fees, shall be deemed to refer to the licenses, license taxes, fees or charges, or schedule of license fees, provided for in other chapter of this Code. 
B.  The tax collector may revoke or refuse to renew the business tax certificate required by Chapter 5.04 of this Code for any business that is delinquent in the payment of any tax due pursuant to this chapter or that fails to make a deposit required by the tax collector pursuant to Section 5.42.060. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.190 - Payment of tax does not authorize unlawful business. 
A.  The payment of a cannabis business tax required by this chapter, and its acceptance by the town, shall not entitle any person to carry on any cannabis business unless the person has complied with all of the requirements of this Code and all other applicable state laws. 
B.  No tax paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business, or any business in violation of any local or state law. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.200 - Deficiency determinations. 
If the tax collector is not satisfied that any statement filed as required under the provisions of this chapter is correct, or that the amount of tax is correctly computed, he or she may compute and determine the amount to be paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained in the statement or upon the basis of any information in his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession within three years of the date the tax was originally due and payable. One or more deficiency determinations of the amount of tax due for a period or periods may be made. When a person discontinues engaging in a business, a deficiency determination may be made at any time within three years thereafter as to any liability arising from engaging in such business whether or not a deficiency determination is issued prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due. Whenever a deficiency determination is made, a notice shall be given to the person concerned in the same manner as notices of assessment are given under Section 5.42.240. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.210 - Failure to report—Nonpayment, fraud. 
A.  Under any of the following circumstances, the tax collector may make and give notice of an assessment of the amount of tax owed by a person under this chapter at any time: 
1.  If the person has not filed a complete statement required under the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  If the person has not paid the tax due under the provisions of this chapter; 
3.  If the person has not, after demand by the tax collector, filed a corrected statement, or furnished to the tax collector adequate substantiation of the information contained in a statement already filed, or paid any additional amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter; or 
4.  If the tax collector determines that the nonpayment of any business tax due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to penalties and interest otherwise stated in this chapter and any other penalties allowed by law. 
B.  The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any tax known by the tax collector to be due or estimated by the tax collector, after consideration of all information within the tax collector's knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person assessed, to be due under each applicable section of this chapter, and shall include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the date of the notice of assessment. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.220 - Tax assessment—Notice requirements. 
The notice of assessment shall be served upon the person either by personal delivery, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the business or to such other address as he or she shall register with the tax collector for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this chapter; or, should the person have no address registered with the tax collector for such purpose, then to such person's last known address. For the purposes of this section, a service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the U.S. Mail. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.230 - Tax assessment—Hearing, application and determination. 
Within fifteen days after the date of service, the person may apply in writing to the tax collector for a hearing on the assessment. If application for a hearing before the town is not made within the time herein prescribed, the tax assessed by the tax collector shall become final and conclusive. Within thirty days of the receipt of any such application for hearing, the tax collector shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before him or her no later than ninety days after the receipt of the application, unless a later date is agreed to by the tax collector and the person requesting the hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given by the tax collector to the person requesting such hearing not later than five days prior to such hearing. At such hearing, said applicant may appear and offer evidence why the assessment as made by the tax collector should not be confirmed and fixed as the tax due. After such hearing, the tax collector shall determine and reassess the proper tax to be charged and shall give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in Section 5.42.240 for giving notice of assessment. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.240 - Conviction for violation—Taxes not waived. 
The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required tax shall not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action for the tax debt unpaid at the time of such conviction. No civil action shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any state law requiring the payment of all taxes. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.250 - Violation deemed misdemeanor. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.260 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstance, is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawful, unenforceable or otherwise void, that determination shall have no effect on any other provision of this chapter or the application of this chapter to any other person or circumstance and, to that end, the provisions hereof are severable. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.270 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available under any other provision of this Code and any other provision of law or equity are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the town shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
5.42.280 - Amendment or repeal. 
This chapter may be repealed or amended by the town council without a vote of the people to the extent allowed by law. However, as required by Article XIII.C of the California Constitution, voter approval is required for any amendment that would increase the rate of any tax levied pursuant to this chapter. The people of the town affirm that the following actions shall not constitute an increase of the rate of a tax: 
A.  The restoration of the rate of the tax to a rate that is no higher than that set by this chapter, if the town council has acted to reduce the rate of the tax; 
B.  An action that interprets or clarifies the methodology of the tax, or any definition applicable to the tax, so long as interpretation or clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification) is not inconsistent with the language of this chapter; or 
C.  The collection of the tax imposed by this chapter even if the town had, for some period of time, failed to collect the tax. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-7-2018)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Title. 
This title shall be known as the town animal control ordinance. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.04.010)  
6.04.020 - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this title, shall have the following meaning ascribed to them: 
"At large" means not under the immediate control of a person by means of an enclosure, leash, rope, chain or other means of effective physical control. 
"Dog" includes all canine species. 
"Dog kennel" means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where four or more dogs, more than six months of age, are kept at the same time, or where any dogs are kept for the purposes of sale or breeding. 
"Dog owner" means the owner or custodian of any dog. 
"Health officer" means the health officer of Mono County and his authorized assistants. 
"Unlicensed dog" means any dog for which the license for the current year has not been paid. 
"Vaccination" or "vaccination against rabies" means the inoculation of a dog with canine chick embryo origin modified live rabies vaccine, or canine nerve tissue killed virus rabies vaccine, approved by the health officer or by the United States Public Health Service for use in the prevention of rabies in dogs. 
"Vicious dog" means any dog which, without reasonable provocation, attacks other dogs or animals, or has bitten, threatened or physically attacked a human being. 
"Working dog" means a dog which is kept or maintained for the purpose of working livestock, or any commercial purpose licensed by the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Working dog kennel" means a kennel where working dogs are kept. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.04.020)  
Chapter 6.08 - ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER AND WILDLIFE OFFICER[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-03, § 1, adopted Mar. 3, 2010, amended Ch. 6.08 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Ch. 6.08 pertained to Animal Control Officer. See Prior Code Cross-Reference Table and Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation. 
 
6.08.010 - Positions created—Appointments. 
There is created the position of animal control officer who shall be appointed by the town manager and shall operate the town animal control department. The animal control officer shall have such assistants as the town manager may authorize. 
There is created the position of wildlife officer who shall be appointed by the town manager. In lieu of appointing a wildlife officer, the town manager may contract for wildlife services and may deputize a person to serve as contract wildlife officer. Any person deputized to serve as contract wildlife officer shall not be an employee of the Town. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1, 3-3-2010)  
6.08.020 - Authority—Citation—Badge—Firearms. 
A.  Individuals appointed to the positions described in section 6.08.010 are charged with the duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter and any law of the state relating to the care, treatment and impounding of animals, and are authorized to issue citations for violations of the laws and provisions in accordance with Section 836.5 of the Penal Code of the state. 
B.  Each such person, while performing his respective duties, shall wear a metallic badge of a size and design to be determined by the chief of police. 
C.  Each such person is authorized to carry firearms or weapons of a type and caliber approved by the chief of police. Each such person shall receive initial and recurrent training in the use of any type of firearm or weapon approved for use by the chief of police in order to establish and assure satisfactory proficiency in the use of such weapons commensurate with the safety and welfare of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1, 3-3-2010)  
6.08.030 - Duties generally. 
Individuals appointed to the positions described in Section 6.08.[010], or any town police officer may pick up and impound animals as provided in this title and the other ordinances and laws, including laws of the State of California, relating to animals. 
The animal control officer is further authorized to establish a redemption fee for dogs redeemed from the pound together with a fee for the reasonable cost of the care of dogs while impounded and to establish reasonable placement fees for animals placed in the pound. Any such fees shall be approved by the town council by resolution as specified in Chapter 6.12. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1, 3-3-2010)  
6.08.040 - Authority to shoot animal. 
Whenever any such individual is authorized to take up and impound any animal under the provisions of this title he/she shall have the authority in the exercise of a sound discretion to shoot any such animal which attacks him while he is in the act of seizing it for impounding and to shoot any dog at large which has no known owner or home and which cannot be safely caught. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1, 3-3-2010)  
Chapter 6.12 - DOGS 
Sections: 
 
6.12.010 - License—Required—Fee. 
The owner of any dog over the age of six months shall procure a town dog license and pay therefor an annual license fee for each dog in accordance with a resolution of the town council adopted for the purpose of declaring the fees appropriate for the licensure of nonspayed and nonneutered dogs, and for spayed and neutered dogs after receipt of an appropriate certificate from a licensed veterinarian declaring the dog to have been so spayed or neutered or other proof acceptable to the animal control officer. The resolution providing for the license fees may also provide for additional fees and penalties. The license fees provided by the resolution shall be due and payable on and after the first day of July of each year, and shall be delinquent after the first day of August of each year, provided, that if the first day falls on a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, license fees may be paid without penalty on the first succeeding business day. No penalty shall be imposed if a mailed payment is postmarked on or before the first day of August. With respect to dogs first brought into the town after July 31st, and dogs which have not reached the age of six months by July 31st, no penalty will be payable if the owner or custodian procures a license within thirty days after the dog is brought into the town or within thirty days after the dog reaches the age of six months. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.12.010)  
6.12.020 - License—Term. 
All dog licenses shall be issued for a period terminating on the thirtieth day of June of each year. A license, when issued prior to January 1st of any year, shall be charged and paid for at the full yearly rate, and when issued after the first day of January, only one-half of the additional penalty shall be charged, if no license fee for the dog has been due and payable for such dog prior to the first day of January. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1 (part), 1988: prior code § 9.12.020)  
6.12.030 - License—Issuance. 
The amount of such license fee shall be paid to the town and, upon payment therefor, there shall be issued to the person making such payment, a dog tag with the date of expiration thereon and the words "Mammoth Lakes" and "Dog License" plainly inscribed thereon, provided that the owner or custodian of the dog shall have had the dog vaccinated and presents a vaccination certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian, indicating that the period of time elapsing from the date of vaccination to the date of expiration of the license being issued does not exceed thirty months in the case of vaccination with chick embryo vaccine or eighteen months in the case of nerve tissue rabies vaccine. The vaccination certificate need not be presented whenever the owner or custodian of the dog furnishes proof in the form of a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian that the dog has a condition or illness which renders it unfit to be vaccinated. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.12.030)  
6.12.040 - License—Issued by another government. 
A.  The town will honor a dog license issued by authority of another government, but only when: 
1.  The dog license to be honored is current and effective until the next ensuing thirtieth day of June, and this fact is established by proof of a dog license tag, certificate or receipt of the other government which shows the period for which the license is issued; 
2.  The dog has been vaccinated against rabies and the period of time elapsing from the date of vaccination to the next ensuing thirtieth of June does not exceed thirty months in case of vaccination with chick embryo rabies vaccine or eighteen months in the case of vaccination with nerve tissue rabies vaccine, and this fact is established by the presentation of a vaccination certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian or a dog license tag, receipt, or certificate which on its face establishes the date and type of vaccination. 
3.  The request to so honor the license is made within thirty days after the dog is brought into the town. 
B.  If the conditions in this section are met, the dog license will be honored by the issuance of a Mammoth Lake dog license upon payment by the owner or custodian of a three-dollar processing fee. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.12.040)  
6.12.050 - Register required. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to enter into a register kept by him for that purpose the name and address of the owners or custodians of all dogs licensed and the description of such dogs, the number of the tag and the date of its issuance. A similar register for all operators of kennels shall also be kept by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.12.050)  
6.12.060 - License tag. 
The dog license issued to any person upon payment of the license fee provided for in this chapter shall be securely attached to a collar or harness on such dog. The animal control officer may impound any dog not bearing a current Mammoth Lakes dog license tag. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.12.060)  
6.12.070 - Kennel license. 
Every person owning or operating a kennel, or place where four or more dogs are kept for breeding, boarding, training or other commercial purposes, in lieu of obtaining licenses for all dogs regularly kept therein, may obtain a kennel license for all dogs regularly kept therein; provided, however, all such dogs shall be vaccinated as provided in this title. It is unlawful for any person to fail to procure a kennel license when owning or operating a kennel. The fee therefor shall be fifteen dollars unless otherwise established by resolution of the town council as specified in Sections 6.12.010 through 6.12.060, and shall be due, payable, delinquent, penalized and proratable in the same manner as individual dog licenses. Before any kennel license is issued, a permit therefor shall be obtained from the county health officer, and all kennels shall be constructed so as to prevent dogs confined therein from running at large or leaving the premises where the kennel is maintained. All kennels shall be construed and operated in a sanitary and proper manner so that the kennel does not disturb or disrupt the neighborhood thereof. The town animal control officer and the county health officer may prescribe reasonable regulations regarding the operation of kennels. Failure of the kennel to abide by such regulations may be grounds for the town to revoke such kennel license. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.16.010)  
6.12.080 - Working dog kennel license. 
Every person owning or operating a working dog kennel, in lieu of obtaining licenses for the individual dogs kept therein, may obtain a working dog kennel license for all dogs regularly kept therein, at a fee of one dollar per dog with a fifteen dollar minimum charge per license unless otherwise established by resolution of the town council pursuant to the provisions of Sections 6.12.010 through 6.12.060, provided, however, that all such dogs are vaccinated as provided in this title. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.16.020)  
6.12.090 - Rabies—Vaccination—Required. 
Every person who keeps or harbors a dog over the age of six months shall have such dog vaccinated against rabies by a duly licensed veterinarian. Such vaccination shall be at intervals of twelve months if nerve tissue vaccine is used or thirty-six months if chick embryo vaccine is used. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1 (part), 1988: prior code § 9.20.010)  
6.12.100 - Rabies—Vaccination—Dog from out of town. 
Every person bringing any dog into the town which has not been vaccinated within twelve months, in the case of nerve tissue vaccine, or within thirty-six months, in the case of chick embryo vaccine, or within twenty-four months, in the case of chick embryo vaccine used before January of 1986, prior to importation shall cause such dog to be vaccinated against rabies within thirty days after its arrival in the town. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.20.020)  
6.12.110 - Rabies—Vaccination—Certificate required. 
On demand of the animal control officer, every person keeping or harboring any dog over six months of age shall exhibit to the animal control officer a certificate of a duly licensed veterinarian certifying that the dog has been vaccinated, the date of the vaccination and the type of vaccine used. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.20.030)  
6.12.120 - Rabies—Vaccination—Certificate issuance. 
A.  Every person practicing veterinary medicine in the town who vaccinates a dog with rabies vaccine shall issue to the owner of the dog a duplicate original of a certificate signed by the veterinarian which states: 
1.  The name and address of the owner of the vaccinated dog; 
2.  The kind of vaccine used, name of the manufacturer, manufacturer's vaccine serial or lot number and the date of the vaccination; 
3.  The name, breed, age, color and sex of the vaccinated dog; 
4.  The year and serial number of the license tag, if any. 
B.  Veterinarians shall retain a copy of each such vaccination certificate issued for the period of time for which the vaccination is effective. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.20.040)  
6.12.130 - Rabies—Owner's duty to report. 
Whenever the owner of any dog observes or learns that such dog has shown symptoms of rabies or has acted in a manner which would lead a reasonable person to suspect that it might have rabies, or that is has been bitten by a dog having rabies or suspected of having rabies, or has been otherwise exposed to rabies, or has bitten a human being, such person shall immediately notify the animal control officer and shall immediately confine the dog. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.32.010)  
6.12.140 - Bite—Quarantine procedure. 
Whenever any dog has bitten any human being or whenever the animal control officer has reasonable grounds to suspect that a dog has rabies, he is empowered to immediately quarantine the dog either upon the premises of the owner or within the town dog pound. If the quarantine is upon the premises of the owner of the dog, the dog shall be immediately confined within a locked enclosure so constructed that it cannot escape or have contact with any other animal or human being other than the person responsible for its care, or at the discretion of the animal control officer, it may be kept under restraint by leash in the charge of a responsible peron or under such other restriction as the animal control officer may deem necessary; provided, however, that the owner may, in lieu of quarantine of the animal upon the premises, place the same into the care of a duly licensed veterinarian for the purpose of confinement. The owner of any such dog quarantined on the premises shall immediately report to the animal control officer any change in the disposition or unusual actions of the dog. The dog shall be kept quarantined and restrained until the animal control officer shall, in writing, order its destruction or release. When such dog is quarantined in the town dog pound, it shall be held for a sufficient period of time to determine whether or not it is infected with rabies. Any dog determined to have rabies shall be immediately destroyed. Any dog quarantined in the town dog pound determined not to have rabies may be released to the owner and redeemed by its owner as specified in Chapter 6.16. If the owner of such dog fails to redeem same within six days from the date of a written notice of release from the animal control officer, such dog may be sold or destroyed as provided in Chapter 6.16. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.32.010)  
6.12.150 - Bite—Quarantine violation. 
When any dog is quarantined, it is unlawful for the owner or person in possession of the dog to violate the quarantine by removing the dog from the premises, allowing it to run at large, destroying it without authorization from the animal control officer, concealing it from the animal control officer, or disobeying any other quarantine restriction which was imposed by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.32.030)  
6.12.160 - Prohibited acts generally. 
A.  No unauthorized person shall remove any current, valid license tag from any dog. 
B.  No person shall attach or keep upon any dog any license tag provided for in Sections 6.12.010 through 6.12.060, except a tag issued for such dog pursuant to such sections. 
C.  No person shall harbor or keep any dog over the age of six months which does not have valid, subsisting town dog license. 
D.  No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any animal control officer who is taking up or impounding animals or issuing citations, while such officer is engaged in the performance of his official duties. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.36.010)  
6.12.170 - Interfering with use of streets prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any owner or person is possession of a dog to permit any dog to be at large which attacks, worries or barks at pedestrians, vehicles or other users of the public areas, roads, streets and highways. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1 (part), 1988: prior code § 9.36.020)  
6.12.180 - Habitual barking. 
It is unlawful for any person to permit any dog owned by him or in his possession or under his control to habitually destroy the peace and quiet of any other person or neighborhood by habitual barking or howling. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.36.030)  
6.12.190 - Nuisance behavior. 
It is unlawful for any person to permit any animal owned by him or in his possession or under his control to defecate or urinate in any public place or on the property of another, to knock over trash cans, dig holes on the property of another or create a nuisance in any public place or on the property of another. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.36.040)  
6.12.200 - Vicious dogs. 
No person shall permit any vicious dog owned, controlled, harbored or kept by him to run at large at any time. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.36.050)  
6.12.210 - Dogs at large. 
It is unlawful for any person owning, harboring, or having the care, custody or possession of any dog within the town limits of Mammoth Lakes to allow such dog to run at large. All such dogs shall be kept securely fastened by a chain, rope or leash unless securely confined within private property legally controlled by the person in possession of the dog. Further, any dog off the premises of its owner, or the person charged with the care, custody or possession of the dog, shall be presumed to be at large unless it is securely fastened to a rope, chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a competent person. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dog while being trained in an obedience class or being exhibited at a dog show or obedience trial or being trained for or used for bona fide hunting purposes, or that is engaged in the herding, grazing or control of livestock; provided, however, that such dog is under the immediate vocal control of a competent person while so engaged. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.36.060)  
6.12.220 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of Sections 6.12.160 through 6.16.210 shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction, shall be punishable as determined by the court of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.36.070)  
Chapter 6.16 - IMPOUNDMENT 
Sections: 
 
6.16.010 - Impounding authorized when. 
Any authorized officer of the town may take up and impound any animal, including any unlicensed dog or dog bearing no license tag, which may be found running at large off the premises of the owner of the dog and not in the presence of the owner or custodian of the dog, and may take up and impound any licensed dog or dog bearing a license tag which appears to be lost or strayed and the owner of which cannot immediately be located. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.24.010)  
6.16.020 - Animal shelter established. 
The town shall establish a suitable place for the impounding of dogs from the incorporated area of town, which premises shall be known as the Mammoth Lakes animal shelter. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.24.020)  
6.16.030 - Stray animals. 
The animal control officer, his designee or any town police department officer may take up and impound any stray or abandoned animal, and thereupon hold and dispose of an such animal as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.24.030)  
6.16.040 - Destruction of impounded animal. 
Any animal, including any dog which bears a valid tag, taken up and impounded, which is not redeemed within a period of ten days, after all attempts to notify the owner have been exhausted, may be destroyed by the animal control officer in a humane manner, adopted out, or sold at public auction. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.28.010)  
6.16.050 - Unlicensed dog—Destruction. 
Any unlicensed dog or dog not bearing a town license tag, taken up and impounded pursuant to the provisions of this title and which is not redeemed in the manner provided in this chapter within a period of ten days from the time of the taking up, may, after all attempts to notify the owner have been exhausted, be destroyed by the animal control officer in a humane manner, adopted out, or sold at public auction. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.28.020)  
6.16.060 - Impounded animals—Sale. 
When any animal sold by the animal control officer as provided by Sections 6.16.040 and 6.16.050, it shall be his duty to deliver to the purchaser of such animal a statement in writing containing a description of the animal sold, the date of the sale, and the amount of the purchase price. The animal control officer shall retain a duplicate of all such statements issued by him. All sales made under the provisions of this section shall convey a good and valid title to the purchaser, and the previous owner of the animal so sold thereafter shall be barred from all right to recover the same. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.28.030)  
6.16.070 - Impounded animals—Redemption. 
The owner or person entitled to the possession of any animal impounded may, at any time prior to its sale or disposal as provided in this chapter, redeem the same upon payment of such fees for impoundment as have accrued and meeting such other reasonable criteria as the animal control officer determines. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.28.040)  
6.16.080 - Impounded animals—Receipts and disposition. 
The animal control officer shall, in the absence of a resolution of the town council establishing redemption fees, establish a redemption fee for animals redeemed from the pound including a fee for the cost of the care of such animals while impounded. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.28.050)  
Chapter 6.20 - POLICE DOGS 
Sections: 
 
6.20.010 - Interference prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person who is not an officer or employee of the town police department to touch, strike, feed, tease, bother or otherwise harass or interfere with any dog utilized by the police department for law enforcement investigation, patrol or crowd control activities while the dog is in the presence of an officer or employee of the police department, is in its regular kennel, or is kept in an official police vehicle. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.37.010)  
6.20.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
This chapter may be enforced as either a misdemeanor or an infraction, depending upon the circumstances. If it is enforced as a misdemeanor, conviction of an offense hereunder shall be punishable by up to six months in jail and five hundred dollar fine, with a minimum fine of not less than one hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 88-04 § 1(part), 1988: prior code § 9.37.020)  
Chapter 6.24 - FEEDING OF WILDLIFE PROHIBITED 
Sections: 
 
6.24.010 - Feeding of wildlife prohibited. 
No person shall feed or in any manner provide food for one or more nondomesticated mammalian predators or rodents, including but not limited to bears, mountain lions, coyotes, raccoons, mice or squirrels. 
(Ord. 96-13 § 1(part), 1996)  
6.24.020 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply in any of the following instances: 
A.  Where the person is the owner of such nondomesticated predator or rodent and such predator or rodent is kept under valid certificate or permit issued by the state of California Department of Fish and Game; 
B.  Where the person provides food for a trapped, injured or unweaned nondomesticated predator or rodent between the time the agency in charge of animal control is notified and such predator or rodent is picked up by said agency. 
(Ord. 96-13 § 1(part), 1996)  
6.24.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter is an infraction, as defined under Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 96-13 § 1(part), 1996)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.04 - AMBULANCE SERVICE 
Sections: 
 
8.04.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to assure that the people of the town will receive adequate and safe emergency and nonemergency medical transportation services. 
(Prior code § 7.70.010)  
8.04.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Ambulance" means any vehicle specially constructed, modified, equipped and/or used for the purpose of transporting sick, injured, convalescent, infirm or otherwise incapacitated persons. 
"Ambulance service" means the private or public organization or individual providing an ambulance for use in emergency service. 
"Department" means the county health department. 
"Director" means the director of the health department or his or her duly authorized representative. 
"Emergency call" means a request for an ambulance to transport or assist persons in apparent sudden need of medical attention, or in a medical emergency, as determined by a physician, to transport blood, any therapeutic device, accessory to such device, or tissue or organ for transplant. 
"Emergency service" means the functions performed in response to an emergency call. Emergency service also includes transportation of a patient, regardless of a presumption of death of a patient, or transportation of a body for the purpose of making an anatomical gift, as provided in Section 12811, Vehicle Code, and the Uniform Anatomical Gift Act, Health and Safety Code. 
(Prior code § 7.70.020)  
8.04.030 - Responsibilities and scope. 
The director of the Mono County health department shall have the authority and responsibility to develop and administer an emergency medical services program and to promulgate reasonable rules and regulations, pursuant to the California Administrative Procedures Act as he or she may deem necessary for the efficient administration of such program. 
(Prior code § 7.70.030)  
8.04.040 - Standards. 
A.  Minimum standards for the operation of an ambulance within this town, either by private or public entity, shall be those minimum standards for ambulance equipment and personnel as set forth in Title 13, Sections 1100 through 1109 inclusive, of the California Administrative Code, as from time to time hereafter amended. 
B.  In addition to the minimum requirements contained in the referenced sections of the California Administrative Code, the operator of any ambulance service within the town shall coordinate dispatch through the county-wide emergency telephone number (911) and comply with such other regulations as may be promulgated by the director. 
(Prior code § 7.70.040)  
8.04.050 - Application and investigation. 
A.  Application. No person shall operate or supply ambulance services in the town thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter unless he/she first applied for and receives an ambulance service permit from the director of the Mono County health department. 
B.  Investigation. Upon receipt of an application for an ambulance service operation permit as required by this chapter, the applicant shall submit documentary evidence to the satisfaction of the director that the personnel and equipment to be utilized in the provision of ambulance service comply with all state standards for such service. The director shall conduct such investigation as he may deem appropriate to verify the information submitted. 
(Prior code § 7.70.050)  
8.04.060 - Permits. 
A.  Conditions of Approval. Permits shall be issued subject to evidence of compliance with the standards set out in Section 8.04.040, and demonstration of such compliance as set forth in subsection B of Section 8.04.050. Permits may also include such other conditions as may be reasonably required by the director, through use of his or her rulemaking power. Permits are valid for a term of one year and applications for renewal of a permit should be made at least forty-five days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. 
B.  Denial. 
1.  If upon examination of the documentary evidence supplied by the applicant and investigation of the same, the director or his duly designated representative determines that the applicant is not in compliance with the minimum standards set forth in 8.04.040, the director shall advise the applicant of the specific area of noncompliance and measures necessary to correct the same. If the applicant does not submit evidence satisfactory to the director or his duly authorized representative of compliance within fifteen days of the date of the written statement of findings of noncompliance, the permit application shall be deemed denied. 
2.  No more than four applications for an ambulance service permit may be submitted within a three-hundred- sixty-five-day period. 
C.  Revocation. 
1.  Any permit may be revoked or suspended on an urgency basis if the director, or his duly authorized representative, determines that the permit holder is operating the ambulance service not in accordance with the standards set out in Section 8.04.040. 
2.  Such determination shall be evidenced by a written notice either personally served or mailed to the permit holder, and shall specify the causes for suspension or revocation. Upon receipt of such notice, the permit holder shall immediately suspend operations. Within fifteen days of any such suspension or revocation, the permit holder shall be entitled to a hearing before the director or his or her duly authorized representative to contest the director's determination of noncompliance or to provide evidence of correction. 
3.  At the conclusion of such hearing, the director or the duly authorized representative shall orally announce the intended decision and confirm this decision in writing. This decision shall be final for administrative purposes. 
(Prior code § 7.70.060)  
8.04.070 - Modification of service. 
No permit holder operating under an ambulance service permit shall modify staffing procedure or equipment utilized under the permit without the prior written consent of the director. 
(Prior code § 7.70.070)  
8.04.080 - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to private persons transporting persons for the purpose of medical treatment so long as the transportation is not performed for compensation paid by the transported party or any third party. 
(Prior code § 8.04.090)  
8.04.090 - Fees. 
The fee charged under this chapter for a permit shall be twenty-five dollars per ambulance unit. 
(Prior code § 8.04.100)  
8.04.100 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  The director, or his or her duly authorized representative, may at any and all reasonable times, when the permit holder is conducting business, enter the business premises of or inspect the equipment of such permit holder to monitor compliance with the standards set forth in Section 8.04.040. 
B.  Every person who violates or fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter in the operation of an ambulance service is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 8.04.080)  
Chapter 8.08 - ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
8.08.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, as amended (Public Resources Code Sections 21000 through 21174), and the Guidelines for Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970 adopted by the Secretary of Resources of the state. 
(Prior code § 16.04.010)  
8.08.020 - Application. 
This chapter shall apply to each department or office of the town which is responsible for the processing of "projects" or the initiation, processing, review or approval of "environmental impact reports" as the same are defined in the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970. 
(Prior code § 16.04.020)  
8.08.030 - Objectives, criteria and procedures adoption. 
The town council shall, by resolution, adopt the objectives, criteria and procedures necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter. The objectives, criteria and procedures shall be consistent with the guidelines established by the Secretary of Resources, and shall provide for, but not be necessarily limited to, the following: 
A.  The environmental review and assessment of town projects and the preparation, review and approval of environmental impact reports for such projects; 
B.  The environmental review and assessment of private projects for which a permit, lease, license, funding or other entitlement of use is required from the town and the preparation, review and approval of environmental impact reports for such projects; 
C.  The reasonable opportunity for anyone interested in any project to review and comment upon such environmental review and assessment and upon such environmental impact reports prepared by the town; 
D.  Exemptions of various projects from the requirement of preparation of environmental impact reports; 
E.  The preparation, notice and filing of negative declarations. 
(Prior code § 16.04.030)  
8.08.040 - Construction of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any resolution implementing this chapter shall be construed so that in the event there is a conflict or ambiguity between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other code, ordinance, resolution or regulation of the town, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any implementing resolution shall govern. 
(Prior code § 16.04.040)  
Chapter 8.12 - Solid Waste Management[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-12, § 2(Exh. A, § 1), adopted Dec. 17, 2014, changed the title of Ch. 8.12 from "Refuse disposal" to read as set out. 
 
8.12.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words defined in this section are used, they shall, unless the context requires otherwise, be deemed to have the following meanings: 
"AB 939" means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, codified in Public Resources Code Section 40000 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time. 
"Bear box" means a metal or other similar durable material structure or container used to house one or more garbage cans and designed to prevent bears and other wildlife from accessing the enclosed garbage can or cans. 
"Bear-resistant container" means a securable container constructed of solid material capable of withstanding energy applied by direct impact and not having any unsecured openings that would allow a bear to gain entry by biting or pulling with its claws. 
"Bulky waste" means large items of solid waste such as appliances, furniture, large auto parts, and other similar waste, materials with weights and volumes greater than those allowed in waste collection bins, carts or other containers. 
"Collection" means the operation of gathering together and transporting to the point of disposal or processing any garbage, refuse, rubbish, solid waste, recyclable, transformable, or compostable waste materials. 
"Collection premises" means every improved property, including but not limited to, every single-family unit and multi-family unit usable for human habitation whether or not inhabited, and all commercial and industrial premises usable for business purposes. 
"Combustible rubbish" includes paper, rags, discarded household bedding, excelsior or other packing materials, cartons, boxes and containers of wood or fiber, sawdust or shavings from lumberyards, mills, factories or ships, lumber scraps, wood or wooden articles, grass, trees, plants, vines and the prunings thereof, but shall not include dirt, sweepings, plaster or other building materials, whether combustible or noncombustible, resulting from the repairing or demolishing of old buildings or resulting from new construction. 
"Commercial solid waste" includes all types of solid waste generated by commercial, industrial, governmental and other non-residential sources, which have been placed in an authorized solid waste container used for the temporary storage of solid waste awaiting pickup. The term "commercial solid waste" does not include hazardous substances or medical and special waste. 
"Contractor" means the company or entity the town has contracted with or authorized to provide solid waste services to collect, remove, transport, process or dispose of solid waste or recyclable materials within the town municipal boundaries. 
"Cooking waste" means fats, oil, grease, and other substances generated by restaurants and other establishments and used in the preparation of food, which cannot be disposed of with other garbage and must be collected separately from other garbage. 
"Garbage" means all animal and vegetable refuse from kitchens of households, restaurants, stores, markets, warehouses and delivery vehicles, all household waste which has been prepared for or used for food, or has resulted from the accumulation of animal, vegetable and other matter that attends the preparation, consumption, decay, dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fruits or vegetables, and shall include all garbage which shall have resulted from the sorting or the commercial preparation or processing of food products by any food manufacturer or distributor. 
"Garbage can" means a watertight, durable metal or plastic container with a tight-fitting lid designed to temporarily store garbage, waste or rubbish. 
"Hazardous waste or materials" means any and all of the following: 
(a)  Wastes, materials or substances defined or characterized as hazardous waste by the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended, including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. Section 6901, et seq.) as amended from time to time, regulations promulgated thereunder, or other Title 6-10 applicable federal law; 
(b)  Wastes, materials or substances defined or characterized from time to time as hazardous waste by any agency of the State of California having jurisdiction over hazardous waste generated by facilities within the state, and pursuant to any other applicable government regulations; 
(c)  Wastes, materials or substances, the storage, treatment, transportation or disposal of which is subject to regulation under the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2601-2654, as amended from time to time, regulations promulgated thereunder, or other applicable federal law. 
(d)  Radioactive wastes, materials, substances or items, the storage, treatment, transportation or disposal of which is subject to governmental regulations; and 
(e)  Wastes, materials, substances or items which contain polychlorinated biphenyls. 
The term "hazardous waste" will be construed to have the broader, more encompassing definition where a conflict exists in the definitions employed by two or more governmental entities having concurrent or overlapping jurisdiction over hazardous waste. 
"Industrial solid waste" means all solid waste and semi-solid waste which results from industrial processes and manufacturing operations. 
"Medical waste" means solid waste or other materials, substances or items which may be reasonably considered infectious, pathological or bio hazardous, originating from hospitals, public or private medical clinics, departments of research laboratories, pharmaceutical industries, blood banks, forensic medical departments, medical offices, mortuaries, veterinary facilities and other similar facilities, and includes, without limitation, equipment, instruments, utensils, fomites, laboratory waste (including pathological specimens and fomites attendant thereto), surgical facilities, equipment, bedding and utensils (including pathological specimens and disposal fomites attendant thereto), sharps (hypodermic needles, syringes, etc.), dialysis unit waste, chemotherapeutic waste, animal carcasses, offal and body parts, biological materials (vaccines, medicines, etc.), and other similar materials, but excluding any such waste which is determined by evidence reasonably satisfactory to the town to have been rendered non-infectious, non-pathological and non-bio hazardous. 
"Multi-family units" mean a dwelling which includes four or more individual living units under single or multiple condominium project ownership. Note: this definition applies for purposes of this Chapter 8.12 only; Title 17 of this Code defines multi-family units differently for purposes of zoning and land use. 
"Noncombustible rubbish" includes, among other things, ashes weighing not over seventy pounds with container, bottles, broken glass, crockery, earthenware, tin cans, tin ware, wire, wire netting, and other articles of discarded metal or stone of less than twenty pounds in weight each, automobile tires and tubes, batteries, metal kegs, barrels, or casks, but shall not include dirt sweepings, rocks or stones as such, or bricks, plaster, mortar or other building materials, whether combustible or noncombustible, resulting from the repairing or demolishing of old buildings or resulting from new construction. 
"Occupant" means any person actually occupying any premises within the territorial boundaries of the town either as owner or tenant, by contract or otherwise, including persons or businesses occupying or using any industrial or commercial premises. 
"Owner" shall conclusively be deemed to be the person to whom the taxes on the property are assessed as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the county, or alternatively, from such records of the county assessor or tax collector as contain more recent information. 
"Recyclables or recyclable material" means used residential or business materials which may be returned to the economic mainstream as commodities for reuse, or for reprocessing to create new or reconstituted products, which, if not segregated from solid waste, would otherwise become solid waste consistent with the requirements of AB 939. These materials include but are not limited to glass, metal, paper, cardboard, plastic or other materials which have been segregated from garbage and rubbish for the purpose of depositing at a designated collection location, including a curbside location, for collection and transportation to recycling or transfer station facilities. 
"Residential solid waste" means all types of solid waste, which originate from single-family units and from multi-family units. 
"Single-family unit" means a single-family dwelling, a two unit dwelling, or a three unit dwelling. 
"Solid waste" means all "solid waste" as defined in Section 40191 of the California Public Resources Code, as that section may be amended from time to time, which is generated within the town. Solid waste means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid and liquid wastes, including residential, industrial, commercial and municipal garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, recyclable materials, discarded "home and industrial appliances", manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semi-solid wastes, but does not include hazardous waste, medical waste, and special waste. 
"Special wastes" means any designated wastes, as defined in Title 23 California Code of Regulations § 2522, and special handling waste generated by industrial facilities or processes, but shall not include "hazardous waste" as defined herein. Special wastes shall include: asbestos, sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, drilling muds, grease wastes, contaminated soils, shredder waste, agricultural wastes, filter cake/dewatered sludge, spent catalyst fines, refinery ash and byproducts; except where any such wastes are deemed to be hazardous waste. 
"Yard waste" means any leaves, pine needles, yard trimmings, tree limbs and dry grass (not green or wet) that is no more than four feet in length and four inches in diameter. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.030) 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 2, 6-5-2013; Ord. No. 14-12, § 2(Exh. A, § 2), 12-17-2014)  
8.12.011 - Authority of town to classify materials. 
The town shall have the authority and discretion to designate from time to time the materials or types of materials that shall be classified and collected as municipal solid waste, recyclables and yard waste, respectively, if it determines that such designation or re-designation is in the public interest, including but not limited to a determination that such designation or re-designation would be prudent in light of changes in methods, technology and/or markets for materials recovery. 
(Ord. No. 14-12, § 2(Exh. A, § 4), 12-17-2014)  
8.12.020 - Disposal restrictions and unlawful acts. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to place or dump or procure any other person to place or dump any garbage, swill, refuse, cans, bottles, paper or vegetable matter, or the carcass of any dead animal, or offal from any slaughter pen or butcher shop, or other trash or rubbish, or any wrecked or abandoned vehicle, or any offensive, unsightly or decaying matter of any kind whatsoever on the right-of-way of any public highway, street or thoroughfare, or upon any camping place or public grounds, or into or upon the banks of any stream or dry watercourse within the town, or the property of any person, or any other site except an approved dump, garbage pit or refuse transfer station. 
B.  Except as authorized by this chapter or other town ordinance or regulation: 
1.  No person shall interfere with or obstruct the authorized activities of a solid waste collector, authorized recycling collector, in the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste. 
2.  No person shall deposit or permit to be deposited on, over, or along, any public road, highway, right-of-way or public or private property within the boundaries of the town any solid waste or litter except in containers or in areas lawfully provided for or permitted for that use. 
3.  The existence or accumulation, without the authority of the town, of solid waste, litter, trash, scrap materials, junk parts, garbage or refuse of any kind upon private property shall be prohibited. It shall be unlawful to allow accumulations of wastepaper, litter or combustible or flammable waste materials or rubbish of any kind to remain in any court, yard, vacant lot, or open space. 
4.  It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, or employee of a commercial establishment or institution to deposit solid waste from the establishment or institution in any receptacle maintained on a sidewalk or at any other location for disposal of litter by pedestrians. 
5.  No person shall dump, deposit, or otherwise dispose of any hazardous or medical waste onto land, into soil, rock, air, or water or at unauthorized disposal sites, transfer stations, resource recovery facilities, transformation facilities, buy back centers, drop off recycling centers, or any container to be collected and ultimately deposited, unless otherwise approved in advance and in writing by the town. 
6.  No person shall burn or incinerate solid waste except as permitted by the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District or other agencies having jurisdiction. 
7.  No person shall tamper with, modify, remove from, or deposit solid waste or recyclable materials in any container which has not been provided for his/her use, without the permission of the container owner. 
8.  No person shall store or accumulate any solid waste, nor permit the storage or accumulation of any solid waste within or upon any property or place owned, leased or rented by such person or in such person's possession or control. 
9.  No person shall place any solid waste in or upon any premises in the town other than the collection premises where such solid waste is generated. 
10.  No person shall permit any premises owned, leased or rented by such person or in such person's possession or control to be used for the storage or accumulation of any solid waste other than solid waste generated on such premises. 
11.  No person shall place any solid waste on or in any public place or public property including without limitation any street, way, sidewalk, gutter, stream or creek or the banks thereof. 
12.  No person shall dispose of any solid waste, nor permit the disposal of any solid waste, on any premises owned, leased or rented by such person or in such person's possession or control. 
13.  No person shall sort, separate or segregate any solid waste of any kind within or upon any public street or place, unless so authorized by the town, and then only in the manner, place and time and subject to such restrictions as may be imposed by the town. 
14.  No person shall place solid waste upon the land of another, or in a residential or commercial solid waste receptacle of another, or upon premises other than those from which the solid waste originated, for the purpose of making solid waste available for collection and disposal. 
15.  No person shall, other than the owner or a person or company operating under the authority of a franchise agreement or contract with the town for the collection of solid waste or recyclable materials, tamper with, modify, or deposit solid wastes into recyclable materials that have been segregated from non-recyclable wastes and placed at a designated collection location for the purpose of collection and recycling. Unless otherwise provided by applicable law, all recyclable materials, which are segregated from non-recyclable wastes for the purpose of recycling, and placed at a designated collection location, may not be removed by anyone other than a person or company operating under the authority of a franchise agreement or contract with the town for the collection of recyclable materials. 
16.  Any and all garbage generated within or upon any premises in the town shall be placed without delay in garbage containers authorized by this chapter, shall be stored in such containers on the premises where generated until disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
17.  No person shall keep or accumulate, or permit to be kept or accumulated, any solid waste in or upon any premises or place in the town owned, leased or rented by such person or in such person's possession or control, in such manner that: 
a.  Creates a fire hazard dangerous to persons or property; 
b.  Becomes unreasonably offensive or dangerous to the public peace, health or safety; 
c.  Promotes the propagation, harborage or attraction of vectors; 
d.  Becomes a public or private nuisance; or 
e.  Are a toxic or otherwise contaminated liquid. 
C.  The following requirements shall apply to the collection and transportation of solid waste: 
1.  No person shall collect or transport any solid waste within or upon any public streets in the town, or anywhere in the town, except in leak-proof containers or vehicles so constructed that no solid waste can leak, fall, or be blown from such container or vehicle. 
2.  Vehicles or containers used to collect or transport garbage, rubbish, or other refuse shall be kept completely covered or screened at all times except when solid waste is being actually loaded or unloaded and except when the vehicles are moving along a collection route in the course of collection. 
3.  Vehicles used to collect or transport garbage, rubbish, or other refuse shall be labeled with the company's name and telephone number and a unique vehicle number in letters and numbers not less than four inches high painted or stenciled on the vehicle in a location that is clearly visible to the public. 
4.  Vehicles used to collect or transport garbage, rubbish, cannery waste, stable matter or swill shall be maintained in such manner as to meet or exceed vehicle emission standards promulgated by the State of California. 
5.  Collection and transportation of any solid waste shall be so conducted that no solid waste will spill out of the collecting or transporting container or vehicle. Any person collecting or transporting any solid waste shall immediately pick up all solid waste which spills or is blown from the collecting or transporting container or vehicle, and shall otherwise clean the place onto which any such solid waste was spilled or blown. 
6.  No person shall transport or permit to be transported into the town any solid waste of any kind generated or accumulated outside the town, for the purpose of storing or disposing of it in the town, and no person shall store or dispose of any solid waste transported or brought into the town from outside the town, except as follows: 
(a)  Solid waste may be transported directly to a solid waste disposal facility for final deposition at such facility site. 
(b)  Solid waste may be transported directly to a solid waste transfer/processing station in order to transfer it directly from smaller to larger vehicles for transport, or for temporary storage, separation or other processing of the materials in the solid waste. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.010) 
(Ord. No. 14-12, § 2(Exh. A, § 3), 12-17-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-12, § 2(Exh. A, § 3), adopted Dec. 17, 2014, changed the title of § 8.12.020 from "Disposal restrictions" to read as set out.  
8.12.030 - Violation determination. 
Any person whose garbage is found on any public place mentioned in Section 8.12.020 is deemed to have violated this chapter. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.020)  
8.12.040 - Administration. 
The town manager, is authorized and empowered to adjust, settle or cancel any charge required or made under this chapter or an controversy which may arise in the administration of this chapter or out of the contract between the town and any contractor, either on behalf of the town, the contractor or any other person. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.040)  
8.12.050 - Bear-resistant container or bear box to be provided. 
Every tenant, lessee or occupant of any premises where garbage, recyclables or cooking waste is created in the town shall provide or contract for upon such premises, in a suitable place, one or more bear-resistant containers, or shall provide garbage cans located inside a bear box, for receiving and holding garbage, recyclables, and cooking waste created upon such premises between the time of collection and removal when subscribing to optional service. All garbage cans or bear-resistant containers shall be in sizes specified in contracts let by the town pursuant to Section 8.12.300 or otherwise permitted by resolution of the town council, provided that garbage cans or bear-resistant containers used for storing cooking waste may be of any size permitted by the waste hauler removing such materials. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.050) 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 3, 6-5-2013)  
8.12.060 - Receptacle use. 
All accumulations of garbage, recyclables, cooking waste, and/or rubbish shall be placed in the receptacles required by Section 8.12.050; provided, however, that persons living in the same apartment house, duplex, flat or multiple dwelling may use a single larger bear-resistant container in common. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.060) 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 4, 6-5-2013)  
8.12.070 - Burying garbage prohibited. 
No person shall bury any garbage, garden refuse, combustible rubbish or noncombustible rubbish on any premises. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.070)  
8.12.080 - Burning prohibited. 
No person shall burn any garbage and/or rubbish within the town. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1 (part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.080)  
8.12.090 - Receptacle placement disputes. 
In all cases of disputes or complaints arising from or concerning the place where the garbage receptacles shall be placed while awaiting the removal of their contents, the town manager, or his designee, shall forthwith designate the place and such designation shall be final. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.160)  
8.12.100 - Collection from parks, playgrounds and government buildings. 
A garbage and rubbish contractor shall provide the garbage, recyclables, and/or rubbish collection services to the town as set forth in the parties' agreement. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.170) 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 5, 6-5-2013)  
8.12.110 - Collection schedules. 
Garbage and rubbish shall be collected from every subscribing single-family residence and every subscribing residential unit in every multiple dwelling at least once each calendar week. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.180)  
8.12.120 - Special collection. 
A garbage and rubbish contractor that has executed a contract with the town pursuant to Section 8.12.300 may provide additional and/or more frequent garbage and/or rubbish collection services than those set forth in this chapter subject to the terms of and as provided in the contractor's contract. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.190) 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 6, 6-5-2013)  
8.12.130 - Hours for collection in residential areas. 
It is unlawful to place, deposit or permit to remain any garbage, rubbish or waste containers on the curbings, parkways or sidewalks of any public street located in residential areas before six p.m. on the day prior to collection, or after six p.m. on the day of collection after the materials have been removed or collected. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.200)  
8.12.140 - Frequency of collection in residential areas. 
In the residential areas of the town, no more than eight days shall elapse between one collection of garbage and rubbish and the next, and the routes of collection shall be so arranged that collection will be made on the same days of each succeeding week. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.210)  
8.12.150 - Garbage limit for residential collection. 
The maximum total volume of garbage to be placed for collections pursuant to Section 8.12.110 shall be the maximum amount permitted by a contract let by the town pursuant to Section 8.12.300 or as otherwise permitted by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.220) 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 7, 6-5-2013)  
8.12.160 - Weight limit for containers. 
No bear-resistant container or garbage can placed for collections required by Section 8.12.110 shall weigh more than the maximum amount permitted by a contract let by the town pursuant to Section 8.12.300 or as otherwise permitted by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.230) 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 8, 6-5-2013)  
8.12.170 - Collection from residential establishment. 
Any parcel containing one or two dwelling units shall be required to pay and utilize either the residential bin program or the transfer station self-haul disposal program as described in the agreement between the town and the refuse disposal contractor and shall have the option of subscribing to curbside or side yard pick-up service. Any parcel that contains three or more dwelling units shall be required to subscribe to commercial bin service. All condominium projects, trailer parks, mobile home parks, planned unit developments and townhouses shall be required to subscribe to commercial bin service. All motels, hotels, lodges and inns shall be required to subscribe to commercial bin service. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.235) 
(Ord. No. 14-12, § 2(Exh. A, § 5), 12-17-2014)  
8.12.180 - Collection from commercial and industrial establishment. 
Every commercial and industrial business shall enter into an agreement with the refuse disposal contractor for the removal and transportation of garbage and rubbish at the collection level appropriate for the type and size of business undertaken. Payment for such service shall be made directly to the contractor in accordance with Section 8.12.120. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.240)  
8.12.190 - Location of containers. 
All refuse containers except commercial bins and containers designated for sideyard service shall be placed at curbside in a manner so as not to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Exceptions will be allowed, but only for the convenience of the town as determined by the town manager or his designee. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.250)  
8.12.200 - Condition of receptacles. 
All garbage receptacles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, in good repair and free from all rough, sharp and jagged surfaces by the owner or person using the same. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.260)  
8.12.210 - Covers on receptacle required. 
All containers or receptacles for the collection of recyclable materials and other solid waste which are not located inside a bear box shall be bear-resistant and shall be kept secured at all times, except when recyclable materials or other solid waste is being deposited therein or removed therefrom, and shall at all times be protected against the access of wildlife. The owner, occupant(s), and/or manager of the property where a container or receptacle is located shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with these requirements. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.270) 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 9, 6-5-2013; Ord. No. 14-12, § 2(Exh. A, § 6), 12-17-2014)  
8.12.220 - Sideyard service. 
The location of containers must be accessible on pick-up day and that location must remain the same at all times. Access from the street to the containers must be clear on pick-up day. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.280)  
8.12.230 - Disposal by contractor. 
All garbage or rubbish gathered and collected by a person contracting pursuant to this chapter shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the contractor in a manner satisfactory to the council. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.350)  
8.12.240 - Unauthorized collection or removal prohibited. 
No person shall gather, collect or remove from any garbage or combustible or noncombustible rubbish from any receptacle in which the same may be placed for collection or removal, or interfere with or disturb any such receptacle from any location where the same is placed by the owner thereof, without having a written contract with the town to collect and remove garbage and rubbish, and unless such person shall be designated by such contract to collect garbage and rubbish and dispose of the same; provided, however, that the occupant of any premises may remove any garbage, combustible or noncombustible rubbish accumulated on the premises occupied by him and dispose of the same in a lawful manner; and further, one who enters into a contract to trim trees, shrubbery, gardens or lawns may dispose of the resultant rubbish. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.360)  
8.12.250 - Spillage of garbage prohibited. 
No person, including a contractor authorized to collect garbage and rubbish, shall drop, spill or permit garbage to fall upon private grounds or public streets in the town. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.370)  
8.12.260 - Unauthorized transportation through streets prohibited. 
It is unlawful for anyone other than those contracting pursuant to this chapter or those occupants and persons designated in this chapter, to remove, collect, carry or transport garbage or rubbish within the town, or to transport or carry garbage or rubbish in an manner in any vehicle, tank or receptacle over, on or through any public street, in the town. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.380)  
8.12.270 - Brush, trimmings and boxes—Bundling required. 
Brush, tree trimmings, cardboard boxes and similar combustible materials to be placed for collection as required by Sections 8.12.110 and 8.12.180 shall be tied securely in bundles weighing not more than seventy pounds and not be over four feet in length and eighteen inches in diameter. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.390)  
8.12.280 - Clean-up weeks participation. 
The contracting agency shall participate in the town's annual clean-up weeks as necessary to supplement the town's available manpower and equipment resources. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.400)  
8.12.290 - Use of unauthorized bin prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to dispose of refuse in any bin other than those bins to which they are entitled to utilize. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.410)  
8.12.300 - Contract—Bond required. 
The council shall have the power to let contracts for the removal, transportation and disposal of garbage and rubbish as provided in this chapter, and may, as a condition for granting of the contracts, require a bond or letter of credit from the contractor in an amount determined by the council for the faithful performance of the agreement. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.460)  
8.12.310 - Contract—Basis. 
In letting contracts authorized by this chapter, the council shall not be required to let the contract to the lowest bidder, but shall be free to let such contract to the person deemed best fitted to comply with the terms of this chapter and the contract. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.470)  
8.12.320 - Contract—Termination. 
In case a contractor fails or refuses to conform to the conditions of this chapter or his contract to remove, transport and dispose of garbage and rubbish, the council may, at its option and after a hearing, of which the contractor shall have ten days written notice, terminate the contract and let the contract to another person deemed more capable of carrying out the terms of the contract. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.480)  
8.12.330 - Fee payment liability. 
A.  Each owner, occupant or person in possession, charge or control of a parcel of property upon which there exists a residential unit or units or commercial enterprise within the town is made liable for the payment of the refuse disposal fees levied against such premises for required refuse disposal, irrespective of the actual use of the refuse collection services provided by the town or its authorized removal contractor. Services made available to those premises required to receive such services shall be considered as services utilized. It shall be the duty of the owner of such premises to provide for payment of the refuse collection and disposal fees to the authorized contractor. Citations issued under this chapter for violations by occupants, tenants, lessees, or sub lessees of the collection premises, or agents, guests, or other representatives of the property owner, may be issued to the property owner for disposition and collection of fees and/or fines, and may be personally delivered to the recipient or sent by certified mail to the address of the property in question or to the address of the owner of the property as shown on the county tax roll. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall prevent an arrangement for the continuance of an existing arrangement under which payments of refuse collection fees are made by a tenant or tenants or any agent on behalf of the owner. Any such arrangement will not affect the owner's obligation to the town or its authorized removal contractor. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.540) 
(Ord. No. 14-12, § 2(Exh. A, § 7), 12-17-2014)  
8.12.340 - Fee—Civil debt. 
The refuse disposal fee shall be a civil debt owed by the owner, occupant or person in possession, charge or control of a residential unit or commercial enterprise. In the event that any civil action to enforce the collection of the refuse disposal fee is brought in any court, the prevailing party shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees to be determined by the court. The prevailing party shall be the party in whose favor final judgment is entered. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.550)  
8.12.350 - Exemptions. 
A.  The town manager, or his designee, acting in behalf of the town, shall determine exemptions to mandatory service where there is no possibility that solid waste will be generated by or upon a parcel or unit of real property. Exemptions shall not be granted unless there is evidence showing that the granting of the exemption will not be contrary to the intent of this chapter nor to the public health, safety and welfare, and, due to the special conditions or exceptional characteristics of the property or its location, the strict application of this chapter would result in practical difficulties and unnecessary hardships. No exemption will be granted for a vacant residential, commercial, or industrial unit, and no exemption shall be granted for a period longer than one year. The expiration of an exemption shall not be deemed a revocation for purposes of paragraphs C and D of this section. 
B.  Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a statement with the town manager or his designee stating facts upon which exemption is claimed and, in the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, and the granting of the exemption by the town, such person shall be liable for the payment of the refuse collection fees required by this chapter. 
C.  The town manager or his designee, after giving notice of not less than ten days and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section, may revoke any exemption granted upon information that the person is not entitled to the exemption as provided in this chapter. 
D.  In the event an exemption is denied and/or revoked, an applicant for such shall have the right to appeal to the town council. 
(Ord. 87-05 § 1(part), 1987: prior code § 7.16.560) 
(Ord. No. 14-12, § 2(Exh. A, § 8), 12-17-2014)  
8.12.360 - Violations. 
(a)  All violations of any portion of this chapter are declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the town in such manner as provided by law. All violations of any portion of this chapter are declared to be misdemeanors or infractions, pursuant to Section 1.12.010. The remedies set forth in this chapter are non-exclusive and the town may seek any and all legal and equitable relief permitted by law in addition to those remedies set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection of any building, structure or premises for the enforcement of this chapter, or whenever the town manager has cause to believe that there exists any condition which endangers the public health, the town manager or his/her designee is authorized to request entry to such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to exercise any power or authority or to perform any duty imposed under this chapter. 
(c)  The right to request entry authorized by this section shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(i)  If the building, structure or premises is occupied, the town manager or his/her designee shall first present proper credentials, explain the purpose for which entrance is desired, and request entry. In all cases entry shall be permitted to areas open to the public generally; 
(ii)  If such property is unoccupied, a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the property shall be made to present proper credentials, explain the purpose for which entrance is desired, and request entry; and 
(iii)  In no case shall the town manager or his/her designee enter upon areas of private property not open to the public without the consent of the owner, a lawful occupant, or an authorized representative of the owner or a lawful occupant. If consent cannot be obtained, a search warrant, abatement warrant, or other court-issued authority for entry shall be obtained prior to entry. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, § 10, 6-5-2013; Ord. No. 14-12, § 2(Exh. A, § 9), 12-17-2014)  
8.12.370 - Composting. 
Waste organic matter may be composted provided that the composting: 
(a)  Is conducted in accordance with accepted composting practices; 
(b)  Is conducted in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations; 
(c)  Does not generate offensive odors or provide a source of food or harborage for vermin; and 
(d)  Does not create a public or private nuisance. 
Any individual generator may choose to compost their own organic material in compliance with this section without reliance on the town's solid waste or recycling franchisee or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 14-12, § 2(Exh. A, § 10), 12-17-2014)  
Chapter 8.13 - CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE MANAGEMENT 
 
8.13.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to require construction and demolition waste management to enable the Town of Mammoth Lakes to work toward reducing the amount of waste generated within Mammoth Lakes ultimately disposed of in landfills by requiring the project applicant for every project covered by this chapter to divert a minimum of fifty percent of the construction and demolition debris resulting from that project, in compliance with state and local statutory goals and policies, and to create a mechanism to secure compliance with the stated diversion requirements. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2(Exh. A), 9-16-2015)  
8.13.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words defined in this section are used, they shall, unless the context requires otherwise, be deemed to have the following meanings: 
"Applicant" means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the Town for any permit, as defined in this chapter, and who is, therefore, responsible for meeting the requirements of this chapter. 
"Completion" means the earliest of the following dates: the date a temporary certificate of occupancy is issued by the town for a project, the date a certificate of occupancy is issued by the town for a project, or the date the final town inspection approving the project is completed. 
"Construction" means the building or enlargement of any structure, or any portion thereof, and includes without limitation alterations or improvements to an existing structure. 
"Construction and demolition material" means the excess or discarded material that is removed from a site during or after the construction or demolition of any structure, fence, wall, or paving. 
"Conversion rate" means the rate set forth in the standardized conversion rate table for use in estimating the volume or weight of construction and demolition debris, approved by the California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery. 
"Covered project" means any project meeting the thresholds established in Section 8.13.030. 
"Demolition" means the razing, tearing down or wrecking of any structure, wall, fence or paving, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior. 
"Diversion requirement" means the diversion of a minimum of fifty percent of the total construction and demolition material generated by a project, or the lower percentage requirement granted by exception pursuant to Section 8.13.040. 
"Divert (and diversion)" means the recycling and/or reuse of construction and demolition debris to avoid disposal in a landfill. 
"Excavation" means digging or removing soil, rocks, gravel, sand from a site, including but not limited to such work as is customarily performed in construction of buildings or dredging or construction of canals, drainage basins, waterways, lakes, levees, or dams. 
"Mining" means any activity governed by the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (Public Resources Code Section 2710 et seq.). 
"Permit" means any building or demolition permit. 
"Project" means any proposal for new or changed use, or for new construction, alteration or enlargement of any structure, that requires a permit from the Town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Recycling and reuse" means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting construction and demolition debris that would otherwise be disposed of in a landfill for use as raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet industry standards. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected that requires a location in the ground, including a building or swimming pool, but not including a fence or wall used as a fence, or driveways, or walkways. 
"Town manager" means the town manager, or his or her designee. 
"Waste management plan" means a plan describing the amount of construction and demolition material to be produced by or removed from a project, and establishing methods by which fifty percent of such material will be diverted. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2(Exh. A), 9-16-2015)  
8.13.030 - Covered projects. 
(a)  Unless otherwise determined to be exempt under Section 8.13.040, covered projects shall be all those projects meeting any of the criteria listed in the most current edition of the CALGreen Construction Waste Reduction Requirements, as included herein by reference. Should the State of California update those standards over time or cease to use such standard, town council may adopt updated standards by resolution. All covered projects shall comply with all provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the diversion requirement for construction and demolition materials. 
(b)  Projects meeting any of the following criteria shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter; provided that: (i) the applicant has provided the town with satisfactory evidence supporting the claimed exemption; (ii) the town has issued a written determination of exemption, which may take the form of a stamp or other notation of exemption on applicant's application for a building permit; and (iii) nothing herein shall be deemed to exempt any project from the requirements of the California Green Building Standards Code or any regulation adopted in connection therewith: 
(1)  Projects not meeting any of the criteria described in subsection A of this section; 
(2)  Immediate or emergency construction, repair, or demolition work required to protect the public health or safety in an emergency, as defined in Section 21060.3 of the Public Resources Code, as it may be amended from time to time; 
(3)  Work for which a building or demolition permit is not required by this municipal code; 
(4)  A project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and remains in effect at the time of construction; or 
(5)  A town project for which the notice inviting bids has been published prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2(Exh. A), 9-16-2015)  
8.13.040 - Application for exception. 
(a)  Prior to commencing demolition or construction, an applicant wishing relief from the requirements of this chapter may seek a complete or partial exception from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The exception process shall be initiated by the filing of an application for exception with the town manager, and payment of any application fee established by resolution of the town council. The town council is authorized to establish, by resolution, an application fee in an amount sufficient to recoup the town's costs in considering an application for exception. The application shall indicate the maximum rate of diversion the applicant believes is feasible and the specific circumstances the applicant believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement. 
(c)  The town manager shall review the exception application and either grant the application, partially grant the application by revising the diversion requirements to a level other than that sought by the applicant, or shall deny the application. The town manager may, but is not required to, meet with the applicant to discuss possible means of meeting the diversion requirements set forth in this chapter. A decision on the application, or a conclusion that the application is incomplete, shall be rendered within ten business days of receipt of the application. 
(d)  In order to grant a complete or partial exception from the requirements of this chapter, the town manager must make all of the following findings: 
(1)  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances applicable to the project that do not apply generally to similar projects, such as contamination of construction and demolition materials by hazardous substances, size and location related to available staging for sorting, projects specific to nuisance abatement, or low recyclability of specific materials to be used in or removed from the project; 
(2)  Granting the application will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with limitations imposed on similar projects; and 
(3)  Cost to the applicant of strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter is not the primary reason for granting the exemption. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2(Exh. A), 9-16-2015)  
8.13.050 - Compliance and diversion rates. 
The applicant for a covered project shall divert or cause to be diverted a minimum of fifty percent of the construction and demolition materials resulting from the project. Compliance with this requirement and the other provisions of this chapter shall be listed as a condition of approval on all building or demolition permits issued for a covered project. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2(Exh. A), 9-16-2015)  
8.13.060 - Submission of waste management plan. 
The applicant for each covered project shall complete and submit to the town manager three copies of a waste management plan, as part of the application packet for a building permit, and payment of any application fee established by resolution of the town council. The town council is authorized to establish, by resolution, an application fee in an amount sufficient to recoup the town's costs in administering this chapter, including but not limited to reviewing the waste management plan, processing the applicant's deposit, and conducting the compliance review required by this chapter. The waste management plan shall include the following information, calculated with the applicable conversion rate: 
(a)  The estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition material, with separate listings for each type of material. 
(b)  The estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition material that can be diverted, with separate listings for each type of material. 
(c)  The estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition material that will be landfilled as solid waste. 
(d)  The vendor or facility that will collect or receive the construction and demolition material or that will deconstruct the existing structure. Applicants opting to self-haul construction and demolition material shall comply fully with the terms of this chapter, shall deliver such material only to a facility licensed to provide disposal and diversion services, and shall receive and retain receipts for all such material. Applicants who do not self-haul shall use the services of the solid waste hauler holding an exclusive solid waste franchise from the town (if an exclusive franchise has been awarded), unless the franchised hauler indicates in writing that it lacks sufficient equipment, expertise, or disposal or diversion capacity to handle construction and demolition material from an applicant's project. 
(e)  The estimated commencement date for the demolition or construction work. Applicants are not required to make detailed measurements; a good-faith estimate of the quantity of each material will suffice. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2(Exh. A), 9-16-2015)  
8.13.070 - Diversion security deposit. 
Each applicant for a permit for a covered project shall submit with the waste management plan a diversion security deposit, in cash or by irrevocable letter of credit or performance bond. The details of the deposit requirement, including but not limited to the amount and timing of payment, shall be established by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2(Exh. A), 9-16-2015)  
8.13.080 - Review of waste management plan. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this municipal code, no building permit shall be issued for any covered project unless and until the town manager has approved the waste management plan submitted for the project. A waste management plan shall be approved or disapproved within fifteen business days of submittal of a complete plan. 
(b)  No waste management plan shall be approved unless the town manager makes all of the following findings: 
(1)  The waste management plan provides all of the information required by Section 8.13.060; 
(2)  The waste management plan indicates that at least fifty percent of the construction and demolition material produced by the project will be diverted, or that an exception has been approved pursuant to Section 8.13.040; and 
(3)  The applicant has submitted the diversion security deposit required by Section 8.13.070. 
(c)  If the town manager makes the findings set forth in subsection (b) of this section, he or she shall mark the waste management plan as "approved," retain one copy, and return copies to the applicant and the community development department. If the town manager disapproves the waste management plan, he or she shall state the grounds for denial in writing, retain one copy, and return copies of the waste management plan and the grounds for denial to the applicant and the community development department. As an alternative to outright disapproval, the waste management plan may be returned to the applicant along with a request for additional information. 
(d)  If, during the course of the project, the applicant determines that the estimated weight or volume of construction and demolition material to be generated and or recovered from the project is substantially different from the weight or volumes set forth in the waste management plan, the applicant shall submit an addendum to the original waste management plan. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2(Exh. A), 9-16-2015)  
8.13.090 - Compliance review and refund of security deposit. 
(a)  Within ninety days after the completion of any covered project, the applicant shall submit to the town manager documentation concerning the applicant's compliance with the diversion requirements for the project. This documentation shall include: 
(1)  Receipts from the vendor or facility that collected or received construction and demolition material from the project, noting the actual weight or volume of material collected or received, including separate summary listings for material diverted and material landfilled; and 
(2)  Information concerning the weight or volume of construction and demolition material recycled or reused in the project. 
(b)  Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that construction and demolition materials, whether diverted or landfilled, are measured and recorded. Volumetric measurements may be used, incorporating standardized conversion rates approved by the town, if any. 
(c)  The town manager shall review the information submitted under subsection (a) of this section to determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement applicable to the project. 
(1)  If it is determined that the diversion requirement has been achieved, the full amount of the diversion security deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(2)  If it is determined that the diversion requirement has not been met, a portion of the diversion security deposit shall be refunded which is equal to the portion of the diversion requirement that has been met. Any portion of the diversion security deposit not released to the applicant shall be forfeited to the town, and shall be used either to offset administrative costs associated with enforcing the requirements of this chapter or for efforts to educate the community about the need for recycling and encourage recycling. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2(Exh. A), 9-16-2015)  
8.13.100 - Violations and enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to do any of the following: 
(1)  Willfully fail to comply with any provision of this chapter; 
(2)  Provide false or misleading information in any plan, report, or document required by this chapter; or 
(3)  Fail to meet the diversion requirement established by this chapter. 
(b)  An applicant shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which a violation under this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by the applicant. For failure to meet the diversion requirement, the violation shall be deemed to have commenced at the commencement of construction or demolition work, as shown on the applicant's waste management plan. 
(c)  Any person who commits a violation described in subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars; provided, however, that the town prosecutor shall have the discretion to prosecute such violations as infractions. 
(d)  Any person who commits a violation described in subsection (a)(3) of this section after receiving at least one written warning is guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars for the first violation, two hundred dollars for the second violation within a year, and five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year. 
(e)  A violation of any provision of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the town through any legal means. The penalties and remedies established by this chapter are cumulative and not exclusive, and this chapter shall not preclude any person from seeking any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2(Exh. A), 9-16-2015)  
8.13.110 - Appeals. 
(a)  Any applicant aggrieved by any decision or finding made by the town manager in the exercise of the authority granted herein, may appeal such decision or finding. An appeal must be filed within five days after receipt of notice of any protested decision or finding by filing with the town clerk, with a copy to the town manager, a letter of appeal stating therein the basis for such appeal, including all evidence and legal arguments which the applicant wishes the town to consider. 
(b)  A hearing shall be held on a date nor more than fifteen days after receipt by the town of the letter of appeal. The applicant shall be given at least five days' notice of the time and place of the hearing. A hearing officer, appointed by the town manager, shall give the appellant, and any other interested party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order to show cause why the decision or finding should not be upheld. In all such cases, the burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to show that there was no substantial evidence to support the decision or finding appealed. 
(c)  At the conclusion of the hearing, or within five days thereof, the town shall provide the applicant with a copy of the hearing officer's decision, which shall be in writing and shall comprise a final and conclusive determination as to the matter appealed. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2(Exh. A), 9-16-2015)  
Chapter 8.14 - SOLID WASTE RECYCLING 
 
8.14.010 - Purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to require recycling to enable the Town of Mammoth Lakes to comply with State of California waste diversion requirements and to work toward enhancing the town's ability to meet future state policy goals for waste diversion rates. This chapter meets this purpose by requiring businesses and multi-family housing complexes to make efforts to separate recyclable materials from all other solid waste and by implementing state laws concerning recycling of waste generated at large events and large venues. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
8.14.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words defined in this section are used, they shall, unless the context requires otherwise, be deemed to have the following meanings: 
"Alternative recycler" means a firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, other than an authorized contractor, with which a customer contracts for the removal from the customer's premises of specified recyclable materials generated by the customer and which pays the customer for the recyclable materials, or which accepts donations of recyclable materials from customers; in no case shall an alternative recycler charge or collect any fee or charge from a customer for the collection or processing of recyclables. 
"Approved recycling container" means a recycling cart or other wheeled container, front-load bin, or other container provided by an authorized contractor or an alternative recycler or approved by the town for the collection and removal of recyclable materials. 
"Authorized contractor" means a firm, partnership, corporation or other entity authorized under and by virtue of a contract with the town to collect recyclable materials within the town limits. 
"Business" means any commercial or public entity, including, but not limited to, a firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint-stock company, corporation, or association that is organized as a for-profit or nonprofit entity, property complex containing two or more commercial entities, industrial facility, special district or a federal, local, or regional agency or facility. In addition, to the extent that applicable law allows the town to regulate the disposal of waste by schools, school districts, and state agencies, such organizations shall be considered businesses for the purpose of this chapter. 
"Commercial solid waste" means all types of solid waste, including recyclable materials, that are discarded from businesses (as defined) but does not include industrial waste. 
"Covered generator" means an entity that is subject to the town's commercial recycling program requirements and includes: 
(a)  Any business as defined in this chapter that generates four cubic yards or more of commercial solid waste per week; and 
(b)  Any multi-family residential property as defined in this chapter. 
"Customer" means: 
(a)  A residential property owner or occupant; or 
(b)  A business or multi-family residential property owner or generator that contracts for recyclable material removal services with an authorized contractor or alternative recycler. Where several businesses or multi-family residential properties share waste containers or service, "customer" refers only to the party that enters into a contract for removal services. 
"Generator" means each residential property owner or occupant, business, or multi-family residential property that generates recyclable materials as a result of its activities. 
"Industrial waste" means the solid wastes and semi-solid wastes that result from industrial processes and manufacturing operations. 
"Multi-family residential property" means five or more residential dwelling units (as described by Title 14 Section 18836(a)(2) of the California Code of Regulations) located on a single parcel of land, including any mobile home park, located within the town. 
"Recyclable material" means material such as, but not limited to, newspapers, glass, metal and aluminum cans, plastic bottles, corrugated cardboard and used motor oil which is separated from other waste or refuse for the purpose of recycling. 
"Recycling" means the process of collecting and turning used products into new products by reprocessing or remanufacturing them. 
"Recycling center" means an operation, including a place, mobile unit, reverse vending machine, or other device, which is certified by the State of California and which accepts from consumers, and pays or provides the refund value for, empty beverage containers intended to be recycled. 
"Self-hauling" means a covered generator transporting its own waste and/or recyclable materials rather than contracting with an authorized contractor or an alternative recycler for that service. 
"Self-hauling/exemption form" means the form provided by the public works director or his or her designee on which a covered generator certifies that it is exempt from the requirements of the commercial recycling program as set forth in Section 8.14.040, it is using an alternative recycler, or it will be self-hauling and its activities will be completed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable law or regulation. 
"Source separating" or "source separation" means the process of removing recyclable materials from solid waste at the place of generation, prior to collection, and placing them into separate containers that are separately designated for recyclable materials. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
8.14.030 - General provisions. 
(a)  Ownership of Recyclable Material. Recyclable material placed at the curbside or other location for collection by an authorized contractor is the property of the customer until such time as it is collected for disposal, at which time it becomes the property of the authorized contractor. 
(b)  Recyclable Material Collection and Service. 
(1)  No person other than an authorized contractor or an alternative recycler shall remove recyclable materials which have been placed in an approved recycling container at the curbside or on the customer's premises. Any and each violation thereof from one or more recycling collection locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Subject to the limitations contained in Section 8.14.050, the town council may require all residents or any class of residents to obtain recyclable collection service from one or more authorized contractors. The town council may make such election by resolution or in any solid waste collection agreement entered by the town and subject to such terms and conditions as the town council may prescribe. 
(c)  Destroying, scattering, scavenging, or collecting recyclable material without the consent of the owner is prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to burn, break, destroy, scatter, scavenge, collect, contaminate, or take any recyclable materials without the consent of the owner of the recyclable materials. 
(d)  Approved Recycling Containers—Ownership and Unauthorized Removal. It is unlawful for a person other than: 
(1)  The customer or his/her designee; or 
(2)  The town; or 
(3)  An authorized agent of the town; or 
(4)  The authorized contractor or alternative recycler to remove any approved recycling container from the customer's premises or curbside. 
(e)  Right of Individual to Dispose of Recyclable Material. Nothing in this chapter shall modify, limit, or abrogate in any manner the right of any individual person, organization, or any other entity to donate, sell, exchange at fair market value or otherwise dispose of recyclable material, provided that any such disposal is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  Placement of Recycling Containers. No recycling containers or bins within the town shall be placed or located in such a manner that blocks or impedes vehicular or pedestrian traffic, falls within the designated visibility triangles (site distance), or obstructs egress from any building or property, whether or not such building or property may be abandoned or otherwise not in use. 
(g)  Source Separation of Recyclable Material. All residents and covered generators in the town shall make reasonable efforts to remove from the general waste stream by source separation any material designated by the town and/or an authorized contractor as recyclable material. 
(h)  Contamination of Recyclable Material. 
(1)  Recycling containers provided by the authorized contractor or the alternative recycler may not contain ten percent or more of non-recyclable materials (contaminants). Any customer which violates this requirement may be charged at the solid waste disposal rate for the disposal of that container. Any customer whose recyclable material was not collected because it contained contaminants is responsible for properly separating recyclable materials from the non-recyclable materials for collection and proper recycling. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for an authorized contractor or alternative recycler to combine materials in solid waste bins or carts with materials in recycling bins or carts in one collection vehicle. 
(i)  Civil Action by Authorized Contractor or Alternative Recycler. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of a person or entity under contract to the town to remove solid waste or recyclable materials, and/or an alternative recycler, to bring a civil action against any person who violates the above described sections of the chapter, nor shall a conviction for such violation exempt any person from a civil action brought by an authorized contractor. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
8.14.040 - Commercial recycling program—Requirements for covered generators. 
(a)  Each covered generator shall be responsible for ensuring and demonstrating compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Source separation of recyclable materials from the solid waste they are discarding; 
(2)  Providing for a basic level of recycling service that includes, at a minimum, the collection of recyclable materials; and 
(3)  Entering into a service agreement with an authorized contractor for the collection of recyclable materials; or completing a self-hauling/exemption form. 
The requirements for self-hauling may include, but are not limited to, maintaining written records demonstrating that all self-hauling activities have been completed in accordance with the standards imposed by the town in this chapter. 
(b)  Each covered generator shall provide containers for designated recyclable materials in common areas where recyclable materials may be collected. 
(c)  Each covered generator shall ensure that designated recyclable materials generated at its site will be taken only to a recycling center, and not to a landfill for disposal, by complying with all the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Each covered generator shall prominently post and maintain one or more signs where designated recyclable materials are collected that set forth what materials are required to be source separated, in addition to collection procedures for such materials. 
(e)  No covered generator shall be liable for the failure of an authorized contractor or alternative recycler to deliver designated recyclable materials to a recycling center. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
8.14.050 - Exemptions to requirements for covered generators. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the requirements of this chapter or any other provision herein, a business with less than four cubic yards of waste per week or a residential property that is not a multi-family residential property as defined in this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of Section 8.14.040. 
(b)  Any covered generator seeking to be exempted from the commercial recycling program requirements of Section 8.14.040, intending to conduct self-hauling of recyclable materials, or intending to contract with an alternative recycler instead of an authorized contractor must complete a self-hauling/exemption form annually. The town council may adopt a fee in conjunction with the self-hauling permit to cover associated review and state reporting costs. See Section 8.14.060 for self-hauling and self-hauling/exemption form requirements. The application for exemption shall be submitted to the public works director, and/or his or her designee. 
(c)  A covered generator may be exempted by the public works director, and/or his or her designee, if it demonstrates to the public works director and/or his or her designee that there is no collection service or other system available within a reasonable area for recycling the waste material generated. If the public works director, and/or his or her designee, determines that such a collection service or other system is available within a reasonable area, the public works director and/or his or her designee may deny the exemption request, and the covered generator will be responsible for compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  A covered generator may be exempted by the public works director, and/or his or her designee, if it is determined through a site visit requested by the covered generator: 
(1)  That there is not adequate storage space for approved recycling containers for recyclable materials on site and that it is infeasible for the covered generator to share approved recycling containers for designated recyclable materials with another covered generator on an adjoining property; or 
(2)  That compliance with this chapter results in a violation of the town's zoning code, including town zoning regulations for minimum parking spaces. If the public works director, and/or his or her designee, determines that it is feasible for recycling containers to be placed on site or shared with an adjoining generator, the covered generator will be responsible for compliance with this chapter. 
(e)  A covered generator may be exempted if utilizing other recycling efforts as approved by the public works director, and/or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
8.14.060 - Self-hauling requirements for covered generators. 
(a)  A covered generator may transport the recyclable materials generated and collected at its premises by self-hauling to a recycling center, rather than using an authorized contractor or alternative recycler only if an owner, generator or employee of the covered generator completes this activity by utilizing a vehicle owned by either an employee or the entity. 
(b)  A covered generator that transports recyclable materials generated and collected at its premises to a recycling center without the utilization of an authorized contractor or alternative recycler must complete a self-hauling/exemption form that certifies that all self-hauling activities will be completed in accordance with the provisions of all applicable laws and/or regulations. At a minimum, the covered generator shall provide the following information on the self-hauling/exemption form: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the covered generator that is signing the self-hauling/exemption form; 
(2)  A list of the types of recyclable materials being self-hauled; 
(3)  For each type of recyclable material, the estimated amount that is being taken to a recycling center quarterly; 
(4)  The name and address of the recycling center(s). 
(c)  The self-hauling/exemption form shall contain a written statement signed by the covered generator's owner or manager certifying that the covered generator is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Approval requirements for self-hauling may include, but are not limited to, requiring applicants to maintain written records demonstrating that all self-hauling activities have been completed in accordance with the standards imposed by the town's commercial recycling program, as described in this chapter. These records shall be made available to the public works director and/or his or her designee for review upon request. 
(e)  The public works director, and/or his or her designee, may restrict or prohibit self-hauling by a covered generator if the public works director, and/or his or her designee, determines that the person's self-hauling activities violate the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
8.14.070 - Appeal upon denial of self-hauling/exemption application. 
(a)  Within thirty days of written notification of denial of a self-hauling/exemption application, or within sixty days of public works director's and/or his or her designee's failure to act on the application, the applicant has the right to meet with the public works director, and/or his or her designee, to review the items cited in the written notice and provide any additional evidence to support approval. Within fifteen days of such meeting, the public works director, and/or his or her designee, will make a final, written determination of the application based on the reviews of additional evidence, together with the original application. The public works director, and/or his or her designee, will send a copy of all final, written determinations, including reasons for denial, if any, to both the applicant and the town manager. 
(b)  Within ten days after receiving the final denial from the public works director and/or his or her designee, the applicant may request that the town manager reconsider the determination by submitting a written appeal to the town manager. If the applicant's appeal includes a request for a meeting, the applicant has the right to meet with the town manager within thirty days of the written request to review the materials related to the application and the denial. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show facts demonstrating that the applicant does, in fact, meet the requirements of this chapter. The town manager will provide the applicant with a written explanation of his or her determination on the application within thirty days of such meeting or, if no meeting is requested, within thirty days of receipt of the applicant's request for town manager review. The town manager's decision is final. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
8.14.080 - Large event and large venue recycling. 
A.  This section is intended to implement the requirements of California Public Resources Code Section 42648 et seq. 
B.  When issuing a permit to the operator of a venue or event which will serve or be attended by an average of more than two thousand individuals for each day of operation (including both workers and guests or customers), the town shall provide information to the operator on programs that can be implemented to reduce, reuse, and recycle solid waste materials generated at the venue or event. Each such venue or event shall submit a plan to the town demonstrating that at least fifty percent of the solid waste generated by the venue or event shall be diverted from landfills through reuse or recycling. The town may refuse to issue a permit for any event that fails to submit such a plan, and may require a deposit in the amount of five hundred dollars prior to issuing a permit for such a venue or event to secure compliance with the diversion requirement set forth herein. 
C.  The town may require each operator of a venue or event described in paragraph B above to submit, within thirty days following the end of the event, written documentation of waste reduction, reuse, recycling, and diversion programs implemented at the venue or event, and the type and weight of materials diverted and disposed at that venue or event. If the venue or event operator has failed to implement such programs or has failed to divert from landfills at least fifty percent of the solid waste generated at the venue or event, the operator shall include an explanation for failure as part of its report to the town. The venue or event operator shall submit the requested information to the town no later than one month from the date of the town's request for the information. The town shall refund the deposit described in paragraph B above for any venue or event which has achieved the diversion goal set forth herein, and may retain the deposit provided for any venue or event which has failed to achieve the diversion goal. 
D.  The town may, by resolution adopted by the town council, impose a fee on the operator of any venue or event described in paragraph B above to recover the town's costs incurred in complying with its obligations under state law regarding recycling at such venues and events. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
8.14.090 - Enforcement. 
(a)  Authority. The public works director, and/or his or her designee is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. To the extent permitted by law, the public works director and/or his or her designee may inspect any collection container, collection vehicle load, or receiving facility for collected trash or recyclable materials. 
(b)  Remedies. It is unlawful to violate any provision or requirement of this chapter. The failure to comply with any requirement of this chapter constitutes a violation of this chapter. Each instance of a violation of this chapter is a separate offense. Violations of the provisions or requirements of this chapter may be prosecuted as an infraction or misdemeanor subject to the penalties provided in this Code or the public works director may issue an administrative citation as provided in this Code. 
(c)  Remedies Cumulative. Remedies under this section are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(d)  Strict Liability. Violations of this chapter shall be treated as strict liability offenses regardless of intent. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2014)  
Chapter 8.16 - NOISE REGULATION 
Sections: 
 
8.16.010 - Policy declaration—Nuisance when. 
It is the policy of the town to prohibit unnecessary, excessive and annoying noises from all sources subject to its police power. At certain levels, noises are detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizenry and in the public interest shall be systematically proscribed and declared to be public nuisance. 
(Prior code § 10.16.010)  
8.16.020 - Definitions. 
All terminology used in this chapter, and not specifically defined in this section, shall be interested in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or any successor body. 
"A-weighed sound level" means the sound level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighing network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
"Ambient noise level" means the composite of noise from all sources near and far. In this context, the ambient noise level constitutes the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location. 
"Construction" means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
"Cumulative period" means an additive period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted. 
"Decibel" means a unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty micropascals. 
"Demolition" means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
"Emergency work" means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
"Fixed noise source" means a stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including but not limited to, residential, agricultural, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air conditioners, and refrigeration equipment. 
"Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)" means the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination weight rating, which is the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used. 
"Impulsive sound" means sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts and the discharge of firearms. 
"Intrusive noise" means that noise which intrudes over and above the existing ambient noise at a given location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound depends upon its amplitude, duration, frequency and time of occurrence, and tonal or informational content as well as the prevailing ambient noise level. 
"Licensed" means the possession of a formal license or a permit issued by the appropriate jurisdictional authority; or, where no permits or licenses are issued, the sanctioning of the activity by the jurisdiction as noted in public record. 
"Mobile noise source" means any noise source other than a fixed noise source. 
"Motor vehicle" includes any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the California Motor Vehicle Code, including all on-highway type motor vehicles subject to registration under the code, and all off-highway type motor vehicles subject to identification under the code. 
"Motorboat" means any vessel propelled by machinery, whether or not such machinery is the principal source of propulsion but shall not include a vessel which has a valid marine document issued by the Bureau of Customs of the United States government or any federal agency successor thereto (Section 651(d), Harbors and Navigation Code). 
"Muffler" or "sound dissipative device" means a device consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates, or other mechanical design, for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from an internal combustion engine, and effective in reducing noise. 
"Noise control office(r) (NCO)" means the town agency or department having lead responsibility for this chapter. 
"Noise disturbance" means any sound which, as judged by the noise control officer, (1) endangers or injures the safety or health of human beings or animals, or (2) annoys or disturbs reasonable persons of normal sensitivities, or (c) endangers or injures personal or real property, or (d) violates the factors set forth in 8.16.050. Compliance with the quantitative standards as listed in this chapter shall constitute elimination of a noise disturbance. 
"Person" means any individual, association, partnership or corporation and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state. 
"Powered model vehicle" means any self-propelled, air-borne, waterborne or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle, which is not designated to carry persons, including but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
"Public right-of-way" means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
"Public space" means any real property or structures thereon which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
"Pure tone" means any sound which can be judged as audible as a single pitch or a set a single pitches by the noise control officer. For the purposes of this chapter, a pure tone shall exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous one-third octave bands by five dB for center frequencies of five hundred Hz and above and by eight dB for center frequencies between one hundred sixty and four hundred Hz and by fifteen dB for center frequencies less than or equal to one hundred twenty-five Hz. 
"Real property boundary" means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real property divisions. 
"Sound amplifying equipment" means any device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound, excluding standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the radio is installed, and, as used in this chapter, warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes. 
"Sound level matter" means an instrument, including a microphone, or amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound levels, which meets or exceeds the requirements pertinent for type S2A meters in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters, S1.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof. 
"Sound truck" means any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle, regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment. 
"Vibration perception threshold" means the minimum ground-borne or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects. The perception threshold shall be presumed to be a motion velocity of 0.01 in./sec. over the range of one to one hundred Hz. 
(Prior code § 10.16.020)  
8.16.030 - Noise control officer—Appointment. 
The noise control program established by this chapter shall be administered by the code enforcement officer who shall be designated the noise control officer in order to implement and enforce this chapter and for the general purpose of noise abatement and control, the noise control officer shall have, in addition to any other authority vested in it, the power to: 
A.  Conduct, or cause to be conducted, studies, research and monitoring related to noise, including joint cooperative investigation with public or private agencies, and the application for, and acceptance of, grants; 
B.  Conduct programs of public education regarding the cause, effects of noise and general methods of abatement and control of noise, and the actions prohibited by this chapter and the procedures for reporting violations; 
C.  Encourage the participation of public interest groups in related public information efforts; 
D.  Provide for training of field inspectors and other technical personnel concerned with noise abatement in conformance with standards for technical qualifications as established by the state office of noise control; 
E.  Coordinate the noise control activities of all town departments, cooperate where practicable with all appropriate state and federal agencies, advise on the availability of low noise emission products for replacement or retrofit of existing or planned town-owned or operated equipment, and transmit recommended contracts for the approval of the town council for the provision of technical and enforcement services; 
F.  Request any other department or agency responsible for a proposed or final standard, regulation or similar action to consult on the advisability of revising the action, if there is reason to believe that the action is not consistent with this chapter; 
G.  On all public and private projects which are likely to cause noise in violation of this chapter and which are subject to mandatory review or approval by other departments, review for compliance with the intent and provisions of this chapter, required sound analyses which identify existing and projected noise sources and associated noise levels, and require usage of adequate measures to avoid violation of any provision of this chapter; 
H.  Upon presentation of proper credentials, enter and/or inspect any private property, place, report or records at any time when granted permission by the owner, or by some other person with apparent authority to act for the owner. When permission is refused or cannot be obtained, a search warrant may be obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction upon showing of probable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter may exist. Such inspection may include administration of any necessary tests; 
I.  Develop and recommend to the town council provisions regulating the use and operation of any product, including the description of maximum sound emission levels of such product, but not in such a manner as to conflict with federal or state new product regulations; 
J.  Prior to the approval of any zoning change, review the noise impact of the zoning change by identifying existing and projected noise sources and the associated sound levels, and require usage of adequate control measures on noise sources identified above which will be in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 10.16.030)  
8.16.040 - Noise control officer—Duties. 
In order to effectively implement and enforce this chapter, the noise control officer shall, within a reasonable time after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter: 
A.  Develop measurement standards and procedures which will further the purposes of this chapter; 
B.  Develop administrative procedures which will provide for effective enforcement of this chapter; 
C.  Under the provisions of this chapter, investigate and pursue possible violations of this chapter; 
D.  Assist in the preparation or revision thereof of the town noise element of the general plan as required by Government Code, Section 65302(g), following guidelines set forth by the state office of noise control; 
E.  Assist in or review the total transportation planning of the community, including planning for new roads and highways, bus routes, airports and other systems of public transportation, to insure that proper consideration is taken with regard to the impact of sound levels and that the policies set forth in the noise element are adhered to; 
F.  Provide ongoing assistance to local agencies in determining possible mitigation measures for current or forecast noise problems; 
G.  Assist the town local transportation commission (LTC) in developing a plan for noise compatible land use in the vicinity of all local airports under its jurisdiction, maintain consistency with the provisions and policies of the general plan noise element, and appear at any hearings or meetings regarding airport activities that would affect the noise environment of local residents in order to insure that the best interests of the town are served; 
H.  Prepare and publish a list of those products required to meet specified noise emission limits under federal, state or local law; 
I.  Make recommendations to the town council for modifications or amendments to this chapter to insure consistency with all state and federal laws and regulations; 
J.  Administer noise program grants, funds and gifts from public and private sources, including the state and federal governments. 
(Prior code § 10.16.040)  
8.16.050 - General noise regulations. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or negligently make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes any discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. 
B.  The factors which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The sound level of the objectionable noise; 
2.  The sound level of the ambient noise; 
3.  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
4.  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
5.  The number of persons affected by the noise source; 
6.  The time of day or night the noise occurs; 
7.  The duration of the noise and its tonal, informational or musical content; 
8.  Whether the noise is continuous, recurrent or intermittent; 
9.  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(Prior code § 10.16.050)  
8.16.060 - Noise measurement procedure. 
Upon receipt of a complaint from a citizen, the noise control officer, equipped with sound level measurement equipment satisfying the requirements specified in Section 8.16.020, shall investigate the complaint. The investigation shall consist of a measurement and the gathering of data to adequately define the noise problem and shall include the following: 
A.  Nonacoustic data: 
1.  Type of noise source; 
2.  Location of noise source relative to complainant's property; 
3.  Time period during which noise source is considered by complainant to the intrusive; 
4.  Total duration of noise produced by noise source; 
5.  Date and time of measurement survey. 
B.  Noise measurement procedure: 
1.  Utilizing the "A" weighting scale of the sound level meter and the slow meter response (use fast response for impulsive type sounds), the noise level shall be measured at a position or positions at any point on the receiver's property. 
2.  In general, the microphone shall be located four to five feet above the ground; ten feet or more from the nearest reflective surface, where possible. However, in those cases where another elevation is deemed appropriate, the latter shall be utilized. If the noise complaint is related to interior noise levels, interior noise measurements shall be made within the affected residential unit. The measurements shall be made at a point of at least four feet from the wall, ceiling, or floor nearest the noise source, with windows in the normal seasonal configuration. Calibration of the measurement equipment, utilizing an acoustic calibrator, shall be performed immediately prior to recording any noise data. 
(Prior code § 10.16.060)  
8.16.070 - Exterior noise limits. 
A.  The noise standards for the various categories of land use identified by the noise control officer as presented in Table 1 shall, unless otherwise specifically indicated, apply to all such property within a designated zone. 
B.  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound at any location within the town or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level when measured on any other property to exceed: 
1.  The noise standard for that land use as in Table 1 for a cumulative period of more than thirty minutes in any hour; or 
2.  The noise standard plus five dB for a cumulative period of more than fifteen minutes in any hour; or 
3.  The noise standard plus ten dB for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; or 
4.  The noise standard plus fifteen dB for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or 
5.  The noise standard plus twenty dB or the maximum measured ambient level, for any period of time. 
C.  If the measured ambient level differs from that permissible within any of the first four noise limit categories above the allowable noise exposure standard shall shall be adjusted in five dB increments in each category as appropriate to encompass or reflect the ambient noise level. 
D.  In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under this category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. 
E.  If the measurement location is on a boundary between two different zones, the noise level applicable to the lower noise zone plus five dB, shall apply. 
F.  If possible, the ambient noise shall be measured at the same location along the property line utilized in subsection B of this section with the alleged offending noise source inoperative. If for any reason the alleged offending noise source cannot be shut down, the ambient noise must be estimated by performing a measurement in the same general area of the source but at a sufficient distance such that the noise from the source is at least ten dB below the ambient in order that only the ambient level is measured. If the difference between the ambient and the noise source is five to ten dB, then the level the ambient itself can be reasonably determined by subtracting a one decibel correction to account for the contribution of the source. 
G.  In the event the alleged offensive noise, as judged by the noise control officer, contains a steady, audible tone such as a whine, screech, or hum, or is a repetitive noise such as hammering or riveting, or contains music or speech conveying informational content, the standard limits set forth in Table 1 shall be reduced by five dB. 
Table 1 
Exterior Noise Limits 
(Levels Not to Be Exceeded More Than Thirty 
Minutes in Any Hour) 
_____
Receiving Land Use Category 	Time 
Period 	Noise Level (dBA) 
Noise Zone Classification*l 
		Rural 
Suburban 	Suburban 	Urban 
_____
One and Two Family Residential 	10 p.m.—7 a.m. 	40 	45 	50 
	7 a.m.—10 p.m. 	50 	55 	60 
_____
Multiple Dwelling Residential Public Space 	10 p.m.—7 a.m. 	45 	50 	55 
	7 a.m.—10 p.m. 	50 	55 	60 
_____
Limited Commercial Some Multiple Dwellings 	10 p.m.—7 a.m. 	55 
	7 a.m.—10 p.m. 	60 
_____
Commercial 	10 p.m.—7 a.m. 	60 
	7 a.m.—10 p.m. 	65 
_____
Light Industrial 	Any time 	70 
Heavy Industrial 	Any time 	75 
_____
 
* The classification of different areas of the community in terms of environmental noise zones shall be determined by the noise control officer, based upon assessment of community noise survey data. Additional area classifications should be used as appropriate to reflect both lower and higher existing ambient levels than those shown. Industrial noise limits are intended primarily for use at the boundary of industrial zones rather than for noise reduction within the zone. 
(Prior code § 10.16.070)  
8.16.080 - Interior noise standards. 
A.  Interior noise standards for multifamily residential dwellings as presented in Table 2 shall apply, unless otherwise specifically indicated, within all such dwellings with windows in their normal seasonal configuration. 
Table 2 
Interior Noise Standards 
_____
Noise Zone 	Type of 
Land Use 	Time 
Interval 	Allowable Interior 
Noise Level (dBA) 
_____
All 	Multifamily 
Residential 	10 p.m.—7 a.m. 	35 
		7 a.m.—10 p.m. 	45 
_____
 
B.  No person shall operate or cause to be operated within a dwelling unit, any source of sound or allow the creation of any noise which causes the noise level when measured inside a neighboring receiving dwelling unit to exceed: 
1.  The noise standard as specified in Table 2 for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; or 
2.  The noise standards plus five dB for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or 
3.  The noise standard plus ten dB or the maximum measured ambient, for any period of time. 
C.  If the measured ambient level differs from that permissible within any of the noise limit categories above, the allowable noise exposure standard shall be adjusted in five dB increments in each category as appropriate to reflect the ambient noise level. 
D.  In the event the alleged offensive noise, as judged by the noise control officer, contains a steady, audible tone such as a whine, screech, or hum, or is a repetitive noise such a hammering or riveting, or contains music or speech conveying informational content, the standard limits set forth in Table 2 shall be reduced by five dB. 
(Prior code § 10.16.070)  
8.16.090 - Prohibited acts. 
A.  No person shall unnecessarily make, continue or cause to be made or continued any noise disturbance. 
B.  The following acts, and the causing or permitting thereof, are declared to be in violation of this chapter: 
1.  Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television set, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, or similar device which produces or reproduces sound: 
a.  Between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of Section 8.16.070 except for activities for which a variance has been issued by appropriate authority, 
b.  In such a manner as to exceed the levels set forth for public space in Table 1 in Section 8.16.080, measured at a distance of at least fifty feet (fifteen meters) from such operating on a public right-of-way or public space. 
2.  Using or operating for any purpose any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, or similar device between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m., such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property line, or at any time violates the provisions of Section 8.16.070, except for any noncommercial public speaking, public assembly or other activity for which a variance or permit has been issued by the planning commission or the noise control officer. 
3.  Offering for sale, selling anything, or advertising by shouting or outcry within any residential or commercial area of the town except by variance issued by the planning commission. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food, and beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses or other similar licensed public entertainment events. 
4.  Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or bird which frequently or for long duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds which create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line. 
5.  Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of this section. 
6.  Operating or causing the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, repair, alteration or demolition work is subject to the hours of work permitted by this code, except for emergency work of public service agencies. 
a.  At residential properties: 
i.  Mobile equipment: Maximum noise levels for nonscheduled, intermittent, short-term operation (less than ten days) of mobile equipment: 
	Type I Areas 
Single-Family Residential 	Type II Areas 
Multifamily Residential 	Type III Areas 
Semi-Residential Commercial 
Daily, except Sundays and legal holidays 7 a.m. to 8 p.m. 	75 dBA 	80 dBA 	85 dBA 
Daily, 8 p.m. to 7 a.m. and all day Sundays and legal holidays 	60 dBA 	65 dBA 	70 dBA 
 
ii.  Stationary equipment: Maximum noise levels for repetitively scheduled and relatively long-term operation (periods of ten days or more) of stationary equipment. 
	Type I Areas Single-Family Residential 	Type II Areas Multifamily Residential 	Type III Areas Semi-Residential Commercial 
Daily, except Sundays and legal holidays 7 a.m. to 8 p.m. 	60 dBA 	65 dBA 	70 dBA 
Daily, 8 p.m. to 7 a.m. and all day Sundays and legal holidays 	50 dBA 	55 dBA 	60 dBA 
 
b.  At business properties: 
i.  Mobile equipment: Maximum noise levels for nonscheduled, intermittent, short-term operation of mobile equipment: daily, including Sundays and legal holidays, all hours; maximum of eighty-five dBA, 
ii.  Stationary equipment: Maximum noise levels for repetitively scheduled and relatively long-term operation of mobile equipment: daily, including Sundays and legal holidays, all hours; maximum of seventy-five dBA. 
All mobile or stationary internal combustion engine-powered equipment or machinery shall be equipped with suitable exhaust and air intake silencers in proper working order. 
7.  Operating or permitting the operation of any device that creates a vibration which is above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the property boundary of the source if on private property or at one hundred fifty feet (forty-six meters) from the source if on a public space or public right-of-way. 
8.  Operating or permitting the operation of powered model vehicles: 
a.  Between the hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m. so as to create noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of Section 8.16.070, 
b.  In such a manner as to exceed the levels set forth for public space land use in Table 1 in Section 8.16.070, measured at a distance not less than one hundred feet (thirty meters) from any point on the path of a vehicle operating on public space or public right-of-way. 
9.  Sounding or permitting the sounding of any electronically amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device, intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place, for more than ten seconds in any hourly period. Houses of religious worship and all public entities, including the town shall be exempt from the operation of this provision. Sound sources covered by this provision and not exempted under division 10(b) of this subsection may be exempted by a variance issued by the planning commission. 
10.  The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar, or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes or for testing, as provided in subparagraph (b) of this subdivision. 
a.  Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall not occur before seven a.m. or after seven p.m. Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed sixty seconds, 
b.  Testing of the complete emergency signaling system, including the functioning of the signaling device, shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. Such testing shall not occur before seven a.m. or after ten p.m. The time limit specified herein shall not apply to such complete system testing, 
c.  Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm unless such alarm is terminated within fifteen minutes of activation; 
11.  Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, or similar tool between ten p.m. and seven a.m., so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line; 
12.  Any motor, machinery, pump, such as swimming pool equipment, etc., shall be sufficiently enclosed or muffled and maintained so as not to create a noise disturbance in accordance with Section 8.16.070; 
13.  Operating or permitting the operation or playing of any loudspeaker, musical instrument, motorized racing vehicle, or other source of sound in any place of public entertainment that exceeds ninety-five dBA as read on the slow response of a sound level meter at any point normally occupied by a customer, without a conspicuous and legible sign stating: "WARNING! SOUND LEVELS WITHIN MAY CAUSE HEARING IMPAIRMENT"; 
14.  The removal or rendering inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement, of any noise control device or element thereof, of any product identified under Section 8.16.040(H); 
15.  The removal of any noise label from any product identified under Section 8.16.040(H); 
16.  The use of a product identified under Section 8.16.040(H) which has had a noise control device or element thereof or noise label removed or rendered inoperative. 
(Ord. 02-02 § 1(part), 2002; Ord. 98-02 § 1(part), 1998; Ord. 9701 § 1(part), 1997; prior code § 8.16.090)  
8.16.100 - Exemptions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; or 
2.  The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
B.  Warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety, as for example, police, fire and ambulance sirens, and train horns, shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to occasional outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting and entertainment events, provided such events are conducted pursuant to a permit or license issued by the county relative to the staging of the events, and fees therefor paid as established by resolution of the town council. 
(Prior code § 10.16.100)  
8.16.110 - Variances. 
Variances for exceptions from any provision of this chapter, subject to limitations and restrictions as to area, noise levels, time limits and other terms and conditions, may be sought in the same manner and on the same basis as set forth in the zoning code in Title 17. 
(Prior code § 10.16.110)  
8.16.120 - Appeals. 
Appeals of an adverse decision or action by the noise control officer shall be made directly to the planning commission by filing a written appeal with the executive secretary to the planning commission within ten days of the action of the noise control officer which is subject to the appeal. The appeal procedure shall be as set forth in the zoning code. 
(Prior code § 10.16.120)  
8.16.130 - Enforcement. 
A.  Any noise exceeding the noise level limits for a designated noise zone as specified in Sections 8.16.070 and 8.16.080 or the prohibited actions as specified as Section 8.16.090 of this chapter, shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty and punished as set forth in Section 1.12.010. 
C.  In lieu of issuing a notice of violation as provided for in subsection D of this section, the noise control officer may issue an order requiring abatement of a sound source alleged to be in violation, within a reasonable time period and according to guidelines to be approved by the town council which the noise control officer may prescribe. No complaint or further action shall be taken in the event that the cause of the violation has been removed, the condition abated or fully corrected within the time period specified in the written notice. 
D.  Except where a person is acting in good faith to comply with any such abatement order, violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for a notice of violation to be issued by the noise control officer or other responsible enforcement agency according to procedures which the noise control officer may prescribe. 
E.  As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter which operation or maintenance causes or creates sound levels or vibration exceeding the allowable limits as specified in this chapter shall be deemed and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. Additionally, no provision of the chapter shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or from other law. 
(Prior code § 10.16.130)  
Chapter 8.20 - NUISANCES 
Sections: 
 
8.20.010 - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, as follows: 
"Council" means the town council of the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Manager" means the town manager of the town of Mammoth Lakes or his authorized representative. 
"Town" means the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.010)  
8.20.020 - Nuisances designated. 
It is a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises in the town to maintain or permit to exist, such premises in such manner that anyone or more of the following conditions are to exist thereon: 
A.  Land, the topography, geology or configuration of which, whether in natural state or as a result of grading operations, excavation or fill, causes erosion, subsidence or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public, health, safety and welfare, or to adjacent properties; 
B.  Buildings or structures which are abandoned for a period of six months, or permitted to remain in a state of partial construction or destruction for a period of four months, without a building permit having been obtained and substantial construction performed. "Substantial construction" means construction sufficiently noticeable to the public to give notice of ongoing construction work; 
C.  The failure to close, by such means as are acceptable to the chief of police, or the chief building official or his designee, all doorways, windows and other openings into vacant structures; 
D.  Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions and inviting trespassers and malicious mischief; 
E.  Vegetation, including dry grass, dead shrubs, dead trees, combustible refuse and waste, or any material growing upon the area between the traveled way and the property line, sidewalks or upon private property which by reason of size, manner of growth and location would create any one or more of the following: 
1.  A condition likely to constitute a fire hazard to any building, improvement or other property, or when dry will in reasonable probability constitute a fire hazard, 
2.  A condition likely in the opinion of the town health officer, to harbor rats, vermin or other similar creatures constituting a health hazard, or 
3.  A condition which causes appreciable harm or material detriment to the aesthetic and/or property values of surrounding property. 
F.  Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds and other vegetation: 
1.  Dangerous to public health safety and/or welfare, or 
2.  Causing appreciable harm or material detriment to the aesthetic and/or property values of surrounding property. 
G.  The accumulation and storage on any premises for more than ninety days of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative automobiles, trailers, campers, boats, other mobile equipment or major part thereof within the view of persons on public property or on other property adjacent to the premises; 
H.  Attractive nuisances dangerous to children in the form of: 
1.  Abandoned and broken equipment, or 
2.  Unprotected and/or hazardous pools, ponds and excavations, or, 
3.  Neglected machinery. 
I.  Waste on the premises which by reason of its location is unsightly and interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of property by neighbors, detrimentally affects property values in the surrounding neighborhood or community or which would materially hamper or interfere with the suppression of fire upon the premises or adjacent premises and which is visible from public property or from neighboring properties for a period of time in excess of ten days. "Waste" is defined for the purpose of this section as unused or discarded matter and material which consists, without limitation or exclusion by enumeration of such matter and material as rubbish, refuse and matter of any kind including but not limited to, rubble, debris, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile rocks, bricks, soil, building materials, crates, cartons, containers, boxes, furniture and household equipment or parts thereof, lumber, trash, dirt, machinery or parts thereof, scrap metal and pieces of metal, ferrous or nonferrous, bottles, bedding and other similar matter. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed as to prohibit the storage of firewood on the premises to be used for fuel purposes; 
J.  The accumulation of dirt, litter or debris in vestibules, doorways or the adjoining sidewalks of commercial or industrial buildings; 
K.  The maintenance of signs and/or sign structures relating to uses no longer conducted or products no longer sold from vacant commercial, industrial or institutional buildings more than thirty days after such building becomes vacant; 
L.  The maintenance of any structure in a defective, unsightly, deteriorated and unrepaired condition, which is viewable from a public right-of-way or viewable from the sites of neighborhood properties, where such condition would cause appreciable harm or material detriment to the aesthetic and/or property values of surrounding property; 
M.  The substantial lack of maintenance of grounds within the town on which structures exist, where the grounds are viewable by the public from a public right-of-way or viewable from the sites of neighboring properties, where such condition would cause appreciable harm or material detrimental to the aesthetic and/or property values of surrounding properties; 
N.  Maintenance of premises in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare or in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by Civil Code Section 3480. 
O.  A building or structure or property which is altered, enlarged, erected, established, maintained, moved, or operated contrary to the provisions of this Code, the California Building Standards Code as amended by the town, or any condition of approval, or without a valid building permit in instances in which a building permit is required for the work undertaken. 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.020) 
(Ord. No. 16-02, § 2, 3-16-2016)  
8.20.030 - Abatement authority. 
Whenever there is cause to believe that within the incorporated area of the town, there exists a nuisance as defined in Section 8.20.020, the manager or his designee, may cause the abatement of such nuisance and may assess the cost of such abatement, as well as the cost of administration pursuant to the procedures of this chapter. The procedures set forth in this chapter shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the town from enforcing other town ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.030)  
8.20.040 - Notice—Declaration. 
Whenever the manager determines that a condition may exist that is contrary to one or more of the provisions of Section 8.20.020, then he shall cause notice to be given in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.040)  
8.20.050 - Notice—Form. 
Notice of the allegations and intent to abate nuisance shall be titled "Notice of Nuisance and Intent to Abate in Whole or in Part" and shall be substantially as follows: 
Notice of Nuisance 
Intent to Abate In Whole or in Part 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the TOWN OF MAMMOTH LAKES, California, has determined that a condition exists that is contrary to one or more of the provisions of Section 8.20.020 of the Town of Mammoth Lakes Town Code on the real property described as: 
Lot: 
Block: 
Tract: 
STREET LOCATION 
and that such condition creates a nuisance as set forth in the ordinances of the Town of Mammoth Lakes at Chapter 8.20 et seq. That such premises are subject to abatement pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.20 et seq., if said premises, in whole or in part, are found to constitute a nuisance as defined in Section 8.20.020 of the ordinances of the Town of Mammoth Lakes and if same are not promptly abated on a voluntary basis such nuisance(s) may be abated by town authorities and any rehabilitation, repair or demolition will be assessed upon such premises and such cost along with costs of administration will constitute a lien upon such land until paid. 
Said alleged violations consist of the following: 
_____
_____
The intended methods of abatement and estimated costs are: 
_____
_____
You have the right to object to this determination, examine witnesses, produce witnesses and information, and have the assistance of the Town in compelling witnesses to attend a hearing on this determination and intent to abate. 
If you wish to exercise the above rights, you must request a hearing, in writing, in the above matter within twenty (20) days of the date indicated below. Said request for hearing must be received at the offices of the Town of Mammoth Lakes, California 93546, before 5:00 PM on the 20th day from the date of this Notice. 
If a request for hearing is not timely received by the Town, you will have waived your rights as set forth above, and a nuisance and abatement order will be issued by the Town Manager or his duly authorized representative. 
DATED this ___ day of _______ , 19___. 
_____________________ 
TOWN OF MAMMOTH LAKES 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.050)  
8.20.060 - Notice—Service—Response time. 
A.  The manager or his designee, the chief of police, the code enforcement officer or the chief building official, shall cause to be served upon the owner, lesses, occupant, or person having charge of the affected premises a copy of the notice. 
B.  The owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge shall be served with a notice setting forth the allegations from which the determination of a nuisance has arisen and the town's proposed means of abatement. The notice shall contain an estimate by the town of the costs of the abatement to the interested party. The notice shall give the responding party twenty days from the date of the notice to make a request is writing for a hearing on the allegations. If a hearing is not requested within twenty days, the allegations shall be deemed true and the right to any and all administrative hearings shall be deemed waived. 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.060)  
8.20.070 - Notice—Service in person—Posting—Mailing. 
Service of the notice shall be by personal service upon the owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge of the premises upon which the nuisance exists and a copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the front entrance to the premises. If no owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge of the premises can be located after a reasonable effort is made to locate and personally serve such person, the town may mail a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested to the person or person at the address(es) listed on the latest real property assessment rolls of the county of Mono, and such shall be deemed proper service of the notice on the date entered on the return receipt. If the mailed notice is returned marked "unclaimed" or "refused" then service shall nonetheless be considered valid upon receipt of the same by the town. 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.070)  
8.20.080 - Hearing—Procedure. 
A.  Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the manager shall calendar a hearing, not less than ten days from receipt of the request and not more than thirty days from such receipt. 
B.  The manager, at the time set for hearing, shall hear and consider all relevant information presented and shall receive information from owners, witnesses, town personnel and other interested persons relative to such nuisance and to any proposed means for rehabilitation, repair or demolition of such premises. 
C.  The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.080)  
8.20.090 - Hearing—Decision. 
A.  Upon or after the conclusion of the hearing, the manager shall, based upon such hearing, determine whether the premises, or any part thereof, as maintained, constitutes a nuisance as defined by Section 8.20.020. If the manager finds that such nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to rehabilitate, demolish or repair the same, the manager shall make a written order setting forth his findings and ordering the owner, lessee, occupant, or other person having charge of such premises to abate such nuisance by having such premises, building, or structures rehabilitated, repaired, or demolished in the manner and by the means specifically set forth in the order. Such order shall set forth the times within which such work shall be commenced and completed. 
B.  Such order and findings shall be served upon the owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge of the premises by ordinary first class mail to the address provided by such person at the time of hearing, if any, and otherwise, to the address where the nuisance has been determined to exist and shall contain a detailed list of needed corrections and abatement methods. If no mailing address is so available, such order and findings shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the front entrance of the premises on which the nuisance has been determined to exist. 
C.  Within ten days from date of giving of the order, the owner, lessee, occupant, or person in charge of such premises affected may appeal to the council. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the town. If a hearing is not requested within the ten days, the decision of the manager shall be deemed final and the right to any further hearings shall be deemed waived. The appeal shall be set for hearing and heard at a meeting of the council not more than thirty days after such filing. The council, at the time set for hearing, shall hear and consider all relevant information presented and shall receive information from owners, witnesses, town personnel and other interested persons relative to such nuisance and to any proposed means for rehabilitation, repair or demolition of such premises. The hearing may be continued from time to time. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.090)  
8.20.100 - Action to contest decision. 
Any owner, lessee or person having their written authorization may bring an action to contest the decision of the town council within thirty days after the date of such decision. Otherwise, all objections to such decision shall be deemed waived. 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.100)  
8.20.110 - Voluntary abatement. 
A.  Any owner, lessee or person having the authorization of the owner shall have the right to have any such premises rehabilitated or to have such building or structure demolished or repaired in accordance with the manager's order and at his own expense, provided the same is done prior to the expiration of the abatement period set forth in the order. Upon a showing to the manager that such abatement has been carried out in full to the satisfaction of the manager, the proceedings under this chapter shall terminate. 
B.  If such nuisance is not completely abated as directed in the order within the designated abatement period, then the manager is authorized and directed to cause the same to be abated by town forces or private contract, and the manager (or his agents, including private contractors) is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purpose. 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.110)  
8.20.120 - Lien procedure. 
A.  The code enforcement officer or other authorized town official shall keep an itemized report of the costs incurred by the town in the abatement of any public nuisance, including any attorneys' fees pursuant to Section 1.12.060, in addition to any accrued fees and penalties due. The property owner shall be invoiced for the total. The property owner may appeal the amount of any invoice to the town council, which shall hear and consider such appeal in the same manner as an appeal of a hearing on the existence of the nuisance. Once the invoice amount is finalized, payment shall be remitted promptly. If payment is not received, the itemized report shall be submitted in writing to the town clerk. Any such report may include the abatement costs, fees and penalties for any number of properties and abatements, whether or not such properties are contiguous. 
B.  Upon receipt of the itemized report, the town clerk, or his or her designee, shall serve notice of the lien in the same manner as summons in a civil action in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 415.10 et seq. If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. The period of notice commences upon the first day of publication and terminates at the end of the tenth day, including therein the first day. Publication shall be made on each day on which the newspaper is published during the ten-day period. 
C.  After notice has been served, the lien shall be recorded in the Mono County recorder's office and, from the date of recording, shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien. 
D.  The lien shall identify: 
1.  The amount of the lien; 
2.  The town as the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed; 
3.  The date of the abatement order or citation; 
4.  The street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed; and 
5.  The name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
E.  In the event that the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, through either payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection D shall be recorded by the town clerk. 
F.  A lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the town for a money judgment. 
G.  The town may recover from the property owner any costs incurred in the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.120) 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § 4, 3-7-2012)  
8.20.130 - Special assessment procedure. 
A.  As an alternative to the procedures set forth in Section 8.20.120, the code enforcement officer or other authorized town official shall keep an itemized report of the costs incurred by the town in the abatement of any public nuisance, including any attorneys' fees pursuant to Section 1.12.060, in addition to any accrued fees and penalties due. The property owner shall be invoiced for the total. The property owner may appeal the amount of any invoice to the town council, which shall hear and consider such appeal in the same manner as an appeal of a hearing on the existence of the nuisance. Once the invoice amount is finalized, payment shall be remitted promptly. Any such report may include the abatement costs, fees and penalties for any number of properties and abatements, whether or not such properties are contiguous. 
B.  Upon receipt of the itemized report, the town clerk shall serve notice by certified mail, to the property owner, if the property owner's identity can be determined from the county assessor's or county recorder's records. The notice shall be given at the time of imposing the assessment and shall specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax collector's power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
C.  Subject to the requirements applicable to the sale of property pursuant to Section 3691 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the town may conduct a sale of vacant residential developed property for which the payment of that assessment is delinquent. 
D.  Notices or instruments relating to the special assessment shall be entitled to recordation. 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.130) 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § 5, 3-7-2012)  
8.20.140 - Assessment—Lien. 
The total cost for abating such nuisance, as so confirmed by the council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lost or parcel of land to which it relates and, upon recordation in the office of the county recorder of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of such assessment. 
A.  After such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law. 
B.  Such notice of lien for recordation shall be in a form substantially as follows: 
NOTICE OF LIEN: TOWN OF MAMMOTH LAKES 
 Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of Section 8.20.010 et seq. of the Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code and the Ordinances of the Town of Mammoth Lakes, the Manager of the Town of Mammoth Lakes, or his designated representative, did, on or about the ___ day of _______, 19___, cause the premises hereinafter described to the rehabilitated, or the building or structures on the property hereinafter described to be repaired or demolished, in order to abate a nuisance on said real property; and the Town Council of the Town of Mammoth Lakes did, on the ___ day of _______, 19___, assess the cost of such rehabilitation, repair or demolition upon said real property hereinafter described; and the same has not been paid nor any part hereof; and that said Town of Mammoth Lakes does hereby claim a lien to such rehabilitation, repair, or demolition and administrative costs in the amount of said assessment, to wit: The sum of $_______, and the same shall be a lien upon said real property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record. 
 The real property hereinbefore mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the Town of Mammoth Lakes, State of California, and more particularly described as follows: 
(legal description) 
DATED: This ___ day of _______, 19___ 
	      TOWN OF MAMMOTH LAKES 
 	 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.140)  
8.20.150 - Alternative remedies. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to supersede any other remedies in this code nor to prevent the town from commencing civil or criminal proceedings to abate a public nuisance under applicable state or federal law, or to proceed with other authorized nonjudicial nuisance abatement procedures as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Moreover, upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except for conditions abated pursuant to Section 17980 of the Health & Safety Code, relating to abandoned buildings, the court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement, as authorized by Government Code Section 38773.7. Costs of abatement shall include, without limitation by reason of enumeration, all administrative costs of the town. 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.150) 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § 6, 3-7-2012)  
8.20.160 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  The owner or other person having charge or control of any such buildings or premises who maintains any nuisance defined in this chapter, or who violates an order of abatement made pursuant to Section 8.20.090 is guilty of an infraction. 
B.  Any occupant or lessee in possession of any such building or structure who fails to vacate the building or structure in accordance with an order given as provided in this chapter, or in accordance with any other legal procedure commenced to remove such occupant pursuant to such order is guilty of an infraction. 
C.  Any person who removes any notice or order posted as required in this chapter, for the purpose of interfering with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of an infraction. 
D.  No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any representative of the town or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in a building or premises which has been ordered to be vacated, repaired, rehabilitated, or demolished and removed, or with any person to whom any such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this code whenever any such representative of the town, purchaser or person having any interest or estate in such building or premises is engaged in carrying out, implementing or enforcing an order pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or in performance any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work as authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter. Violation of the provisions of this section is an infraction. 
(Ord. 89-07 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 7.20.160)  
8.20.170 - Violations—Public nuisances. 
A.  In addition to other penalties provide by law, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this code, or any such threatened violation, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such by the town. 
B.  Also, any such violation or threatened violation as referred to in subsection A of this section, or any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this code, or of the provisions of any other town ordinance, shall be deemed a public nuisance which may be abated by the town attorney in a civil judicial action. 
(Ord. 2 § 1(part), 1984: prior code § 1.01.250)  
Chapter 8.24 - RECLAMATION 
Sections: 
 
8.24.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide standards and procedures for reclamation of resource development activities in Mammoth Lakes. Specifically, it is the purpose of this chapter to fulfill the legislative mandate contained in the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (SMARA) and the corresponding sections of the California Code of Regulations. It is the intent of the town council to provide for the reclamation of disturbed lands, and to eliminate hazards to public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. 00-11 § 1(part), 2000)  
8.24.020 - Definitions. 
Definitions and applicable provisions contained in SMARA and in the corresponding sections of the California Code of Regulations are incorporated herein by reference. The following definitions are also applicable to the provisions of this chapter: 
"Abandoned or abandonment" means the cessation of resource development activities prior to completion of required reclamation or the cessation of resource development activities whether or not actual reclamation has commenced, or both. Nonuse shall in and of itself constitute abandonment; however, nonuse for more than twelve consecutive months without filing an interim management plan shall create a rebuttable presumption of intent to abandon. Geothermal well abandonment is the discontinued, nonoperative condition of a well as determined and defined by the California Division of Oil and Gas on nonfederal lands and by the Bureau of Land Management on federal lands. 
"Expansion of resource development activities" means any substantial increase in the size or scope of a resource development activity. Expansion includes, without limitation, any resource development activities beyond the boundaries defined in an approved reclamation plan. 
"Idle" means to curtail, for a period of one year or more, surface mining operations by more than ninety percent of the operation's previous maximum annual mineral production, with the written intent to resume those surface mining operations at a future date. 
"Mined lands" means the surface, subsurface, and groundwater of an area in which resource development activities will be, are being, or have been conducted, including those private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from, or are used in, resource development activities are situated. 
"Minerals" means any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances, including, but not limited to, coal, peat, and bituminous rock, but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas, and petroleum. 
"Operator" means any person who is engaged in resource development activities himself, or who contracts with others to conduct operations on his behalf, except a person who is engaged in surface resource development activities as an employee, with wages as his sole compensation. 
"Reclamation" means the combined processes of land treatment that minimize water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from resource development activities, including surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that disturbed lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and creates no danger to public health and safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding disturbed lands, and may require grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures. 
"Reclamation plan" means the plan approved by the town for reclaiming the lands disturbed by resource development or exploration activities. 
"Resource development activities" means projects which propose to utilize or develop natural resources. Resource development activities include, but are not limited to, the following: (a) geothermal exploration and development projects; (b) surface mining operations; (c) hydroelectric, wind or solar power facilities; (d) oil and gas exploration and development projects; and (e) timber production. 
"SMARA" means the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 as amended (Section 2710 et seq., of the Public Resources Code) and the corresponding sections of the California Code of Regulations, Title 14. 
"State geologist" means the individual holding that office created by Section 667, Article 3, Chapter 2 of Division 1 of the Public Resources Code, or his designate. 
"Surface mining operations" means all, or any part of, the process involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open pit mining of minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work incidental to an underground mine. Surface operations shall include, but are not limited to: 
1.  In place distillation or retorting or leaching; 
2.  The production and disposal of mining waste; 
3.  Prospecting and exploratory activities. 
In addition, borrow pitting, streambed skimming, segregation and stockpiling of mined materials (and recovery of same) are also deemed to be surface mining operations unless specifically excluded in conformance with Vested Surface Mining Operation. A person shall be deemed to have obtained "vested" rights when sufficient documentation has been submitted to the community development director and town attorney to indicate that prior to January 1, 1976, he or she has, in good faith and in reliance on a permit or other authorization, if a permit or other authorization was required, diligently commenced surface mining operations and incurred substantial liabilities for work and materials therefore. The operator may also be required to submit documentation indicating that no substantial changes have occurred in the operation since January 1, 1976, except for those changes that were in conformance with applicable regulations in effect at the time of the change. Expenses incurred in obtaining the enactment of an ordinance in relation to a particular operation or the issuance of a permit shall not be deemed liabilities for work and materials. Vesting shall be formally recognized by the planning commission at a public meeting and based upon the community development director's and town attorney's recommendation. 
(Ord. 01-02 (Exh. A (part), 2001: Ord. 00-11 § 1(part), 2000)  
8.24.030 - Reclamation. 
A.  Filing. 
1.  Submittal. The reclamation plan shall be submitted to the planning division on forms supplied by the planning division. Reclamation plan submittals must be complete, containing all information required by the applicable department to justify findings for approval or disapproval, and for surface mining operations, all information required in conformance with applicable provisions of SMARA. 
B.  Procedure. 
1.  Processing. Within thirty days after receipt of a reclamation plan submittal, the community development director or his delegate shall review the submittal and shall notify the applicant or his designated representative, in writing, concerning any deficiencies. 
a.  Reclamation plan submittals shall be deemed complete, unless the applicant or his designated representative has been notified in writing that the submittal is incomplete prior to the expiration of the thirty day review period. 
b.  Complete reclamation plan submittal shall be accepted and processed in accordance with applicable provisions of the town municipal code, CEQA and when applicable SMARA. Acceptance of a reclamation plan submittal by the planning division shall not constitute an indication of project approval. 
c.  Within thirty days of acceptance of an application for a reclamation plan as complete, the planning division shall notify the State Department of Conservation of the filing of the application(s). Whenever mining operations are proposed in the one hundred year flood plain of any stream, as shown in Zone A of the Flood Insurance Rate Maps issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and within one mile, upstream or downstream of any state highway bridge, the planning division shall also notify the State Department of Transportation that the application has been received. 
d.  Upon determination of completeness, the town shall process the application through environmental review pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CECIA) and the Town of Mammoth Lakes Environmental Handbook. The town shall also notify all affected agencies and individuals of the proposed plan. Upon close of the public comment period, the town shall prepare a staff report to the planning commission and set the matter for a public hearing. Said hearing shall be noticed in accordance with the town Municipal Code Section 17.56.070. 
e.  The State Department of Conservation shall be given thirty days to review and comment on the reclamation plan and forty-five days to review and comment on the financial assurance. The planning commission shall evaluate written comments received, if any, from the State Department of Conservation during the comment periods. Copies of any written comments received and responses prepared by the town shall be prompt1y forwarded to the operator/applicant. 
f.  The planning commission shall hold at least one noticed public hearing on the application. The planning commission shall then take action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the reclamation plan and to approve the financial assurances. 
g.  The planning division shall forward a coy of each approved reclamation plan and a copy of the approved financial assurances to the State Department of Conservation. By July 1 of each year, the planning division shall submit to the State Department of Conservation for each active or isle mining operation a copy of the reclamation plan amendments, as applicable or a statement that there have been no changes during the previous year. 
2.  Simultaneous Processing. Simultaneous Processing: In the event that an application for a use permit or mining operations permit and a reclamation plan pertaining to the same project are submitted for approval at the same time, review and processing of the reclamation plan may occur simultaneously with that of the resource use permit application. The issuance of a use permit or mining operations permit shall be predicated on the approval of a reclamation plan in conformance with this chapter. 
3.  Approval. The planning commission may approve or conditionally approve a reclamation plan only when all of the following findings can be made: 
a.  That the reclamation plan complies with the provisions of CEQA and SMARA; 
b.  That the reclamation plan is consistent with the objectives and policies set forth in the general plan and any applicable area or specific plans; 
c.  That appropriate conditions have been imposed to insure and verify that the site during and after reclamation will not cause a public hazard, nor be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare; 
d.  That an approved end use has been identified and that the reclamation of the site shall be finally completed as soon as is feasible, considering the particular circumstances of the site to be reclaimed, and that the plan provides for concurrent reclamation, where appropriate and feasible; 
e.  That the reclamation plan conforms to minimum verifiable performance standards established in this chapter and, in the case of surface mining operations, meets or exceeds the minimum, verifiable statewide reclamation standards adopted by the State Mining and Geology Board, and in the case of geothermal well abandonment, conforms to the requirements and guidelines of the California Division of Oil and Gas on nonfederal lands, and the Bureau of Land Management on federal lands; 
f.  That the estimated code of the reclamation reasonably approximates the probable cost of performing the reclamation work as proposed in the plan and that adequate surety (consistent with applicable provisions of SMARA for surface mining operations) will be posted to ensure completion of the required reclamation; and 
g.  That the person or entity responsible for reclamation plan compliance has a public liability insurance policy in force for the duration of the reclamation which provides for personal injury and property protection in an amount adequate to compensate all persons injured or for property damaged as a result of the proposed reclamation activities. 
C.  Plan Required. Prior to the conduct of surface mining operations, all persons shall have obtained from the town, a permit, a reclamation plan approval, and have posted an appropriate financial assurance as described herein. 
(Ord. 01-02 (Exh. A (part), 2001)); Ord. 00-11 § 1(part), 2000)  
8.24.040 - Amendments. 
A.  Minor Amendments to an Approved Reclamation Plan. 
1.  Minor Amendment. Minor changes to an approved reclamation plan may be approved by the community development director, using the director review with notice process, in accordance with the following provisions. 
2.  Processing. Requests for approval of a minor amendment shall be submitted on forms provided by the planning division, along with the applicable fees. Within thirty days of receipt of such a request, the Director shall determine whether or not the application should be considered a minor amendment. The director shall approve or deny the request and notify the applicant in writing within ten days of his decision. The decision of the director as to whether or not the request should be approved or denied shall be final, unless an appeal is filed. If it is determined that the request is not a minor amendment, the request may be processed as a major amendment. 
3.  Requests for a minor amendment may be approved only if the director is able to make all of the following findings: 
a.  That the proposed change involves only minor changes in dimensions, volumes, or timing of the reclamation plan and will not affect the basic character or implementation of the reclamation plan; 
b.  No substantial adverse environmental damage, either on-site or off-site, will result from the proposed change and the proposed change is consistent with adopted environmental determinations; 
c.  That the proposed change will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and is compatible with the objectives and policies of the general plan, applicable area or specific plans and the land use designation or approval end land use of the site. 
B.  Major Amendments to an Approved Reclamation Plan. Major amendments to approved reclamation plans may be approved by the planning commission subject to the following provisions. 
1.  Applications for proposed amendments shall be submitted on forms provided by the planning division and shall include such data as may be required to complete an environmental assessment. Applications shall include the required filing fee, and shall be noticed and scheduled for public hearing before the planning commission in the same manner as the original reclamation plan submittal. 
2.  Amendments may be approved by the planning commission only if all of the following findings can be made: 
a.  The proposed amendments are necessary or desirable to assure a more practical recovery of the resource or to avoid multiple future disturbances of surface land or waters; 
b.  No substantial adverse environmental damage, either on-site or off-site, will result from the proposed change and the proposed change is consistent with adopted environmental determinations; 
c.  The security required to be filed by the applicant with the town is adequate or additional security has been filed to guarantee compliance with the revised reclamation plan; 
d.  The reclamation plan, as amended, will continue to meet the requirements of this chapter and will be conducted in conformity with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations of all agencies with jurisdiction over the resource development project; 
e.  The approval of the amendment will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare and is compatible with the objectives and policies of the general plan, applicable area or specific plans and the land use designation or approved end land use of the site. 
(Ord. 00-11 § 1(part), 2000)  
8.24.050 - Reclamation standards. 
A.  All reclamation plans must conform with all applicable provisions of the following minimum verifiable standards. The standards shall apply to each project to the extent that they are consistent with required mitigation for the project (as identified in the environmental documents for the project), provided that such mitigation is at least as stringent as the standards, and they are consistent with the approved or actual subsequent use or uses of the reclaimed site. 
B.  Where an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the town that an exception to the standards specified in this chapter is necessary based upon the approved end use, the planning commission may approve a different standard for inclusion in the approved reclamation plan. Where the town allows such an exception, the approved reclamation plan shall specify verifiable, site-specific standards for reclamation. 
C.  When substantial amendments are proposed to reclamation plans which were approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the standards set forth in this chapter shall be applied by the town in approving or denying the amended reclamation plan. 
D.  The standards in this chapter shall not apply to projects: 
1.  Which completed reclamation prior to October 18, 2000, in conformance with an approved reclamation plan; or 
2.  For which a reclamation plan has been approved prior to July 14, 2000 provided, however that any revisions to such previously adopted plans shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and SMARA. 
E.  The following definitions, in addition to those in Chapter 17.08 and Chapter 12.08 of this code, shall govern the interpretation of these standards: 
1.  "Arid" means landscapes with an average annual precipitation of five inches or less. 
2.  "Indigenous plants" means plants occurring naturally in an area, not introduced. 
3.  "Native species" means plant species indigenous to California, using pre-European as the historic time reference. 
4.  "Vegetative cover" means the vertical projection of the crown or shoot area of a species to the ground surface expressed as a percentage of the reference area (percentage can be greater than one hundred percent). 
5.  "Vegetative density" means the number of individuals or stems of each species rooted within the given reference area. 
6.  "Vegetative species-richness" means the number of different plant species within the given reference area. 
7.  "Wetlands" means lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. For purposes of these regulations, wetlands must have one or more of the following attributes: (a) at least periodically, the land supports predominantly hydrophytes; (b) the substrate is predominantly undrained hydric soil; and (c) the substrate is non-soil and is saturated with water or covered by shallow water at some time during the growing season of each year. 
F.  Performance Standards. 
1.  Wildlife and wildlife habitat shall be protected in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Rare, threatened or endangered species or species of special concern, as defined by the California Department of Fish and Game, U.S. Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management, or the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and their respective habitat shall be conserved as prescribed by the federal Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C. Section 1531, and the California Endangered Species Act, Fish and Game Code Section 1900, et seq. If avoidance cannot be achieved through the available alternatives, mitigation shall be proposed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the California Department of Fish and Game, U.S. Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and other applicable agencies. 
b.  Wildlife habitat shall be established on disturbed lands in a condition similar to or better than that which existed before the lands were disturbed, unless the proposed end use precludes its use as wildlife habitat or the approved reclamation plan establishes a different habitat type than that which existed prior to disturbance. 
c.  Wetland habitat shall be avoided. Any wetland habitat impacted as a consequence of resource development activities shall be mitigated at a minimum of a one-to-one ratio for wetland habitat acreage and wetland habitat value. 
2.  Backfilling, Regrading, Slope Stability, and Recontouring. Backfilling, regrading, slope stabilization, and recontouring shall conform with the following standards: 
a.  All landform contours on a proposed mining site shall be accurately mapped prior to any surface or subsurface disturbance. 
b.  Where backfilling is proposed for urban uses (e.g., roads, building sites, or other improvements sensitive to settlement), the fill material shall be compacted in accordance with the Uniform Building Code, town municipal code Chapter 12.08 (Land Clearing, Earthwork, and Drainage Facilities), or other methods approved by the town as appropriate for the approved end use. 
c.  Where backfilling is required for resource conservation purposes (e.g., agriculture, fish and wildlife habitat, and wildland conservation), fill material shall be backfilled to the standards required for the resource conservation use involved. 
d.  Piles or dumps of waste material, such as mining waste, shall be stockpiled in such a manner as to facilitate phased reclamation. They shall be segregated from topsoil and topsoil substitutes or growth media salvaged for use in reclamation. 
e.  Final reclaimed fill slopes, including permanent piles or dumps of mine waste rock and overburden, shall not exceed 2:1 (horizontal:vertical), except where site-specific geologic and engineering analyses demonstrate that the proposed final slope will have a minimum slope stability factor of safety that is suitable for the approved end use, and when the proposed final slope can be successfully revegetated. 
f.  At closure, all fill slopes, including permanent piles or dumps of mine waste and overburden, shall conform with the surrounding topography, and/or approved end use. 
g.  Cut slopes, including final high walls and quarry faces, shall have a minimum slope stability factor of safety that is suitable for the proposed end use and that conforms with the surrounding topography and/or approved end use. 
h.  Permanent placement of piles of dumps of waste material, such as mining waste and overburden, shall not occur within wetlands unless mitigation accepted by the lead agency has been approved to offset wetland impacts and/or losses. 
3.  Revegetation. Revegetation shall be part of the approved plan, unless it is not consistent with the approved end use. 
a.  A vegetative cover suitable for the approved end use and capable of self-regeneration without continued dependence on irrigation, soil amendments, or fertilizer shall be established on disturbed lands unless an artificially maintained landscape is consistent with the approved reclamation plan. Vegetative cover density and species-richness shall be, where appropriate, sufficient to stabilize the surface against effects of long-term erosion and shall be similar to naturally occurring habitats in the surrounding area. The vegetative density, cover and species-richness of naturally occurring habitats shall be documented in baseline studies carried out prior to the initiation of resource development activities. 
b.  Test plots conducted simultaneously with resource development activities shall be required to determine the most appropriate planting procedures to be followed to ensure successful implementation of the proposed revegetation plan. The town may waive the requirement to conduct test plots when the success of the proposed revegetation plan can be documented from experience with similar species and conditions or by relying on competent professional advice based on experience with the species to be planted. 
c.  Where resource development activities result in compaction of the soil, ripping, dishing, or other means shall be used in areas to be revegetated to eliminate compaction and to establish a suitable root zone in preparation for planting. 
d.  Prior to closure, all access roads, haul roads, and other traffic routes to be reclaimed shall be stripped of any remaining road base materials, prepared in accordance with subsection (F)(3)(g) of this section, covered with suitable growth media or topsoil, and revegetated. 
e.  Soil analysis shall be required to determine the presence or absence of elements essential for plant growth and to determine those soluble elements that may be toxic to plants, if the soil has been chemically altered or if the growth media consists of other than the native topsoil. If soil analysis suggested that fertility levels or soil constituents are inadequate to successfully implement the revegetation program, fertilizer or other soil amendments may be incorporated into the soil. When native plant materials are used, preference shall be given to slow-release fertilizers, including mineral and organic materials that mimic natural sources, and shall be added in amounts similar to those found in reference soils under natural vegetation of the type being reclaimed. 
f.  Temporary access for exploration or other short-term uses on arid lands shall not disrupt the soil surface except where necessary to gain safe access. Barriers shall be installed when necessary to prevent unauthorized vehicular traffic from interfering with the reclamation of temporary access routes. 
g.  Indigenous plant species shall be used for revegetation, except when introduced species are necessary to meet the end uses specified in the approved reclamation plan. Areas to be developed for industrial, commercial, or residential uses shall be revegetated for the interim period, as necessary, to control erosion. In this circumstance, non-indigenous plant species may be used if they are not noxious weeks and if they are species known not to displace indigenous species in the area. 
h.  Planting shall be conducted during the most favorable period of the year for plant establishment. 
i.  Soil stabilizing practices shall be used where necessary to control erosion and for successful plant establishment. Irrigation may be used when necessary to establish vegetation. 
j.  If irrigation is used, the operator must demonstrate that the vegetation has been self-sustaining without irrigation for up to five years prior to release of the financial assurances by the town, unless an artificially maintained landscape is consistent with the end use. 
k.  Weeds, as defined by the soil conservation service, or the town agricultural commissioner, or the California Native Plant Society, shall be managed: (1) when they threaten the success of the proposed revege- tation; and (2) to prevent spreading to nearby areas; and (3) to eliminate fire hazard. 
l.  Protection measures, such as fencing of revegetated areas and/or the placement of cages over individual plants, shall be used in areas where grazed herbivore, or other causes threaten the success of the proposed re- vegetation. Fencing shall be maintained until revegetation efforts are successfully completed and the town authorizes removal. 
m.  Success of revegetation shall be judged based upon the effectiveness of the vegetation for the approved end use, and by comparing the quantified measures of vegetative cover, density, and species-richness of the reclaimed lands to similar parameters of naturally occurring vegetation in the area. Either baseline data or data from nearby reference areas may be used as the standard for comparison. Quantitative standards for success and the location(s) of the reference area(s) shall be set forth in the approved reclamation plan. Comparisons shall be made until performance standards are met provided that, during the last two years, there has been no human intervention, including for example, irrigation, fertilization, or weeding. Standards for success shall be based on expected local recovery rates. Valid sampling techniques for measuring success shall be specified in the approved reclamation plan. Sample sizes must be sufficient to produce at least an eighty percent confidence level. 
4.  Drainage, Diversion Structures, Waterways, and Erosion Control. 
a.  Reclamation activities shall be conducted to protect on-site and downstream beneficial uses of water in accordance with the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, Water Code Section 13000 et seq., and the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq. 
b.  The quality of water, recharge potential, and storage capacity of groundwater aquifers shall not be diminished, except as allowed in the approved reclamation plan. 
c.  Erosion and sedimentation shall be controlled during all phases of construction, operation, reclamation, and closure of an operation to minimize siltation of lakes and watercourses, as required by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, the State Water Resources Control Board, and the Mammoth Lakes grading ordinance. 
d.  Surface runoff and drainage shall be controlled by berms, silt fences, sediment ponds, revegetation, hay bales, or other erosion control measures, to ensure that surrounding land and water resources are protected from erosion, gullying, sedimentation, and contamination. Erosion control methods shall be designed to handle run-off from not less than the twenty year/one-hour intensity storm event. 
e.  Where natural drainages are covered, restricted, rerouted or otherwise impacted, mitigating alternatives shall be proposed and specifically approved in the reclamation plan to assure that runoff shall not cause increased erosion or sedimentation. 
f.  When stream diversions are required, they shall be constructed in accordance with: 
1.  Applicable stream and lake alteration agreements between the operator and the Department of Fish and Game; and 
2.  The requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act, Sections 301 (33 U.S.C. Section 1311) and 404 (33 U.S.C. Section 1344) and/or Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act. 
g.  When no longer needed to achieve the purpose for which they were authorized, all temporary stream channel diversions shall be removed and the affected land reclaimed. 
5.  Prime Agricultural Land and Reclamation. In addition to the standards for topsoil salvage, maintenance, and redistribution, the following standards shall apply to operations on prime agricultural lands where the approved end use is agriculture: 
a.  Resource development activities which will operate on prime agricultural lands, as defined by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service, shall return all disturbed areas to a fertility level as specified in the approved reclamation plan. 
b.  When distinct soil horizons are present, topsoil shall be salvaged and segregated by defined A, B, and C soil horizons. Upon reconstruction of the soil, the sequence of horizons shall have the A atop the B, the B atop the C, and the C atop graded overburden. 
c.  Reclamation shall be deemed complete when productive capability of the affected land is equivalent to or exceeds, for two consecutive crop years, that of the pre-disturbance condition or similar crop production in the area. Productivity rates, based on reference areas described in the approved reclamation plan, shall be specified in the approved reclamation plan. 
d.  Use of fertilizers or other soil amendments shall not cause contamination of surface or groundwater. 
6.  Other Agricultural Land. The following standards shall apply to agricultural lands, other than prime agricultural lands, when the approved end use is agriculture. 
a.  In addition to the standards for topsoil salvage, maintenance, and redistribution, non-prime agricultural lands shall be reclaimed so as to be capable of sustaining economically viable production of crops commonly grown in the surrounding areas. 
7.  Building, Structure, and Equipment Removal. 
a.  All equipment, supplies, and other materials shall be stored in designated areas (as shown in the approved reclamation plan). All waste shall be disposed of in accordance with state and local health and safety ordinances. 
b.  All buildings, structures, and equipment shall be dismantled and removed prior to final site closure except those buildings, structures, and equipment approved in the reclamation plan as necessary for the end use. 
8.  Water Resources Protection, Including Surface and Groundwater. 
a.  Surface and groundwater shall be protected from siltation and pollutants which may diminish water quality as required by the Federal Clean Water Act, Sections 301 et seq., (33 U.S.C. Section 1311), 404 et seq., (33 U.S.C. Section 1344), the Porter-Cologne Act, Section 13000 et seq., the Lahontan Regional Water Quality Control Board or the State Water Resources Control Board. 
b.  In-stream surface mining operations shall be conducted in compliance with Section 1603 of the California Fish and Game Code, Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, and Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act. 
c.  Surface mining activities in stream or river channels shall be regulated to control channel degradation in order to prevent undermining of bridge supports, exposure of pipelines or other structures buried within the channel, loss of spawning habitat, lowering of groundwater levels, destruction of riparian vegetation, and increased stream bank erosion (exceptions may be specified in the approved reclamation plan). Changes in channel elevations and bank erosion shall be evaluated annually using records of annual extraction quantities and benchmarked annual cross sections and/or sequential aerial photographs to determine appropriate extraction locations and rates. 
d.  In accordance with requirements of the Department of Fish and Game, in-stream mining activities shall not cause fish to become entrapped in pools or in off-channel pits, nor shall they restrict spawning or migratory activities. 
9.  Topsoil Salvage, Maintenance and Redistribution. When the approved reclamation plan calls for revegetation or cultivation of disturbed lands, the following performance standards shall apply to topsoil salvage, maintenance, and redistribution activities: 
a.  All salvageable topsoil suitable for revegetation shall be removed as a separate layer from areas to be disturbed. Topsoil and vegetation removal shall not precede development activities by more than one year, unless a longer time period is approved by the town. 
b.  Topsoil resources shall be mapped prior to stripping and the location of topsoil stockpiles shall be shown on a map in the reclamation plan. If the amount of topsoil needed to cover all surfaces to be revegetated is not available on-site, other suitable material capable of sustaining vegetation (such as subsoil) shall be removed as a separate layer for use as a suitable growth media. Topsoil and suitable growth media shall be maintained in separate stockpiles. Test plots may be required to determine the suitability of growth media for revegetation purposes. 
c.  Soil salvage operations and phases of reclamation shall be carried out in accordance with a schedule that: (1) is set forth in the approved reclamation plan; (2) minimizes the area disturbed; and (3) is designed to achieve maximum revegetation success allowed under the mining plan. 
d.  Topsoil and suitable growth media shall be used to phase reclamation as soon as can be accommodated by the operations schedule presented in the approved reclamation plan. Topsoil and suitable growth media that cannot be utilized immediately for reclamation shall be stockpiled in an area where it will not be disturbed until needed for reclamation. Topsoil and suitable growth media stockpiles shall be clearly identified to distinguish them from waste dumps. Topsoil and suitable growth media stockpiles shall be planted with a vegetative cover or shall be protected by other equally effective measures to prevent water and wind erosion and to discourage weeds. Relocation of topsoil or suitable growth media stockpiles for purposes other than reclamation shall require prior written approval from the town. 
e.  Topsoil and suitable growth media shall be redistributed in a manner that results in a stable, uniform thickness consistent with the approved end use, site configuration, and drainage patterns. 
10.  Tailing and Waste Management. 
a.  State Water Resources Control Board mine waste disposal regulations in Article 7 of Chapter 15 of the Title 23, California Code of Regulations, shall govern mine waste and tailings, and mine waste disposal units shall be reclaimed in conformance with this chapter. 
b.  Geothermal drilling waste and cuttings shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the Lahontan Regional Water Quality Board. 
11.  Closure of Surface Openings. 
a.  Except those used solely for blasting or those that will be mined through within one year, all drill holes, water wells, and monitoring wells shall be completed or abandoned in accordance with each of the following: 
1.  California Water Code Sections 13700 et seq., and 13800 et seq.; 
2.  The applicable local ordinance adopted pursuant to Water Code Section 13803; 
3.  The applicable Department of Water Resources report issued pursuant to Water Code Section 13800; and 
4.  Subdivisions (1) and (2) of Section 2511 (g) of Chapter 15 of Title 23 regarding discharge of waste to land. 
b.  Prior to closure, all portals, shafts, tunnels, or other surface openings to underground workings shall be gated or otherwise protected from public entry in order to eliminate any threat to public safety and to preserve access for wildlife habitat. 
c.  All geothermal wells shall be completed or abandoned in accordance with the California Division of Oil and Gas if located on nonfederal land or with the Bureau of Land Management if located on federal land. 
(Ord. 01-02 (Exh. A (part)), 2001: Ord. 00-11 § 1(part), 2000)  
8.24.060 - Vested surface mining operations. 
The reclamation plan required pursuant to this chapter shall apply to "vested" surface mining operations conducted after January 1, 1976. 
Where a person with a vested right has continued surface mining operations in the same area subsequent to January 1, 1976, he shall obtain approval of a reclamation plan, in conformance with applicable provisions of this chapter, covering the mined lands disturbed by such subsequent surface mining operations. In those cases where an overlap exists (in the horizontal or vertical sense) between pre- and post- January 1, 1976, surface mining operations, the reclamation plan shall call of reclamation proportional to that disturbance caused by the surface mining operation after January 1, 1976. 
(Ord. 00-11 § 1(part), 2000)  
8.24.070 - Idle mine status. 
A.  Interim Management Plan. Within ninety days of a surface mining operation becoming idle, the operator shall submit to the planning department for review and approval, an interim management plan. The interim management plan shall describe, in detail, measures the operator will implement to maintain the site in compliance with conditions specified in the use permit and with standards specified in the approved reclamation plan. 
B.  Term of Plan. The interim management plan may remain in effect for a period not to exceed five years, at which time the town shall do one of the following: 
1.  Renew the interim management plan for an additional period not to exceed five years, provided the town finds that the operator has complied fully with the interim management plan; or 
2.  Require the operator to commence reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. 
C.  Financial Assurances. Financial assurances required by this chapter shall remain in effect during the period the operation is idle. 
D.  Interim Management Plan Approval. The receipt of an interim management plan shall be considered and processed as an amendment to the approved reclamation plan in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter. As specified in SMARA, the review and approval of an interim management plan for a surface mining operation shall not be considered a project under CEQA. 
E.  The operator of a resource development activity which has been abandoned for a period of more than twelve months shall be subject to revocation of the approved use permit and be required to commence reclamation in accordance with the approved plan. 
(Ord. 01-02 (ExH.A 9Part)), 2001; Ord. 00-11 § 1(part), 2000)  
8.24.080 - Annual inspections. 
A.  Inspections Required. Resource development activities shall comply with the following inspection and reporting requirements: 
1.  The operator shall file a request for annual inspection with the planning division at least once in each calendar year. Request for annual inspections shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee, and, for surface mining operations, shall coincide with the dates for annual SMARA inspections. 
2.  The planning division shall inspect or cause to be inspected the site within thirty working days of receipt of the written report, filing fee, and application for inspection. 
3.  Inspections may be made by a state-registered geologist, state-registered civil engineer, state-licensed landscape architect or state-registered forester, who is experienced in land reclamation and who has not been employed by the mining operation in any capacity during the previous twelve months, or other qualified specialists as selected by the community development director. All inspections shall be conducted using a form approved and provided by the State Mining and Geology Board. The community development department shall notify the State Department of Conservation within thirty days of completion of the inspection that said inspection has been conducted, and shall forward a copy of said inspection notice and any supporting documentation to the mining operator. The operator shall be solely responsible for the reasonable cost of such inspection. 
(Ord. 01-02 (Exh. A (part)), 2001; Ord. 00-11 § 1(part), 2000)  
8.24.090 - Administration. 
A.  Appeals. Appeals of any decision pertaining to reclamation plans may be made in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 17.68 of the Municipal Code. 
B.  Fees. Fees required in conjunction with the provisions of this chapter shall be established from time top time by the town council. 
C.  Public Records and Proprietary Information. Reclamation plan submittals, interim management plans, and other documents submitted in support of this chapter are public records unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the town that the release of such information, or part thereof, would reveal reserves, production, or rates of depletion entitled to protection as proprietary information. The operation shall identify such proprietary information as a separate part of the application, and such proprietary information shall be made available only to persons authorized in writing by the operator to receive such proprietary information, and for surface mining operations to the State Geologist. 
D.  Successor in Interest. Whenever any resource development activity or portion of such an operation is sold, assigned, conveyed, exchanged, or otherwise transferred, whether voluntarily or by operation of law, the original permittee as well as each successor in interest shall be bound by the provisions of any reclamation plan approved pursuant to the provision of this chapter, provided, however, that the original permittee or any successor in interest may be relieved from all liability for completing the reclamation by action of the town council if, after application to the council, it is determined that the current owner has posted adequate security to ensure completion of all remaining reclamation. 
(Ord. 00-11 § 1(part), 2000)  
8.24.100 - Surety requirements. 
A.  Surety. 
1.  Surety Required. The operator, mine owner, or land owner shall be required to execute an agreement and to provide adequate and acceptable surety, made payable to the town and the department of conservation as required by the California Public Resources Code, guaranteeing compliance with the approved reclamation plan. This requirement shall be satisfied prior to commencing any on-site resource development activity and liability shall continue until all reclamation work required by the reclamation plan has been concluded and accepted by the town. 
2.  Continued Liability. In addition, the operator or person responsible for final reclamation shall have a continued liability to guarantee the continued viability of the reclamation effort not to exceed five growing seasons following the conclusion and acceptance of reclamation by the town. This liability shall begin anew whenever reclamation efforts fail to meet the reclamation plan performance standards and additional reclamation is required. The minimum security to be retained to guarantee the continued viability of the reclamation effort shall be as follows: 
a.  If the security guarantees the cost of all reclamation, ten percent of the aggregate cost of all reclamation; or 
b.  If the security was posted in conformance with a phased reclamation program any other method acceptable to the town that ensures the continued viability of the reclamation effort. 
3.  Insurance. The operator shall maintain, to the satisfaction of the town and for the life of the reclamation plan, liability insurance of not less than five hundred thousand dollars for one person and one million dollars for all persons and two million dollars for property damage, or other amounts adopted by the town. This requirement would not preclude the operator from being self-insured. 
4.  Form of Surety. The security required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter shall be made payable to the town and the department of conservation as required by the California Public Resources Code; shall be subject to review and approval by the town; and shall be in the form of one of the following: 
a.  Surety bonds; 
b.  Irrevocable letters of credit; 
c.  Trust funds; 
d.  For surface mining operations, other forms of financial assurance as may be specified by the State Board of Mines and Geology. 
5.  Surety Adjustments. The amount of financial assurances required by this chapter may be adjusted annually by the town in consideration of information provided in the annual inspection report. Adjustments shall take into consideration, but not be limited to, new lands disturbed, inflation, prior compliance, and reclamation accomplished in accordance with the approved plan. 
6.  Prior Surety Approvals. If a surface mining operation and/or reclamation plan has received approval of its financial assurances prior to January 1, 1991, from a public/federal agency other than the town of Mammoth Lakes, the town shall deem those financial assurances adequate for the purposes of this chapter, or shall credit them toward fulfillment of financial assurances required by this chapter. 
B.  Release of Surety. 
1.  Acceptance. The operator shall file a request for final inspection with the town, accompanied by the appropriate filing fee. No reclamation or phase of reclamation shall be deemed accepted until the work has been inspected and approved and a certificate of acceptance has been executed by the town and filed with the town council. 
2.  Inspection. Within sixty days after the town has received a request for final inspection for completion of reclamation, or any phase of reclamation, the town shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, the subject area. The town shall then file the certificate of acceptance or shall notify the operator, in writing, of any items that are found to be inconsistent with the approved reclamation plan. 
3.  Release of Bond. Thirty days after the town files the certificate of acceptance with the town council, unless otherwise directed by the town council, the town shall release the surety. 
(Ord. 01-02 (Exh. A (part)), 2001; Ord. 00-11 § 1(part), 2000)  
8.24.110 - Enforcement. 
A.  Enforcement. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the town planning division or such other persons as may be designated by the town council. Enforcement of the provisions contained in this chapter shall be in accordance with applicable provisions of this code. 
B.  Right of Entry. Whenever it becomes necessary to inspect resource development activities as provided in this chapter or to investigate complaints associated with resource development activities or to monitor conditions of approval as may be imposed on resource development activities, reasonable access to the project site shall be afforded by the operator. Authorized representatives of the town, upon presentation of appropriate credentials shall have access to the site without advance notice. 
(Ord. 00-11 § 1(part), 2000)  
Chapter 8.26 - MINING OPERATIONS 
Sections: 
 
8.26.010 - Declaration of findings. 
The town council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  The town of Mammoth Lakes is endowed with a variety of valuable natural resources, including but not limited to gravel and gold, which have periodically been the subject of mining throughout Mammoth Lake's history. 
B.  The town is also endowed with a pristine and beautiful natural environment, whose forests, lakes, streams, and mountains are home to diverse flora, fauna, and ecosystems, and the site of numerous recreational and scenic attractions. 
C.  The town is obligated and committed by its own general plan, municipal code, and state laws such as the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) to ensuring that the environment is adequately protected, to the extent the town possesses the legal authority to do so. 
D.  The town has land use and zoning authority over private lands within the town and over certain lands owned by state and local government agencies. The vast majority of real property in the town, however, is public land owned by the federal government and administered by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, acting through the U.S. Forest Service. 
E.  The Federal Mining Act of 1872 (30 U.S.C. §§ 21 et seq.) confers certain rights to explore the public lands for valuable mineral deposits and provides that the "locators" of such deposits shall have the exclusive right to extract those minerals if they comply with federal law and state and local laws that do not conflict with federal law. (See 30 U.S.C. § 26.) 
F.  The United States Supreme Court and other courts, have held, in cases such as California Coastal Commission vs. Granite Rock Co., 480 U.S. 572 (1987), that state and local laws that impose and require compliance with reasonable regulatory requirements designed to protect the environment are not preempted by the Mining Act as long as they do not act as a de facto ban on mining or otherwise act as a "clear obstacle" to the accomplishment of the congressional purposes and objectives embodied in the Mining Act. 
G.  Accordingly, this chapter is intended to establish, through a purely environmental (non-land use) permit process, legally permissible regulatory requirements designed to protect the environment of the town, and not to create a de facto ban on mining or create a clear obstacle to accomplishing the objectives of the Mining Act. 
H.  The town is a lead agency for purposes of the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (Section 2710 et seq., of the California Public Resources Code). Mining operations on all land in the town, including public land, are already subject to the town's reclamation ordinance, codified in Chapter 8.24. This chapter does not amend that certified ordinance, nor does it impose reclamation requirements. It is intended solely as an exercise of the town's constitutional authority to make and enforce within its limits all ordinances not in conflict with general laws. (California Constitution, Article XI, Sec. 7.) 
I.  Methods of processing that use hazardous chemicals, such as mercury, cyanide and cyanide compounds, breakdown products of cyanide, and sulfuric acid, are of especially grave concern to the residents and the town council of the town of Mammoth Lakes due to their potential to cause damage to the environment, including but not limited to streams, lakes, groundwater, air, flora, and fauna. Anecdotal and scientific evidence of such potential harm is detailed in various sources, including but not limited to publications, staff reports, and testimony that have been brought to the town council's attention. 
J.  The town council is unwilling to risk such damage to the town of Mammoth Lakes environment, and thus, by way of a rebuttable presumption established in this chapter, declines to allow certain known hazardous chemicals to be used in connection with any processing activity in the town unless the use of the chemical in a given project can be shown by the project proponent, by substantial evidence, to have no significant adverse impact on the environment. 
K.  The enactment of this chapter is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) as either a non-project or as a class 7 or class 8 categorical exemption. 
(Ord. 00-11 § 2(part), 2000)  
8.26.020 - Definitions. 
Terms used in this chapter have the following meanings: 
"Acid mine drainage" means the natural process through which sulfuric acid is created by the exposure of iron sulfide minerals in mined metal ores to oxygen in the air. 
"Average case scenario" means typical project operations under average conditions, with reasonably foreseeable environmental impacts. 
"Artificial" means occurring as a result of human design or activity, as opposed to natural activities and processes that occur regardless of any human involvement. 
"Benefication" means the process of liberating and concentrating a mineral from ore. 
"Best case scenario" means atypical project operations under better than average conditions, causing the least possible environmental impact. 
"Environmental contamination" means degradation of any aspect of the natural environment in and around a proposed extraction project, including but not limited to pollution of the air, soil, or surface or groundwater, and any associated harm caused to flora, fauna, or humans. 
"Exploratory extraction" means extraction conducted for the purpose of searching for or investigating a mineral deposit. It includes but is not limited to geophysical, geochemical, or geological surveying and sampling, drilling or rotary drilling of core and bore holes, and digging pits, trenches, or cuts and other works for the purpose of extracting samples prior to commencement of mine development or extraction operations, and the building of roads, access ways, and other facilities related to such work. 
"Exposed" means uncovered through extraction and put in direct physical contact with air, precipitation, and other atmospheric elements. 
"Extraction" means the artificial removal of solid (not liquid or gaseous), nonliving, and naturally-occurring substances from the surface or subsurface of the earth, including but not limited to rocks, sand, gravel, pumice, clay, salt, gold, silver, diamonds, or other minerals or gems. 
"Feasible" means achievable based on known scientific or engineering data and technology. Feasible does not mean the least expensive method nor the method necessary for an extraction or processing project to yield a profit in light of prevailing market prices for mined substances, except in the event that all other things are equal with respect to protecting the environmental, in which case the most cost-effective means may be deemed the most feasible. 
"Financial assurance" means, to the extent permitted by applicable state and federal law, bonds, escrowed funds, letters or credit, insurance, or other form of security provided to the town by a project proponent in an amount set by the planning commission (or town council in the event of an appeal) and in a form approved by the town attorney that will ensure sufficient funding for the clean up, restoration, or other remediation of any environmental damage caused by the project. 
"Groundwater" means all water beneath the surface of the earth within the zone at or below the water table in which the soil is completely saturated with water. 
"Hydrology" means the scientific study of the origin, distribution, and circulation of water through, among other things, precipitation, stream flow, infiltration, groundwater storage, and evaporation. 
"Immediate vicinity" means the geographic area surrounding a project site whose environment could foreseeably be impacted by a project. 
"In situ mining" means a method of processing in which chemical reagents are injected directly into the ground before extraction occurs. 
"Kinetic testing" refers to a method of testing in which a sample of mine waste is placed in a cylindrical chamber or other closed container and factors such as air, water, and bacteria are introduced into the chamber, allowing the impact of these factors on acid generation to be measured over time. 
"Mining" and "mining operations" mean extraction or processing or both, and all activities integral to such extraction or processing occurring in the town, including but not limited to the movement, transportation, loading, unloading, and other activity of vehicles, offices, buildings, facilities, equipment, structures, mined substances, materials, or personnel associated with extraction or processing. 
"Processing" means the artificial refinement, purification, beneficiation, adulteration, or other special treatment of rock ore and other extracted substances to separate valuable metals or other substances from nonvaluable materials such as soils and other impurities, examples of which include but are not limited to washing, flotation, aeration, electrification, gravity concentration, solvent extraction/electrowinning (SX/EW), magnetic separation, crushing, heating, smelting, soaking, leaching, spraying, grinding, sorting, or sifting. For purposes of this chapter, in situ mining shall be considered a form of processing rather than extraction. 
"Project" means a proposal, embodied in a permit applicable, to engage in extraction, processing, or other mining operations, as well as any resulting extraction, processing, or other mining activity. 
"Project proponent" means a party submitting a permit application under this chapter and assuming responsibility for that application, as well as that party's agents, representatives, successors, or assign (if any). 
"Scientific" means performed by an individual with expertise in a particular field of human knowledge, using generally accepted standards and methodologies for observing, identifying, objectifying, explaining, studying and describing phenomena in that field of knowledge. 
"Significant adverse environmental impact" has the meaning attributed to that term under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), as the same may be amended from time to time, and/or under any applicable CEQA guidelines, regulations, or case law. 
"Static testing" means the measuring of bulk amounts of acid-generating and acid-neutralizing material in samples of mined waste, expressed as numerical values, which are then compared to predict the likelihood that the waste will generate acid mine drainage. 
"Substantial evidence" has the meaning attributed to that term under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), as the same may be amended from time to time, and/or under any applicable CEQA guidelines, regulations, or case law. 
"Surface waters" refers to rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds, and other bodies of water existing on a constant or seasonal basis on the surface of the land. 
"Worst case scenario" means atypical project operations under worse than average conditions, where virtually everything that conceivably could go wrong does go wrong, causing the most adverse environmental impacts possible. 
(Ord. 00-11 § 2(part), 2000)  
8.26.030 - Permits required. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in extraction, processing, or other mining operations within the territorial boundaries of the town without processing at the time of such activity both of the following: (1) a reclamation plan (including financial assurance requirements) approved by the town in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (Section 2710 et seq., of the California Public Resources Code), the town of Mammoth Lakes general plan, and any applicable chapters of this code, and (2) either a mining operations permit issued in accordance with this chapter in the case of mining operations on land over which the town lacks full land use and zoning authority or a use permit issued in accordance with this code in the case of mining operations on land over which the town possesses full land use and zoning authority. Violations of this section constitute a misdemeanor and a public nuisance which may, in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies available to the town, be prosecuted and/or enjoined. 
(Ord. 00-11 § 2(part), 2000)  
8.26.040 - Processing with certain chemicals—Rebuttable presumption. 
It shall be and is rebuttably presumed that any proposed processing operation located above or adjacent to surface or groundwaters, or which could potentially impact such waters regardless of their location, that would use one or more of the following chemical as a processing agent poses an unreasonable risk of environmental harm due to the toxicity of such chemicals and their demonstrated potential to cause damage to the environment: mercury, cyanide or cyanide compounds, breakdown products of cyanide, or sulfuric acid. Use of such chemicals shall not be permitted as part of any processing operation unless the project applicant can demonstrate, by substantial evidence, based on reliable scientific or engineering data, that the proposed use of such chemicals in a given project will not, under any reasonable foreseeable scenario, cause significant adverse environmental impacts. Scenarios considered shall include but not be limited to best case, average case, and worst case scenarios, taking into account any environmental contamination reasonably foreseeable over time from both natural and artificial causes, including but not limited to spills, leaks, and other releases or discharges resulting from potential design or construction flaws or miscalculations (if any), foreseeable errors or negligence (if any) of processing operators, as well as rainfall, snowfall, snow melt, floods, fires, earthquakes, and other potential natural forces and events. 
(Ord. 00-11 § 2(part), 2000)  
8.26.050 - Mining operations permit procedure. 
A.  The Mammoth Lakes planning commission shall possess the authority to issue mining operations permits in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and to adopt such reasonable administrative regulations as it deems necessary and proper to implement this chapter, including but not limited to regulations establishing advisory committees to examine project applications and to provide reports and recommendations to the commission. Applications for mining operations permits shall be submitted to the Mammoth Lakes planning division on forms developed by that division. Such application forms shall, at a minimum, solicit detailed plans, specifications, studies, maps, and other information from applicants addressing the following: (a) the nature, estimated location, and physical and chemical characteristics of the substance(s) proposed to be extracted, exposed, or processed; (b) the location, duration, manner, and method of proposed extraction or processing activities; (c) the quantity of substances proposed to be mined or processed; (d) the estimated facilities, personnel, equipment, and vehicles that will be brought into or constructed with in the town to conduct or provide services related to the proposed extraction or processing; (e) the days of the week and times of the day when the proposed extraction or processing will foreseeably occur; (f) the manner or method by which personnel, equipment, mined substances, or any materials associated with the proposed extraction or processing will be moved, transported, or otherwise conveyed to, from, at, or around the extraction or processing site; (g) the quantity and source of any water proposed to be used in conjunction with the proposed extraction or processing; (h) the nature and source(s) of power, electrical or otherwise, that will be used at the site of the proposed extraction or processing; (i) the quantity, nature, and proposed means of disposing of any solid or liquid waste, including all mining waste, generated by the project; (j) the type and nature of any chemical reagents that will be used in processing and the manner and method by which such processing will be conducted; and (k) a description of any foreseeable extensions, continuations, or modifications of the proposed project. Submission of any of the foregoing information to the town as part of an application for a reclamation plan or amendment thereto with respect to a proposed extraction or processing project may, with the prior approval of the community development director, be incorporated by reference into an application for a mining operations permit under this chapter with respect to the same proposed project. 
B.  Upon receipt of a completed application, the town and its consultant(s) shall analyze and assess, at the applicant's cost, the potential adverse environmental impacts of the proposed extraction or processing operations in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and this chapter. Among other things, such analysis and assessment shall include, to the extent deemed relevant and appropriate by the community development director after performing an initial study under CEQA, in order to gather baseline data and to effectuate the intent of this chapter or CEQA: 
1.  Hydrological studies of any surface waters on the project property or within the runoff or drainage path of the project; 
2.  Biological studies regarding the nature and quantity of any species of fish, birds, reptiles, mammals, and other flora and fauna living in or dependent on such surface waters; 
3.  Studies regarding the potential impacts of the project on any natural habitats or ecosystems in the town; 
4.  Studies regarding the potential impacts of the project on human health in the town; 
5.  A hydrological determination of whether or not groundwater exists directly below or in the immediate vicinity of the site of the proposed extraction or processing; 
6.  To the extent groundwater is present, a detailed scientific analysis of the nature, quantity, locations, and properties of such water and a detailed analysis of soil, percolation, and drainage characteristics of the land on which the proposed extraction or processing will occur; 
7.  Hydrological studies of the sources of water that will be used by the project itself and the impacts of the project on such sources and documentation of the use of such water by other parties, including analysis of the degree and duration of the project's anticipated impact on such other water users for the life of the project and until reclamation is completed; 
8.  Hydrological studies regarding any erosion and sedimentation impacts likely to be associated with or caused by the project; 
9.  A geological determination of whether or not any notable sources of actual or potential seismic or volcanic activity exist below or in the immediate vicinity of the site of the proposed extraction or processing; 
10.  To the extent any notable sources of actual or potential seismic or volcanic activity are present, a detailed scientific analysis of the nature and characteristics of such sources and their foreseeable relationship to and effects, if any, upon the proposed project, including but not limited to any groundwater used by or otherwise impacted by the project; 
11.  Studies to determine the impacts of all project transport and vehicle movements on air quality, noise, road systems, and traffic; 
12.  Scientific studies regarding the potential for the project to cause or be subject to land subsidence and collapse, and the hydrological impacts of any such potential on the environment; 
13.  Hydrological studies examining the flooding and drainage potential and characteristics of the proposed project and site of extraction or processing and the foreseeable environmental effects such flooding and drainage may have on the site and on adjacent properties; 
14.  Scientific studies regarding the nature, quantity, and characteristics of any dust, gas, or other airborne substances likely to be generated or dispersed by the proposed project; 
15.  Studies regarding the nature, quantity, and characteristics of any nighttime lighting proposed to be used on the project; 
16.  Scientific studies regarding the nature, decibel level, and other pertinent characteristics of any noise or sound likely to be generated by the proposed project; 
17.  Scientific studies examining the probability, nature, and extent of environmental contamination, if any, that could foreseeably result from the project in best case, average case, and worst case scenarios, taking into account both natural and artificial causes of such contamination, including but not limited to spills, leaks, and other discharges resulting from design flaws, negligent design or construction, negligence of extraction or processing operators, as well as rainfall, snowfall, snow melt, floods, fires, earthquakes, and other potential natural forces and events; 
18.  Scientific studies determining whether or not items of archeological or cultural significance are present at the site and, if so, the degree to which they would be disturbed or otherwise impacted by the proposed project; 
19.  Scientific studies determining whether or not rare, threatened, or endangered species of plants or animals are present at the site and, if so, the degree to which they would be disturbed or otherwise impacted by the proposed project; 
20.  Feasible project alternatives and mitigation measures, which may include components of any reclamation plan proposed or approved for the project. 
C.  Mining operations permits shall be granted only after a duly noticed public hearing and only if the planning commission (or the town council in the event of an appeal) makes all of the following findings based on the evidence before it: 
1.  The application and any documentation submitted with it for purposes of complying with or facilitating CEQA review are complete and adequate; 
2.  The proposed project is consistent and compliant with this chapter, this code, and any applicable environmental policies, regulations, or standards set forth in the Mammoth Lakes general plan, as the same may be amended from time to time, as well as any applicable state or federal laws, orders of state or federal agencies having jurisdiction, and applicable court orders, except to the extent that such consistency or compliance is impossible to achieve through any feasible modification or mitigation of the proposed project without violating or conflicting with the federal Mining Act of 1872 (30 U.S.C. §§ 21 et seq.), as the same may be amended from time to time, or with other applicable federal or state laws; 
3.  The proposed project, as mitigated, will not cause any significant adverse environmental impacts, except to the extent that such impacts are impossible to avoid through any feasible mitigation measures without violating or conflicting with the federal Mining Act of 1872 (30 U.S.C. §§ 21 et seq.), as the same may be amended from time to time, or with other applicable federal or state laws, unless a statement of overriding considerations is made through the CEQA process. 
D.  Conditions of approval imposed on mining operations permits by the planning commission shall, among other things, to the extent deemed relevant and appropriate by the planning commission or the town council in order to effectuate the intent of this chapter or CEQA: 
1.  Require that all mining operations, before and during mining, characterize the potential of their ore and waste rock to generate acid mine drainage. Operators may be required to use both static and kinetic testing to make this determination; 
2.  Require pollution prevention and pollution containment techniques in all phases of mine operation; 
3.  Require mining operations to use the best available technology and practices in order to protect the environment, including but not limited to preventing or minimizing acid mine drainage; 
4.  Impose specific contamination standards for water, air, and other environmental components that the project may not exceed; 
5.  Require post-mining water quality monitoring to ensure that acid mine drainage does not develop (or worsen, to the extent it is present before the proposed mining or processing occurs) over time; 
6.  Require inspections of mining operations, especially water-related facilities, by town staff or consultants at frequent intervals; 
7.  Require adequate financial assurances in order to cover the estimated costs of cleaning up or otherwise remediating any reasonably foreseeable environmental contamination that could result from the project despite any imposed mitigation measures, including but not limited to natural and artificial causes of such potential contamination, including but not limited to spills, leaks, and other releases or discharges resulting from negligent design or construction, negligence of extraction or processing operators, as well as rainfall, snowfall, snow melt, floods, fires, earthquakes, and other potential natural forces and events; 
8.  Require any other appropriate mitigation measures and associated monitoring programs. Significant adverse environmental impacts associated with mining operations shall be mitigated to a level of nonsignificance to the extent feasible without violating or conflicting with the federal Mining Act of 1872 (30 U.S.C. §§ 21 et seq.), as the same may be amended from time to time, or with other applicable federal or state laws, unless a statement of overriding considerations is made through the CEQA process. 
E.  All permit applications shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by resolution of the town council, not to exceed the town's direct and indirect costs of administering the chapter, including any funds periodically required to be paid or placed on deposit with the town to fund its associated costs of staff time and/or consultants necessary to implement and comply with CEQA and this chapter. 
F.  The decision of the planning commission is final unless timely appealed to the town of Mammoth Lakes in compliance with Section 2.04.070 of this code. 
(Ord. 00-11 § 2(part), 2000)  
8.26.060 - Permit noncompliance—Penalties—Suspension or revocation. 
Noncompliance with any term or condition of a mining operations permit issued under this chapter, including but not limited to any mitigation measures, monitoring requirements, or financial assurance requirements, shall constitute a misdemeanor and a public nuisance, and shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit by the planning commission. Before the commission shall consider revocation or suspension of any permit, the commission shall hold a public hearing thereon after giving written notice thereof to the permittee at least ten days in advance of such hearing. The decision of the commission may be appealed to the town council in accordance with Section 2.04.070 of this code. 
(Ord. 00-11 § 2(part), 2000)  
8.26.070 - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
A.  Mining that would be exempt from any reclamation requirements under the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (Section 2710 et seq., of the California Public Resources Code), the Mammoth Lakes general plan, and any other chapter of this code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
B.  Any mining operations, other than exploratory extraction, that were actually in existence and functioning as of the date this chapter took effect* and which were otherwise compliant at that time with applicable laws, and also proposed expansions of such mining operations with respect to which complete applications for reclamation plans or amendments thereto had already been filed with the town as of the date this chapter took effect. 
(Ord. 00-11 § 2(part), 2000) 
Editor's note— Ord. 00-11 § 2(part), 2000, is effective November 3, 2000.  
Chapter 8.30 - PARTICULATE EMISSIONS REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-09, § 4(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 20, 2013, repealed the former Ch. 8.30, §§ 8.30.010—8.30.130, and enacted a new Ch. 8.30 as set out herein. The former Ch. 8.30 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 90-04, § 1, adopted 1990; Ord. No. 90-05, § 1, adopted 1990; Ord. No. 90-07, § 1, adopted 1990; and Ord. 91-14, § 1(Exh. A), adopted 1991. 
 
8.30.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to improve and maintain the level of air quality of the town so as to protect and enhance the health of its citizens by controlling the emissions of particulate matter into the air of the community of Mammoth Lakes. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 4(Exh. A), 11-20-2013)  
8.30.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter: 
A.  "EPA" means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
B.  "EPA-certified appliance" means any wood or other solid fuel burning appliance for space or water heating or cooking that meets the Phase II performance and emission standards of the Environmental Protection Agency. Phase II requirements are 4.1 grams per hour particulate emission for catalytic appliances and 7.5 grams per hour for noncatalytic appliances. Pellet fueled wood heaters and EPA Phase II qualified fireplaces and fireplace retrofit devices shall be considered as meeting Phase II requirements. All other solid fuel burning appliances shall be considered noncertified. 
C.  "Opacity" means the amount of light obscured by particulate matter in the air as may be measured using EPA Method 9 (40 CFR 60, App. A). 
D.  "Pellet fueled wood heater" means any heater designed to heat the interior of a building that operates on pelletized wood and has an automatic feed. 
E.  "Permanently inoperable" means modified in such a way that the appliance can no longer function as a solid fuel appliance or easily be remodified to function as a solid fuel appliance. Permanent conversion to other fuels, such as gas, is permitted. 
F.  "Solid fuel burning appliance, heater or device" means any fireplace, wood burning heater or coal stove or structure that burns wood, coal or any other nongaseous or nonliquid fuels, or any similar device burning any solid fuel used for aesthetic, water heating, or space heating purposes. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 4(Exh. A), 11-20-2013)  
8.30.030 - Standards for regulation of solid fuel burning appliances. 
A.  No solid fuel burning appliance shall be permitted to be installed within the town unless the appliance is certified as meeting the emission requirements of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for Phase II certification. However, residential properties may be permitted one outdoor wood fire pit for recreational or cooking purposes provided that a permit is obtained from the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District (MLFPD) and all MLFPD requirements are adhered to. Such fire pits are not required to be EPA Phase II certified. Use of the fire pits allowed by this paragraph will be suspended by the MLFPD during periods of heightened fire danger, and such fire pits are subject to Section 8.30.080, Mandatory Curtailment. Outdoor wood fire pits are not allowed for non-residential properties unless: (i) associated with a special event for which a special event permit has been issued by the town; and (ii) no voluntary or mandatory no-burn restrictions are in effect or are anticipated to be in effect. 
B.  The restrictions of this section shall apply to all solid fuel burning appliances including unregulated fireplaces. 
C.  For the purposes of enforcing this chapter, the town shall keep a record of all certified appliances installed in Mammoth Lakes in accordance with this chapter and of properties which have been determined to conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 4(Exh. A), 11-20-2013; Ord. No. 14-06, § 2, 6-4-2014)  
8.30.040 - Limitations on number of appliances. 
A.  Single-Family Dwellings. No more than one EPA-certified appliance may be installed in any new single-family detached dwelling. Existing properties with one or more existing solid fuel burning appliances may not install additional solid fuel burning appliances. One pellet fueled wood heater per dwelling shall be allowed in addition to the one EPA-certified appliance. 
B.  Multi-Unit Residential Developments. No solid fuel burning appliance may be installed in any new multi-unit residential development; however, one pellet fueled wood heater per dwelling may be installed in a multi-unit residential development. Existing properties with one or more existing solid fuel burning appliances may not install additional solid fuel burning appliances. Existing properties with no existing solid fuel appliances may install only one pellet fueled wood heater per dwelling. 
C.  Commercial or Lodging Developments. No solid fuel burning appliance shall be installed in any new commercial or lodging development project. Existing properties with one or more existing solid fuel burning appliances may not install additional solid fuel burning appliances. Existing properties with no existing solid fuel appliances may install only one EPA-certified appliance or one pellet fueled wood heater. 
D.  Solid fuel burning appliances shall not be considered to be the primary form of heat in any new construction. 
E.  No new and replacement appliances shall be installed without first obtaining a building permit from the town. All installations shall require an inspection and approval by the building division prior to operation. 
F.  Verification of compliance shall be certified by an inspector of the town's building division. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 4(Exh. A), 11-20-2013; Ord. No. 14-06, § 3, 6-4-2014)  
8.30.050 - Replacement of noncertified appliances upon sale of property. 
A.  Prior to the completion of the sale or transfer of a majority interest in any developed real property within the town, all existing noncertified solid fuel burning appliances shall be replaced, removed, or rendered permanently inoperable. If the buyer assumes responsibility for appliance replacement or removal in writing on a form approved by the community and economic development director, the deadline for submitting a fully completed building permit application to the Town of Mammoth Lakes Building Division shall be extended to ninety calendar days from the date of completion of the sale or transfer. The building division may, in its sole discretion, provide one thirty-calendar-day extension of time for the filing of the building permit application upon request from the buyer. Notwithstanding any other ordinance or the usual duration of a building permit, the work authorized by the building permit shall be commenced within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit's issuance, and shall be completed within one year of the permit's issuance. Extensions of time for final sign off of the building permit for justifiable cause may be granted according to the provisions of the California Building Codes. After the building permit is issued and before the expiration date of the building permit the buyer shall contact the building division to schedule an inspection according to the provisions of the California Building Codes. The buyer shall agree in writing not to use or operate the existing non-compliant solid fuel burning appliance. All proposed construction shall comply with the provisions of the California Building Codes and town ordinances, and the buyer shall proceed with the purchase at their own risk and without assurance that the proposed work will be approved. 
B.  The building division shall inspect the appliance(s) in question to assure that they meet the requirements of this chapter. Within five working days from the date of the inspection, the building division shall issue a written certification of compliance or noncompliance for the affected property. If the inspection reveals that the subject property does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, all noncomplying solid fuel burning appliances shall be replaced, removed, or rendered permanently inoperable. In this event, reinspection shall be required prior to certification of compliance. 
C.  No building permit shall be issued for an increase in habitable area of a structure that has not complied with the requirements of this section. 
D.  Existing appliances certified as meeting EPA Phase I requirements or Oregon Department of Environmental Quality requirements are not subject to the replacement requirements. 
E.  Pursuant to Section 1102.6(a) of the California Civil Code, sellers of residential real property shall disclose to purchasers of such property the provisions of this chapter. This disclosure obligation shall be satisfied by providing to each purchaser a "Local Option Real Estate Transfer Disclosure Statement" specified by the town and by providing a copy of this chapter. 
F.  If developed real property is to be sold which does not contain a solid fuel burning appliance, a form approved by the building division, containing the notarized signatures of the seller, the buyer, and the listing real estate agent attesting to the absence of any fuel device, may be accepted in lieu of an inspection. A written exemption shall be issued by the building division. 
G.  No appliance(s) removed under the provisions of this section may be replaced except as provided by this chapter. 
H.  This section shall not be applicable to National Forest permittees located west of Old Mammoth Road in Sections 4 and 9 of Township 4 S., Range 27 E., MDBM, or National Forest permittees located above eight thousand five hundred feet elevation above sea level. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 4(Exh. A), 11-20-2013; Ord. No. 14-06, § 4, 6-4-2014)  
8.30.060 - Opacity limits. 
No person shall cause or permit emissions from a solid fuel burning appliance to be readily visible, for a period or periods aggregating more than three minutes in any one-hour period. Emissions created during a fifteen-minute start-up period are exempt from this regulation. Readily visible emissions means smoke easily seen when viewed against any contrasting background including, but not limited to native conifers or a blue sky and may be equated with an opacity limit of twenty percent or greater as designated by the shade No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 4(Exh. A), 11-20-2013)  
8.30.070 - Prohibited fuels. 
Burning of any fuels or materials other than the following fuels within the town shall be in violation of this chapter: 
A.  Untreated wood; 
B.  Uncolored paper, including newspaper; and 
C.  Manufactured logs, pellets, and similar manufactured fuels. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 4(Exh. A), 11-20-2013)  
8.30.080 - Mandatory curtailment. 
A.  The town manager shall appoint an air quality manager. The duty of the air quality manager shall be to determine when curtailment of solid fuel combustion in the town is necessary, notify the community that curtailment is required, and make such other determinations as are necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter. 
B.  Determination that curtailment is required shall be made when PM-10 levels have reached one hundred thirty micrograms/m3 or when adverse meteorological conditions are predicted to persist. Should it be determined that one hundred thirty micrograms/m3 is not a low enough threshold to prevent the town from violating the National Ambient Air Quality Standard for twenty-four hours (NAAQS, twenty-four hours), that threshold may be lowered by resolution of the town council. 
C.  Upon the determination that curtailment is required, the air quality manager shall contact all radio stations and television stations in Mammoth Lakes and have them broadcast that it is required that there be no wood or other solid fuel burning. The air quality manager shall also record a notice on a telephone line dedicated to this purpose and post a notice in the town offices. The air quality manager may utilize additional methods of communication to effectively inform Mammoth Lakes' residents and visitors of burning restrictions. Upon such notice, all wood and other solid fuel combustion shall cease. 
D.  All dwelling units being rented on a transient basis which contain a solid fuel burning appliance shall post, in a conspicuous location near the appliance, a notice indicating that no-burn days may be called and informing the tenants about sources of information on no-burn days. 
E.  All persons renting units which contain a solid fuel burning appliance shall inform their tenants that solid fuel burning may be prohibited on certain days and that the person signing the rental agreement shall be responsible for assuring that the no-burn requirements are obeyed during the rental period identified on the rental agreement. 
F.  For residences where a solid fuel burning appliance is the sole means of heat, these curtailment regulations do not apply. For a residence to be considered as having solid fuel as its sole source of heat, the owner must apply to the building division for an exemption and the department must inspect the residence and certify that no other adequate source of heat is available to the structure. Adequate source shall mean that the alternate source of heat cannot produce sufficient heat for the residence without causing a hazard. A written exemption will then be granted. Where an adequate alternate source of heat is determined to have been removed from the structure in violation of the building codes, a sole source exemption shall not be issued. Sole source exemptions shall not be granted for nonresidential uses. 
G.  Pellet fueled heaters shall not be subject to the provisions of this section. 
H.  This section shall not apply to National Forest permittees located west of Old Mammoth Road, in Sections 4 and 9 of Township 4 S., Range 27 E., MDBM, or National Forest permittees located above eight thousand five hundred feet elevation above sea level. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 4(Exh. A), 11-20-2013)  
8.30.090 - Pollution reduction education programs. 
The town manager or his/her designee is directed to undertake such public education programs as are reasonably calculated to reduce particulate air pollution within the town, including particulate emissions from sources other than solid fuel burning appliances. In addition to the notification measures listed in Section 8.30.080.C, the public education programs shall include additional measures to inform the public of burning curtailment requirements. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 4(Exh. A), 11-20-2013)  
8.30.100 - Road dust reduction measures. 
A.  The public works director shall implement a vacuum street sweeping program to reduce PM-10 emissions resulting from excessive accumulations of cinders and dirt. 
B.  The town shall, in its review of proposed development projects, incorporate measures which reduce projected total vehicle miles traveled. Examples of such measures include, but are not limited to, circulation system improvements, mass transit facilities, private shuttles, and design and location of facilities to encourage pedestrian circulation. The goal of the town's review shall be to limit peak vehicle miles traveled to one hundred seventy-nine thousand seven hundred eight on any given day on the roadway segments evaluated in the Mammoth Lakes Vehicle Miles Traveled Analysis (LSC, August, 2012). 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 4(Exh. A), 11-20-2013)  
8.30.110 - Fees. 
A fee shall be charged for the inspection and permitting services of the town. The fee shall be established in the town master fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 4(Exh. A), 11-20-2013)  
8.30.120 - Penalties. 
A.  It is illegal to violate any requirements of this chapter. Any owner of any property which is in violation of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Any person operating a solid fuel burning appliance in violation of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. The third violation by the same person within a twelve-month period shall constitute a misdemeanor. Prosecution of any violation of Section 8.30.080.E, relating to exemptions from curtailment, may be against the property owner, the occupant, or both. 
B.  Violation of any portion of this chapter may result in assessment of civil penalties against the property and against an individual person or persons in accordance with Chapter 1.12, General Penalty. 
C.  Each and every day a violation exists is a new and separate violation. Right to appeal, hearings, and collection of civil penalties shall be pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.20, Nuisances. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall prevent the town from pursuing criminal penalties or using any other means legally available to it in addressing violations of this chapter. 
E.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or whenever the air quality manager or his/her authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which violates the provisions of this chapter, the air quality manager or authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the air quality manager by this code; provided, that if such building or premises be occupied, he/she shall present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises be unoccupied, he/she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, or if the owner or person having charge or control of the building or premises cannot be contacted, the air quality manager or authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 4(Exh. A), 11-20-2013)  
Chapter 8.32 - CIVIL PENALTIES 
Sections:  
ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-01, § 7(Exh. B), adopted March 7, 2012, amended Art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, §§ 8.32.010—8.32.090, pertained to civil penalties and derived from Ord. 93-12 § 1(part), 1993; Ord. No. 11-02, § 3(Exh. A), 6-15-2011. 
 
8.32.010 - Legislative findings and statement of purpose. 
The town council hereby finds that there is a need for an alternative method of code enforcement to the traditional civil, criminal or administrative abatement actions, to effect compliance with the Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code, other codes adopted by the town, and applicable state codes. The town council further finds that an appropriate alternative method of enforcement for code violations is an administrative citation program as authorized by Government Code Section 53069.4. 
The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil or administrative abatement or any other legal remedy established by law, which may be pursued to address violations of the Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes. 
Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the town. 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § 7(Exh.B), 3-7-2012)  
8.32.020 - Definitions. 
"Administrative citation" shall mean the written notice provided to a responsible person to inform that person of a violation of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes. 
"Enforcement officer" shall mean any officer or employee, including his or her designee, with the authority to enforce this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes. 
"Hearing officer" shall mean the hearing officer or officers appointed by the town manager. The hearing officer(s) may be a town employee, but in that event the hearing officer(s) shall not have had any responsibility for the investigation, prosecution or enforcement of this chapter and shall not have had any personal involvement in the proceeding to be heard within the past twelve months or possess any disqualifying interest in the outcome of the proceeding. In the event more than one person is appointed hearing officer for a proceeding, all decisions shall be made by a majority vote of all hearing officers. 
"Non-emergency health or safety violation" shall mean a violation of any building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning ordinance which does not create an immediate danger to health or safety. 
"Responsible person" shall mean either of the following: 
1.  Any individual or legal entity who is the owner, tenant, co-tenant, lessee, sub-lessee, occupant or other person with any right to possession of the real property, owner or authorized agent of any business, company or entity, or the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen years, who causes, permits or maintains a violation of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes. 
2.  Any individual, legal entity or the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen years, who causes, permits or maintains a violation of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes. 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § 7(Exh.B), 3-7-2012)  
8.32.030 - Authority. 
A.  Any responsible person violating any provision of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in this chapter. A violation of this code includes, but is not limited to, all violations of this code, other codes adopted by the town council, applicable state codes, or failure to comply with any condition imposed by any entitlement, permit, agreement or environmental document issued or approved under the provisions of this code. 
B.  Each and every day or portion thereof that a violation described in subsection A exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. 
C.  A civil fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by an enforcement officer and shall be payable directly to the town. 
D.  Except where otherwise provided in this code, fines for offenses, which are punishable as infractions, shall be assessed in the amounts specified by resolution of the town council, or where no amount is specified, fines shall be assessed in an amount not exceeding: 
1.  One hundred dollars for a first violation; 
2.  Two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision (other than a building and safety code provision) within one year, and five hundred dollars for a violation of a building and safety code provision; 
3.  Five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same provision (other than a building and safety code provision) within one year, and one thousand dollars for a violation of a building and safety code provision. 
E.  Except where otherwise provided in this code, fines for offenses, which are punishable as misdemeanors, shall be assessed in the amounts specified by resolution of the town council, or where no amount is specified, fines shall be assessed in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars per violation. 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § 7(Exh.B), 3-7-2012)  
8.32.040 - Service procedures. 
An administrative citation on a form approved by the town manager shall be issued to the responsible person by an enforcement officer for violations of this code, other codes adopted by the town council, or applicable state codes in the following manner: 
A.  Personal Service. The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person and, if possible, obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation. If the served responsible person refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings. 
B.  Service of Citation by Mail. 
1.  If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible person, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a return receipt requested. Simultaneously, the administrative citation may be sent by first class mail. 
2.  Service by mail shall be sent to the responsible person's address as shown on public records or as known to the town. If the administrative citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective by first class mail, provided the administrative citation sent by the first class mail is not returned. 
3.  Service of the administrative citation shall be deemed effective three days following deposit of such citation in the U.S. mail. 
C.  Service of Citation by Posting Notice. 
1.  If the enforcement officer does not succeed in serving the responsible person personally or by certified or first class mail, the enforcement officer shall post the administrative citation in a conspicuous location on any real property within the town in which the town has knowledge that the responsible person has a legal interest. 
2.  Posting of the administrative citation shall be deemed effective service as of the date that the citation is actually posted. 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § 7(Exh.B), 3-7-2012)  
8.32.050 - Contents of notice. 
Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: 
A.  Date, approximate time and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed; 
B.  The code section(s) or condition(s) violated and a description of the violation(s); 
C.  A description of the action required to correct the violation(s); 
D.  An order to the responsible person to correct the violation(s) by a correction date and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s); 
E.  The amount of the fine for the violation(s); 
F.  An explanation of how the fine shall be paid, the deadline by which it shall be paid, and the place to which the fine shall be paid; 
G.  An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation(s) described in the administrative citation; 
H.  Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place to obtain a notice of appeal and request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation; and 
I.  The name and signature of the enforcement officer and, if possible, the signature of the responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § 7(Exh.B), 3-7-2012)  
8.32.060 - Satisfaction of administrative citation. 
A.  Upon receipt of an administrative citation, the responsible person shall do the following: 
1.  Remedy the violation(s) if the violation(s) is of such a nature that it can be remedied. If a non-emergency health or safety violation(s) is corrected before the correction date provided on the administrative citation, no fine shall be imposed. 
2.  Pay the fine to the town within fifteen calendar days from the correction date on the administrative citation. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the town. 
B.  If the responsible person fails to correct the violation(s) set forth in the administrative citation, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation shall increase at the rate specified in Section 8.32.030, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § 7(Exh.B), 3-7-2012)  
8.32.070 - Appeal of administrative citation. 
A.  Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of this code or that he or she is the responsible person by completing a notice of appeal and request for hearing form and filing it with the town clerk within ten calendar days from the date of issuance of the administration citation, together with an advance deposit of the total amount of the fine, or the timely filing of a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver form pursuant to Section 8.32.080. Any administrative citation fine which has been deposited shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation(s) or that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation. 
B.  In addition to the requirements listed in subsection A, any appeal of the administrative citation shall include a detailed written explanation as to the grounds for appeal of the administrative citation. Any appeal shall be limited to such written grounds. 
C.  Appeals of administrative citations shall be conducted pursuant to the following procedures: 
1.  A hearing shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen days and not more than ninety days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No additional fines for the underlying alleged violation shall accrue during the pendency of the hearing. 
2.  At the hearing, the party contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence concerning the administrative citation. 
3.  The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
4.  The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the recipient of the citation prior to issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § 7(Exh.B), 3-7-2012)  
8.32.080 - Advance deposit hardship waiver. 
A.  Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest an administrative citation and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver form, available from the town clerk. 
B.  The request shall be filed with the town clerk within five days of the date of the issuance of the administrative citation. 
C.  The requirement of depositing the full amount of the fine as described in Section 8.32.070 shall be stayed unless or until the town manager makes a determination not to issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. 
D.  The town manager may waive the requirement for advance deposit only if the cited party submits to the town manager a declaration under penalty of perjury supported by evidence that shows to the town manager's reasonable satisfaction that such party is financially unable to deposit the total amount of the fine in advance of the hearing. 
E.  If the town manager determines not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the cited party shall remit the deposit to the town within five days of the date of that decision or fifteen days from the date of issuance of the administrative citation, whichever is later. 
F.  The town manager shall list his/her reasons for granting or not granting an advance deposit hardship waiver in writing and serve it on the cited party. The town manager's decision is final. 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § 7(Exh.B), 3-7-2012)  
8.32.090 - Hearing officer's decision. 
A.  The hearing officer shall make his or her decision within a reasonable time after the hearing. If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the town shall retain the fine amount on deposit with the town. 
B.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the hearing officer shall set a fine payment schedule for the payment of the fine and shall remind the violator of his or her obligation to correct the violation as applicable. As appropriate, the hearing officer may prescribe a reasonable time for the violator to cure the violation. 
C.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the town, then the town shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine. 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § 7(Exh.B), 3-7-2012)  
8.32.100 - Failure to pay fines. 
A.  The failure of any person to pay the civil fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in the matter being referred to the town attorney to file a claim with the applicable court. Alternatively, the town may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the civil fines, including, but not limited to, a lien pursuant to Section 8.20.120 or special assessment pursuant to Section 8.20.130. 
B.  Any person who fails to pay to the town any fine imposed pursuant to this chapter on or before the date that fine is due also shall be liable for the payment of a onetime late payment charge in the amount of twenty-five dollars, plus interest at the maximum rate permitted by law. The late charge and interest imposed by this subsection shall apply to each individual fine for any violation of this code. 
C.  The payment of any administrative fine shall not excuse or otherwise provide any defense to the continued violation of any provision of this code. 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § 7(Exh.B), 3-7-2012)  
8.32.110 - Notices. 
A.  The administrative citation and all notices to be given by this chapter shall be served on the responsible person in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.32.040. 
B.  Failure to receive actual notice specified in this chapter does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § 7(Exh.B), 3-7-2012)  
ARTICLE II. - NOTICES OF VIOLATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-01, § 8, adopted March 7, 2012, repealed former Art. II, §§ 8.32.100—8.32.180, which pertained to administrative citations and derived from Ord. 93-12 § 1(part), 1993. Ord. No. 12-01 subsequently redesignated former Art. III as Art. II, as set out herein. 
 
8.32.100—8.32.180. - Reserved.  
8.32.190 - Recordation of notices of violation—Procedures. 
The following sections, Sections 8.32.200 through 8.32.290, govern the procedures relating to the issuance and recordation of administrative notices of violation. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 1(part), 1993)  
8.32.200 - Declaration and purpose. 
A.  The council finds and determines that there is a need for alternative methods of enforcement for violations of this code which are found to exist on real property. The Council further finds and declares that an appropriate method of enforcement for this type of violations is the issuance and recordation of notices of violation. 
B.  The procedures established in this section shall be in addition to criminal, civil or any other remedy established by law which may be pursued to address violation of this code. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 1(part), 1993)  
8.32.210 - Definitions. 
For purposes of Sections 8.32.200 through 8.32.290, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Director" means and includes the director of the following departments: planning, building, public works, finance, police, parks and recreation, animal control, and any other designated agents or representatives. 
"Financial institution" means any entity or person that holds a recorded mortgage or deed of trust on the property in violation. 
"Notice of violation" means a written notice prepared by the director's enforcement staff containing the following information: 
1.  The name of the property's owner of record; 
2.  Street address; 
3.  Code sections in violation; 
4.  General description of the property's condition which violates the applicable codes; 
5.  General list of necessary corrections to bring the property into compliance with this code; 
6.  Deadline or specific date to correct the violations listed on the notice of violation; 
7.  Fines, penalties, associated fees, costs and interest; 
8.  Reference to the potential consequences should the property remain in violation after the expiration of the compliance deadline including, but not limited to, criminal prosecution, civil injunction, administrative abatement, civil penalties, revocation of permits, recordation of the notice of violation and withholding of future municipal permits. 
"Property owner" means the record owner of the real property based on the county assessor's records and/or persons in possession of the property, i.e., leaseholders, when applicable. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 1(part), 1993)  
8.32.215 - Procedures—Generally. 
A.  Once the director has issued one or more notices of violation and the property remains in violation after the deadline established in the latest notice of violation, the director may record a notice of violation with the recorder's office of Mono County. 
B.  Before recordation, the director shall provide to the property owner(s), and any applicable financial institution, a letter informing these parties that a notice of violation will be recorded unless one of the parties files a written request to appeal pursuant to the procedures outlined in Section 8.32.230. 
C.  The director shall serve this letter by any one of the following means: 
1.  Personal service; or 
2.  Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested; or 
3.  Posting the letter conspicuously on or in front of the property on which the violation is located. 
Service by certified mail in the manner described above shall become effective on the date of mailing. Service by personal service or posting shall become effective on the date of personal service or posting. 
D.  If the director does not receive the written request to appeal within the prescribed time period, the director shall record the notice of violation if any of the listed violations remain. 
E.  The recorded notice of violation shall include the name of the property owner or owners and any affected financial institution (if known), assessor's parcel number, the parcel's legal description, and a copy of the latest notice of violation. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 1(part), 1993)  
8.32.220 - Service on property owner. 
A copy of the recorded notice of violation shall be served upon the property owner(s) and applicable financial institutions pursuant to the procedures in Section 8.32.215(C). 
(Ord. 93-12 § 1(part), 1993)  
8.32.230 - Appeal rights. 
A.  The property owner(s) or financial institution may challenge the recording of the notice of violation within ten calendar days of the effective date of service of the letter required in Section 8.32.215(C) by filing a written appeal, including any required appeal fees, with the director. 
B.  The director shall either request the town manager to appoint a hearing officer or schedule this appeal before an appropriate departmental hearing or appeal board. Written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be served upon the appellant at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing by any one of the methods listed in Section 8.32.215(C). 
C.  The failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with these provisions shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and shall not affect the validity of the recorded notice of violation. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 1(part), 1993)  
8.32.240 - Appeal hearings. 
A.  The hearing officer or board shall consider any written or oral evidence regarding the existence of the violations, any notices issued, the recordation procedures and other relevant testimony. 
B.  These hearings shall be conducted consistent with regulations as issued by the town manager or set forth by the appropriate board. 
C.  The hearing officer or board shall review all evidence and testimony presented to determine whether or not recordation of the notice of violation is proper pursuant to these sections. If the hearing officer or board determines that recordation is improper, the hearing officer or board shall order the director not to record the notice of violation. 
D.  The decision of the hearing officer or board shall be the final administrative order and becomes effective immediately. A copy of the hearing officer's or the board's decision shall be served on the property owner(s) or financial institution in the manner provided in Section 8.32.215(C). 
(Ord. 93-12 § 1(part), 1993)  
8.32.250 - Constructive notice. 
A.  Recordation of the notice of violation shall provide the property owner and successors in interest with constructive notice of the municipal code violations specified therein. 
B.  The failure of any person with a financial, ownership or equitable interest in the property to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of the recorded notice or any proceedings taken under this section. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 1(part), 1993)  
8.32.260 - Prohibition against issuance of municipal permits. 
If no written request to appeal has been timely filed or after an appeal hearing which confirms the director's decision to record, the town may withhold permits for any alteration, repair or construction pertaining to any existing or new structure(s) or sign(s) on the property, or any permits pertaining to the use and development of the real property or the structure(s). The town may withhold such permit until a notice of compliance has been issued by the director, except permits which are necessary to obtain the notice of compliance or which are necessary to correct serious health and safety violations. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 1(part), 1993)  
8.32.270 - Notice of compliance—Procedures. 
A.  When the violations listed on the notice of violation and any other existing violations have been corrected, the property owner(s) or financial institution may file with the director a written request for a notice of compliance. 
B.  Once the director receives this request, a reinspection shall be performed within ten working days to determine whether all necessary permits have been issued and final inspections have been performed. 
C.  The director shall issue and serve a notice of compliance to the property owner(s) or financial institution in the manner provided in Section 8.32.215(C) if the director determines that: (1) all violations listed in the recorded notice of violation have been corrected; (2) the property complies with the applicable municipal code provisions; (3) all necessary permits have been issued and finalized; and (4) the party requesting the notice of compliance has paid an administrative fee to reimburse the town for all administrative costs and expenses incurred in the investigation, inspection, reinspection, title searches, appeal hearing, and any other processing costs and fines associated with the violations specified on the notice of violation and simple interest thereof at one and one-half percent per month or portion thereof. Such interest shall accrue from the time of recordation of the notice of violation until the issuance of the notice of compliance. The director shall establish this fee based on salaries, costs and overhead applicable at the time the costs and expenses are incurred by the town. 
The director is authorized to impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the notice of compliance in order to ensure compliance with this code. 
D.  If the director denies the request for a notice of compliance, a written denial, containing the reasons for the denial, shall be served upon the property owner(s) or financial institution in the same manner as outlined in Section 8.32.215(C). 
(Ord. 93-12 § 1(part), 1993)  
8.32.280 - Cancellation of recorded notice of violation. 
Upon request by the property owner(s) or financial institution, the director shall record the notice of compliance with the county recorder's office. A recordation fee shall apply. If the property owner(s) or financial institution request a notice of compliance pursuant to Section 8.32.270 but do not request the director to record such notice, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner(s) or financial institution to record such notice. Recordation of the town-approved notice of compliance shall have the affect of canceling the recorded notice of violation. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 1(part), 1993)  
8.32.290 - Appeal of denial of notice of compliance. 
A.  If the director denies the request for a notice of compliance, the property owner(s) or financial institution may appeal such denial by filing written request to appeal with the director within ten calendar days from the date of the service of the director's written denial. The director shall request the town manager to appoint a hearing officer or may utilize an appropriate departmental hearing or appeals board to fix the date, time and place of the hearing. Written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be served upon the property owner or responsible party at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing by any of the methods listed in Section 8.32.215(C). 
B.  The hearing officer or board shall consider any written or oral evidence regarding the denial of the notice of compliance including the appropriate code sections, the violations, the efforts to bring the property into compliance and all other relevant evidence. The property owner(s) or financial institution may present testimony or evidence concerning the violations and the means and time frame used to correct the violations. 
C.  These hearings shall be conducted consistent with regulation as issued by the town manager or as set forth by the appropriate hearing board. 
D.  The hearing officer or board shall review all of the evidence and testimony presented to determine whether or not the director's denial was reasonable and supported by sufficient evidence. If the hearing officer or board overrules the director's denial, the hearing officer or board shall direct the issuance of the notice of compliance by the director. The hearing officer or appropriate board has the authority to impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the notice of compliance in order to ensure compliance with this code. 
E.  This appeal is the final administrative remedy and becomes effective immediately. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 1(part), 1993)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.04 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY 
Sections: 
 
9.04.010 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-02, § 5, adopted Mar. 19, 2014, repealed § 9.04.010 which pertained to indecent exposure and derived from prior code §§ 10.20.010—10.20.040.  
9.04.020 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-02, § 5, adopted Mar. 19, 2014, repealed § 9.04.020 which pertained to topless waitresses and performers and derived from prior code §§ 10.24.010—10.24.050.  
9.04.030 - Nude swimming. 
A.  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have meanings set out in the subsection: 
"Person or private parts thereof" is defined and interpreted in the same manner as the phrase has been defined and interpreted in Section 314 of the California Penal Code. 
"Swimming" or "bathing" shall be as these terms are commonly used or defined. 
"Waters of the town of Mammoth Lakes" means any lake, pond, stream, creek, tributary or similar conduit of water thereto located within the boundaries of the town. 
B.  Prohibition. No person over the age of ten years shall swim or bathe in the waters of the town without physical covering of the private parts of the person as these terms are defined in subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 89-12 §1, 1989: prior code §§10.28.010, 10.28.020)  
Chapter 9.05 - SPECIAL SECURITY ASSIGNMENTS—POLICE SERVICE FEES 
Sections: 
 
9.05.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The town council finds and declares that: 
A.  The control of parties, gathering or events on private property is necessary when such continuing activity is determined to be a threat to the peace, health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
B.  Frequently, police officers have been required to make multiple return calls on the same date to the location of these parties, gatherings or events in order to disperse uncooperative participants. 
C.  Frequently, police officers have been required to make multiple responses to the same location on different dates in response to related parties, gatherings or events. 
D.  The return of police officers to the location constitutes a drain of manpower and resources often leaving other areas of the town without police protection. 
E.  The return of police officers to the location frequently result in delayed responses to other pending calls. 
F.  The above conditions create a significant hazard to the safety of the police officers and to the peace, health and safety of the general public. 
(Ord. 99-01 § 1 (part))  
9.05.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply: 
"Owner" means the person(s) or entity(ies) that hold(s) legal and/or equitable title to the private property. 
"Party, gathering or event" means a group of persons who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or for a social activity. 
"Person responsible for the event" means the owner of the property where the party, gathering or event takes place, the person(s) in charge of the premises and/or the person(s) who organized the party, gathering or event. If the person responsible for the event is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor will be jointly and severally liable for the fines imposed for the special security assignment. 
"Special security assignment" means the assignment of police officers in response to a return or subsequent call or calls after the distribution of a written warning that a party, gathering or event violates the law. 
(Ord. 99-01 § 1(part))  
9.05.030 - Police services at parties, gatherings or events requiring a second or subsequent response(s). 
A.  No person shall promote, host, sponsor, or organize or otherwise allow a party, gathering or event to occur on private property which is determined by a police officer to threaten the public peace, health, safety or general welfare of the neighborhood or surrounding community. 
B.  The person responsible for the party, gathering or event will be held liable for civil fines in amounts established by resolution of the town council, for a special security assignment by the police, to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare at any time within a twelve-month period after a first written warning. 
The initial call or any subsequent call may also result in the arrest and/or citation of violators of the state Penal Code or other local regulations. 
(Ord. 99-01 § 1(part))  
9.05.040 - Procedures for imposition of civil fines. 
Civil fines for special security assignments as authorized by Section 9.05.030(B) shall be imposed in the manner provided in this section. 
A.  For all violations of Section 9.05.030 where substantial evidence in support of a violation exists, and a special security assignment occurs, the finance director shall issue a written notice of civil fines imposed in accordance with the resolution of the town council. The written notice shall be served on the person responsible for the party and the owner, if different. The notice shall specify the facts which, in the opinion of the finance director, constitute substantial evidence to establish grounds for imposition of the fines, and specify that the fines are effective thirty days from the date the notice is given unless an appeal is filed in writing before the fines become effective. 
B.  If the person responsible for the event appeals the fine within the time specified in subsection A of this section, the town clerk shall serve written notice to the person responsible and to the owner, if different, by first class mail of the date, time, and location for a hearing on the appeal. The hearing shall be scheduled not less than fifteen days, nor more than sixty days from the date on which notice of the hearing is served by the town clerk. The town manager may preside over the hearing or may designate a hearing officer to take evidence and submit proposed finding and recommendations to the town manager. The town manager shall uphold the fine only upon a finding that a violation has been proven by a preponderance of the evidence. The hearing shall be conducted according to the rules normally applicable to administrative hearings. The town manager shall render a decision within thirty days of the hearing and the decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 99-01 § 1(part))  
9.05.050 - Confidentiality. 
Information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-01 § 1(part))  
Chapter 9.08 - FIREARMS 
Sections: 
 
9.08.010 - Purpose of provisions. 
A.  There are certain areas within the town in which the discharge of firearms should be prohibited for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety. There are other areas where, to preserve the public peace, health and safety, it is necessary to prohibit the discharge of firearms other than bows and arrows and other than shotguns or front-loading muzzle pistols and rifles. These latter areas fall partly within the town and partly within the county of Mono. 
B.  It is the intent of the town council that certain zones be designated wherein it will be prohibited to discharge firearms including bows and arrows and shotguns and certain other zones where it will be prohibited to discharge firearms other than bows and arrows and other than shotguns or front-loading muzzle pistols and rifles. 
(Ord. 86-25 § 1(part), 1986: prior code § 10.64.010)  
9.08.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Firearm" means shotgun, rifle, pistol, crossbow, compressed air guns, pellet guns and BB guns, pistol or revolver from which shot, bullets or missiles are discharged by compressed air, explosive or combustible material, capable of propelling any shot, bullet or missile. 
"Peace officer" means any such officer within the laws of the state duly constituted, acting in his official line of duty. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, copartnership or association, their agents or employees. 
(Ord. 86-25 § 1(part), 1986: prior code § 10.64.020)  
9.08.030 - Discharge of firearm or bow and arrow—Prohibited where. 
It is unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer as defined in Section 9.08.030, to shoot, fire or discharge any firearm, or bow and arrow, in the town territory lying within the boundaries described in Section 9.08.040, except when it may be necessary so to do to protect life or property or to destroy or kill any predatory or dangerous animal. 
(Ord. 86-25 § 1(part), 1986: prior code § 10.64.030)  
9.08.040 - Discharge of firearm or bow and arrow—Prohibited area designated. 
The boundaries of the town territory wherein the prohibition of Section 9.08.030 applies are set forth on the following map, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A and on file in the town clerk's office, and legally described as follows: 
Beginning at the east ¼ corner of Section 25, Township 3 South, Range 27 East, M.D.B. & M., thence west to the east ¼ corner of Section 25, Township 3 South, Range 26 East, thence continuing west along said line of intersection to a point of intersection with the Mono County and Madera County line, thence southerly and easterly along said line to a point of intersection with the north line of Section 20, Township 4 South, Range 27 East, M.D.B. & M., thence east along the north line of Section 20 to the northeast corner of Section 20, thence southerly to the west ¼ corner Section 22, thence east to the center of Section 22, thence north to the center of Section 15, thence west to the west ¼ corner of Section 15, thence north to the northwest corner of Section 15, thence northeast to the center of Section 10, thence east to the center of Section 12, thence north to the south ¼ corner of Section 36, Township 3 South, Range 27 East, thence east to the southeast corner of Section 36, thence north to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. 96-15 § 1, 1996; Ord. 86-25 § 1(part), 1986: prior code § 10.64.040)  
9.08.070 - State law applicability. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed, nor shall this chapter as a whole be construed, to limit or otherwise influence or alter the applicable laws of the state, now or hereinafter in effect within the boundaries hereof. 
(Ord. 86-25 § 1(part), 1986: prior code § 10.64.070)  
9.08.080 - Exemptions. 
The following persons and entities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Any peace officer acting within his or her official capacity; 
B.  Any officer, employee or agent of the California Department of Fish and Game acting in his or her official capacity; 
C.  Any officer, employee or agent of the United States Forest Service acting in his or her official capacity; 
D.  Any person or entity who has received a permit from the Mammoth Lakes police department to operate a firearms range; 
E.  Any officer, employee or agent or person acting with permission of the animal control department of the town acting in his or her official capacity; 
F.  Any officer, employee, agent or person acting with a permit, other than a hunting license, issued by the Department of Fish and Game for the destruction of a wild or vicious animal. 
(Ord. 96-02 § 1, 1996: Ord. 86-25 § 1(part), 1986: prior code § 10.64.080)  
9.08.090 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and may be punished accordingly. 
B.  Any provision or requirement of this chapter, the violation of which or the failure to comply with which, is designated as an infraction, shall be prosecutable as a misdemeanor upon the third violation and each violation thereafter of the same provision by the same individual. In addition, any such violation or failure to comply may be prosecuted originally as a misdemeanor in the discretion of the town attorney or any deputy district attorney, upon showing by the enforcing agency of the seriousness of the particular alleged violation. 
(Ord. 86-25 § 1(part), 1986: prior code § 10.64.090)  
Chapter 9.12 - GRAFFITI CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
9.12.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program for graffiti removal and to provide regulations designed to prevent and control the further spread of graffiti in the town. Graffiti on public and private buildings, structures and places creates a condition of blight within the town which results in a deterioration of property and business values for adjacent and surrounding properties all to the detriment of the town. The town council finds and determines that graffiti is a public nuisance which must be abated to avoid the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the town and to prevent the further spread of graffiti. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: 
"Expense of abatement" means and includes, but is not limited to, court costs, attorney's fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the town and other law enforcement agencies in identifying and apprehending the perpetrator(s). 
"Graffiti" means any unauthorized inscription, work, figure, mark or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any real or personal property. 
"Manager" means the town manager of the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Minor" means an individual under eighteen years of age, or an individual under eighteen years of age who has confessed to, admitted to, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of Section 594, 594.3, 640.6 or 640.7 of the Penal Code, or a minor convicted by final judgment of a violation of Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6 or 640.7 of the Penal Code, or a minor declared a ward of the juvenile court pursuant to Section 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code by reason of the commission of an act prohibited by Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6 or 640.7 of the Penal Code. 
"Person" means any natural person, firm, association, club, organization, corporation, partnership, business, trust, company or any other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties. 
"Responsible adult" means the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor and present with the minor when the minor is in possession of an aerosol container of paint or other liquid substance capable of graffiti defacement of property. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.030 - Graffiti prohibited. 
The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to any other legal remedy established by law. 
A.  No person shall place or cause to be placed any graffiti upon any public or privately owned building, structure or place located on publicly or privately owned real or personal property within the town. 
B.  No person owning or otherwise in control of any real property within the town shall permit or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or remain on any building, structure or place located on such property when the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private property, for a period in excess of that described in this chapter for notice and removal of graffiti. 
C.  Violation of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.040 - Minors—Aerosol paint. 
A.  Possession by Minors Prohibited. It is unlawful for any individual under the age of eighteen years, who is in a public place or upon private property without consent of the owner or tenant thereof and who is not accompanied by a responsible adult, to possess an aerosol container of paint or other liquid substance capable of defacing property. 
B.  Signs Required. Any person engaged in the retail sale of aerosol containers of paint and other liquid substances capable of defacing property must display at the location of retail sale a sign clearly visible and legible to employees and customers which states as follows: 
It is unlawful for any individual under the age of eighteen years, who is in a public place or upon private property without consent of the owner or tenant thereof and who is not accompanied by a responsible adult, to possess an aerosol container of paint or other liquid substance capable of defacing property. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.050 - Defacement of property by minor. 
A.  Any minor creating, causing or committing defacement of property by graffiti shall be responsible for the expense of abatement of that graffiti and all expenses of said abatement shall constitute a lien against property of the minor and a personal obligation against the minor pursuant to Government Code Section 38772, 38773.2 or 38773.6. 
B.  The parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor. The expense of abatement of any nuisance resulting from the defacement by minor of property by means of graffiti may be made a lien against the property of a parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor and shall constitute a personal obligation against the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.2 or 38773.6. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.060 - Defacement of property by nonminors. 
Any person creating, causing or committing defacement of property by graffiti shall be responsible for the expense of abatement of that graffiti and all expenses of said abatement shall constitute a lien against property of that person and a personal obligation against that person. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.070 - Notice. 
Whenever the chief of police or his designee determines that graffiti exists on any building, structure or place in the town which is visible from the street or other public or private property, he shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall have ten days after the date of the notice to remove the graffiti or appeal pursuant to Section 8.20.080 of this code. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.080 - Service of notice. 
The notice to abate graffiti shall be served upon the owner of the affected premises, as such owner's name and address appears on the last equalized property tax assessment rolls of the county of Mono. In addition, if there is a commercial tenant using the premises, there shall also be an attempt to serve said tenant. If there is no known address for the owner, and/or there is more than one commercial tenant on the property, the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the premises. The notice required by this chapter may be served in any one of the following manners: 
A.  By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property; 
B.  By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the last known address of said owner, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. If this address is unknown, and/or the property is occupied, the notice will be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises or delivered to the occupant; 
C.  By posting the notice and order conspicuously on, or in front of, the property on which the violation is located. 
The failure of any person with an interest in property to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner described above shall become effective on the date of mailing. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.090 - Reimbursement of cost of labor and material. 
In the event the property owner complies with the notice by the designated date or such continued date, as the chief of police or his designated representative approves, then the town shall reimburse the property owner his cost of labor and materials up to a maximum of one hundred fifty dollars for the first incident of graffiti on the property, and up to one hundred dollars for each subsequent incident. Receipts for labor and materials used must accompany the claim. The town shall not reimburse the property owner where the chief of police finds that the owner has persuaded, allowed or encouraged the graffiti problem. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.100 - Hearing—Procedure. 
A.  Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the manager shall calendar a hearing, not less than ten days from receipt of the request and not more than thirty days from such receipt. 
B.  The manager, or designee, at the time set for hearing, shall hear and consider all relevant information presented and shall receive information from owners, witnesses, town personnel and other interested persons relative to such nuisance and to any proposed means for rehabilitation, repair or demolition of such premises. 
C.  The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.110 - Hearing—Decision. 
A.  Upon or after the conclusion of the hearing, the manager shall, based upon such hearing, determine whether the premises, or any part thereof, as maintained, constitutes a nuisance as defined by Section 8.20.020. If the manager finds that such nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to rehabilitate, demolish or repair the same, the manager shall make a written order setting forth his findings and ordering the owner, lessee, occupant, or other person having charge of such premises to abate such nuisance by having such premises, building or structure rehabilitated, repaired or demolished in the manner and by the means specifically set forth in the order. Such order shall set forth the times within which such work shall be commenced and completed. 
B.  Such order and findings shall be served upon the owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge of the premises by ordinary first class mail to the address provided by such person at the time of hearing, if any, and otherwise, to the address where the nuisance has been determined to exist and shall contain a detailed list of needed corrections and abatement methods. If no mailing address is so available, such order and findings shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the front entrance of the premises on which the nuisance has been determined to exist. 
C.  Within ten days from the date of giving the order, the owner, lessee, occupant, or person in charge of such premises affected may appeal to the council. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the town. If a hearing is not requested within the ten days, the decision of the manager shall be deemed final and the right to any further hearings shall be deemed waived. The appeal shall be set for hearing and heard at a meeting of the council not more than thirty days after such filing. The council, at the time set for hearing, shall hear and consider all relevant information presented and shall receive information from owners, witnesses, town personnel and other interested persons relative to such nuisance and to any proposed means for rehabilitation, repair or demolition of such premises. The hearing may be continued from time to time. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.120 - Action to contest decision. 
Any owner, lessee or person having their written authorization may bring an action to contest the decision of the town council within thirty days after the date of such decision. Otherwise, all objections to such decision shall be deemed waived. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.130 - Abatement by town. 
Upon failure of persons to comply with the notice to abate by the designated date, or such continued date thereafter as the chief of police or his designated representative approves, then the chief of police is authorized and directed to cause the graffiti to be abated by town personnel or private contract. The chief of police shall obtain an abatement warrant permitting entry by town personnel or contract personnel to accomplish abatement. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.140 - Abatement cost. 
A.  The manager or his agent, shall keep an account of the cost (including incidental expenses) of abating such nuisance on each separate parcel of land where the work is done and shall render an itemized report in writing to the council showing the cost of abatement and the methods used, inclusive of any salvage value relating thereto. In addition thereto, a copy of the report that is submitted to the council shall be served in the manner provided in Section 9.12.110B together with a notice of the time when the report will be heard and reviewed by the council for confirmation. 
B.  The matter shall be set for hearing at an agendized meeting of the council to determine the reasonableness of such costs and any administrative costs assessed. 
C.  "Incidental expenses" and/or costs of administration includes, but is not limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the town in the preparation and service of notices, specifications and contracts, and in inspecting the work and the costs of any printing and mailing required to effectuate the procedures of this chapter. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.150 - Report of account. 
At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the report of account as set forth in Section 9.12.140, the council shall hear and pass upon the report of such costs of abatement, together with any objections or protests. This proceeding shall be limited to the issues involved in and related to the costs of abatement only, and no information or testimony shall be admitted or considered relating to the determination of whether a nuisance existed or any abatement thereof was reasonable. At the time of the hearing on such report of costs of abatement, the council may make such revision, correction or modification in the report as it may deem just, after which, by motion, the report, as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The decision of the council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. Judicial review of such decision shall be available only as provided in Section 9.12.120. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.160 - Assessment—Lien. 
The total cost for abating such nuisance, as so confirmed by the council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates and, upon recordation in the office of the county recorder of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of such assessment. 
A.  After such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law. 
B.  Such notice of lien for recordation shall be in a form substantially as follows: 
NOTICE OF LIEN: TOWN OF MAMMOTH LAKES 
 Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of Section 8.20.010 et seq. of the Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code and the Ordinances of the Town of Mammoth Lakes, the Chief of Police of the Town of Mammoth Lakes, or his designated representative, did, on or about the _______ day of ___________, 19___, cause the premises hereinafter described to be rehabilitated, or the building or structures on the property hereinafter described to be repaired or demolished, in order to abate a nuisance on said real property; and the Town Council of the Town of Mammoth Lakes did, on the _______ day of _______, 19___, assess the cost of such rehabilitation, repair or demolition upon said real property hereinafter described; and the same has not been paid nor any part hereof; and that said Town of Mammoth Lakes does hereby claim a lien to such rehabilitation, repair, or demolition and administrative costs in the amount of said assessment, to wit: The sum of $___________, and the same shall be a lien upon said real property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record. 
 The real property hereinbefore mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the Town of Mammoth Lakes, State of California, and more particularly described as follows: 
(Legal Description) 
DATED: This ___ day of _______, 19___. 
_____________________ 
TOWN OF MAMMOTH LAKES 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.12.170 - Alternative remedies. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to supersede any other remedies in this code nor to prevent the town from commencing civil or criminal proceedings to abate a public nuisance under applicable state or federal law, or to proceed with other authorized nonjudicial nuisance abatement procedures as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1(part), 1996)  
Chapter 9.16 - PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION PROHIBITED 
Sections: 
 
9.16.010 - Public urination and defecation prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any public place except when using a urinal, toilet or commode located in a bathroom, restroom, portable restroom or other structure enclosed from public view. 
(Ord. 96-14 § 1(part), 1996)  
9.16.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter is an infraction, as defined under Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 96-14 § 1(part), 1996)  
Chapter 9.20 - REGULATION OF EPHEDRINE PURCHASES 
Sections: 
 
9.20.010 - Legislative purpose. 
A.  The town council of the town of Mammoth Lakes finds that there is a current and immediate threat to the public health, safety, and welfare in that the manufacture, processing, transportation, possession and sales of illicit narcotics and drugs are inherently dangerous and that chemicals, compounds, substances, by-products and wastes that are associated with the manufacture of illicit narcotics and drugs are both dangerous and injurious to the health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of Mammoth Lakes. 
B.  The town council of the town of Mammoth Lakes finds that there has been a dramatic increase in sales, reports of sales, thefts, and possession of over-the-counter drugs which contain substances known as ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, ephedrine hydrochloride, and pseudoephedrine sulfate, along with other substances and products associated with the manufacture of methamphetamine and that retailers are regularly victimized by those persons who steal these substances, drugs, and products on a regular basis. 
C.  The town council of the town of Mammoth Lakes finds that the general public does not normally purchase the described products in multiple quantities and it is not the town council's intent to restrain legitimate businesses or customers from selling or purchasing the described products. 
D.  No provision of this chapter shall hinder or supersede any other applicable state or federal statute. 
(Ord. 98-07 § 1(part))  
9.20.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this chapter: 
"Count" means the number of pills, tablets, capsules, or individual units of a substance contained within an individual package, box or container. 
"Customer" means any person who purchases or acquires the products described in this section, or persons who are present for the purchase or acquisition of the products described in this section. 
"Ephedrine" means any drug, substance or compound, whether legal or illegal that contains ephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine sulfate, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine, or ephedrine. 
"Retailer" means any single geographic location of any retail business, company, corporation, person, employee, or associate who furnishes, distributes, sells, or gives away products described in this section. 
"Sell" means to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver, surrender, or supply, whether for monetary gain or not. 
(Ord. 98-07 § 1(part))  
9.20.030 - Limitations on sales. 
No retailer shall sell to a single customer more than two packages of a product containing ephedrine in counts of twenty-four or less per transaction, or more than one package per transaction if the count is in excess of twenty-four per package, or any number of packages per transaction if the total weight or the amount of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine contained in the packages exceeds a weight of three thousand milligrams or three grams. 
No customer shall purchase or acquire more than two packages of a product containing ephedrine in counts of twenty-four or less per transaction, or more than one package per transaction if the count is in excess of twenty-four per package, or any number of packages per transaction if the total weight or the amount of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine contained in the packages exceeds a weight of three thousand milligrams or three grams. 
(Ord. 98-07 § 1(part))  
9.20.040 - Penalties. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any person, customer, or retailer violating any of the provisions of this chapter is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof may be punished by the maximum fine or imprisonment, or both, permitted by then-existing state law. 
(Ord. 98-07 § 1(part))  
Chapter 9.24 - TOBACCO REGULATIONS[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-04, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Apr. 16, 2014, amended Ch. 9.24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 9.24, §§ 9.24.010—9.24.070, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 01-08, Exh. A, adopted 2001. 
 
9.24.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The town council finds that substantial scientific evidence exists that the use of tobacco products and electronic cigarettes causes cancer, heart disease, and various other medical diseases. The Surgeon General of the United States has found that tobacco-caused diseases are the leading cause of premature, preventable death and disability in the U.S. Accordingly, the town council finds and declares it in the public interest to: 1) prohibit self-service sales and self-service displays, racks and shelves of smoking products; 2) require the posting of warning signs at the point of purchase stating the legal age of sale and that identification is required to purchase smoking products; 3) prohibit vending machine sales of smoking products; 4) require all cigarettes, other tobacco or smoking products to be sold in their original packaging with all required health warnings; and 5) prohibit the use and/or discarding of lighted or unlighted smoking products in town parks, including playgrounds, skate parks, or other structures built or installed in the town for public use by children. 
(Ord. No. 14-04, § 2(Exh. A), 4-16-2014)  
9.24.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Business" means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered. 
"Council" or "town council" means the town council of Mammoth Lakes. 
"E-cigarette" means a device capable of providing an inhalable dose of nicotine by delivering an aerosol or vaporized solution. 
"Employee" means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect wages or profit and any person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity. 
"Minor, child or children" means any individual or individuals who is/are less than eighteen years old. 
"Non-profit entity" means any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational, character-building, political, social or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A public agency is not a nonprofit entity within the meaning of this section. 
"Park" shall mean park and recreation facilities operated by the Town of Mammoth Lakes, including Shady Rest Park, Mammoth Creek Park, Community Center Park and Whitmore Park. 
"Person" means any natural person, individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any other legal entity. 
"Self-service merchandising, sales or displays" means open display of smoking products and point-of-sale smoking-related promotional products that the public has access to without the intervention of an employee. 
"Smoke or smoking" means the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, or e-cigarette of any kind or the lighting, emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar, cigarette, or e-cigarette of any kind. 
"Smoking paraphernalia" means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines and any other item designed for the smoking or ingestion of smoking products. 
"Smoking product" means any substance containing tobacco leaf or meant to be used in conjunction with an e-cigarette, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco or any other preparation of tobacco, including Indian cigarettes called "bidis", and cartridges and liquid solutions for e-cigarettes, which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhaling or other manner of ingestion. 
"Smoking retailer" means any person or governmental entity that operates a store, stand, booth, concession or other place at which sales of smoking products are made to purchasers for consumption or use. 
"Smoking vending machine" means any electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether in coin or paper currency or other things representative of value, which dispenses or releases a smoking product. 
"Town" means the Town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Vendor-assisted" means only a store employee has access to the smoking product and assists the customer by supplying the product. The customer does not take possession of the product until it is purchased. 
(Ord. No. 14-04, § 2(Exh. A), 4-16-2014)  
9.24.030 - Prohibitions—Smoking product sales. 
A.  No person or business shall engage in the sale of a smoking product without first posting a plainly visible sign at the point of purchase of smoking products which states "THE SALE OF SMOKING PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. PHOTO ID IS REQUIRED TO PURCHASE SMOKING PRODUCTS." The letters of the sign shall be at least one-quarter-inch high. 
B.  No person, business, smoking retailer, or owner, manager or operator of any establishment subject to this chapter shall sell, offer to sell or permit to be sold any smoking product to an individual without requesting and examining identification establishing the purchaser's age as eighteen years or greater unless the seller has some reasonable basis for determining the buyer's age. 
C.  No person, business, smoking retailer or other establishment shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products not in the original packaging provided by the manufacturer and with all required health warnings. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any person, business or smoking retailer to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale or display for sale any smoking product by means of self-service merchandising or by means other than vendor-assisted sales. 
E.  No person, business or smoking retailer shall locate, install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance or use on his, her or its premises any smoking vending machine for the purposes of selling or distributing any smoking product. 
(Ord. No. 14-04, § 2(Exh. A), 4-16-2014)  
9.24.040 - Prohibitions—Parks. 
The use of smoking products of any kind, including but not limited to, chewing tobacco, cigars and cigarettes, e-cigarettes, and the discarding of lighted or unlighted cigarettes cigars, or discarding of e-cigarettes is prohibited in town parks which contain children's parks (playgrounds, pools, skate parks) or other structures built or installed for public use by children. 
(Ord. No. 14-04, § 2(Exh. A), 4-16-2014)  
9.24.050 - Other applicable laws. 
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking vending machines and distribution of smoking product samples where they are otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. Nor shall this article be construed to cause for breach of any pre-existing private contract, or cause for interference with regulations imposed by state or federal law or related to interstate commerce. 
(Ord. No. 14-04, § 2(Exh. A), 4-16-2014)  
9.24.060 - Violation, enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Any person, business or tobacco, retailer who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as specified in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
B.  The owner, operator or manager of any public place or place of employment within the purview of this chapter shall comply herewith. Such owner, operator or manager shall post or cause to be posted all signage required by this chapter. 
C.  It shall be the responsibility of employers to disseminate information concerning the provisions of this chapter to employees. 
(Ord. No. 14-04, § 2(Exh. A), 4-16-2014)  
9.24.070 - Non-retaliation. 
A.  No person or employee shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant agrees to abide by the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  No person shall intimidate or threaten any reprisal or effect any reprisal for the purpose of retaliating against another person because such other person seeks to attain compliance with provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-04, § 2(Exh. A), 4-16-2014)  
Chapter 9.26 - PROHIBITION AGAINST THE USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS IN AND AROUND WORKPLACES AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Sections: 
 
9.26.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall govern unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
"Business" means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, or any other entity formed for profit-making purposes or that has an employee, as defined in this section. 
"Dining area" means any area available to or customarily used by the general public that is designed, established, or regularly used for consuming food or drink. 
"Employee" means any person who is employed; retained as an independent contractor by any employer, as defined in this section; or any person who volunteers his or her services for an employer, association, nonprofit, or volunteer entity. 
"Employer" means any person, partnership, corporation, association, nonprofit or other entity who employs or retains the service of one or more persons, or supervises volunteers. 
"Enclosed" means: 
1.  Any covered or partially covered space having more than fifty percent of its perimeter area walled in or otherwise closed to the outside such as, for example, a covered porch with more than two walls; 
2.  Any space open to the sky (hereinafter "uncovered") having more than seventy-five percent of its perimeter area walled in or otherwise closed to the outside such as, for example, a courtyard; or 
3.  Except that an uncovered space of three thousand square feet or more is not enclosed, such as, for example, a field in an open-air arena. 
"Multi-unit residence" means a building or portion thereof that contains more than one dwelling space consisting of essentially complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including, for example, permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. A single-family house shared by roommates is not a multi-unit residence for purposes of this section. 
"Multi-unit residence common area" means any indoor or outdoor common area of a multi-unit residence accessible to and usable by more than one residence, limited to halls, lobbies, laundry rooms, outdoor eating areas, play areas, swimming pools and recreation areas. 
"Nonprofit entity" means any entity that meets the requirements of California Corporations Code Section 5003 as well as any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational, political, social or similar purposes, the net proceeds of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A public agency is not a nonprofit entity within the meaning of this section. 
"Place of employment" means any area under the legal or de facto control of an employer, business or nonprofit entity that an employee or the general public may have cause to enter in the normal course of operations, but regardless of the hours of operation, including, for example, indoor and outdoor work areas, construction sites, vehicles used in employment or for business purposes, taxis, employee lounges, conference and banquet rooms, bingo and gaming facilities, long-term health facilities, warehouses, and private residences that are used as childcare or health care facilities subject to licensing requirements. 
"Playground" means any park or recreational area designated in part to be used by children that has play or sports equipment installed or has been designated or landscaped for play or sports activities, or any similar facility located on public or private school grounds, or on the town of Mammoth Lakes grounds. 
"Public place" means any place, public or private, open to the general public regardless of any fee or age requirement, including, for example, bars, restaurants, clubs, stores, stadiums, parks, playgrounds, taxis and buses. 
"Reasonable distance" means a distance that ensures that occupants of an area in which smoking is prohibited are not exposed to secondhand smoke created by smokers outside the area. This distance shall be a minimum of twenty feet. 
"Recreational area" means any area, public or private, open to the public for recreational purposes regardless of any fee requirement, including, for example, parks, gardens, sporting facilities, stadiums, and playgrounds. 
"Service area" means any area designed to be or regularly used by one or more persons to receive or wait to receive a service, enter a public place, or make a transaction whether or not such service includes the exchange of money, including, for example, ATMs, bank teller windows, telephones, ticket lines, bus stops, and cab stands. 
"Significant tobacco retailer" means any tobacco retailer that derives seventy-five percent or more of gross sales receipts from the sale or exchange of tobacco products, smoking paraphernalia, and/or e-cigarettes. 
"Smoking" means possessing a lighted pipe, lighted cigar, lighted cigarette, or e-cigarette of any kind, or the lighting of a pipe, cigar, cigarette, or e-cigarette of any kind, including but not limited to those containing tobacco or any other weed or plant. 
"Tobacco product" means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco. 
(Ord. 06-06 §2 (Exh. A (part)), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 14-04, § 3, 4-16-2014)  
9.26.020 - Prohibition of smoking in public places, places of employment and certain other areas. 
A.  Enclosed Places. Smoking shall be prohibited in the following enclosed places within the town of Mammoth Lakes except in such places in which smoking is already prohibited by state and federal law in which case the state or federal law applies: 
1.  Public places; 
2.  Places of employment; 
3.  Multi-use residence common areas; 
4.  Enclosed areas adjacent to an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited by any other section of this code, state law, or federal law and that have a common or shared air space such as, without limitation, openings, cracks, air ventilation systems, doorways, hallways, and stairways. Notwithstanding any other provision, the fact that smoke enters one enclosed area from another enclosed area is conclusive proof that the areas share a common or shared air space; 
5.  Enclosed areas that have a common or shared ventilation, air conditioning or heating system with an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited. Notwithstanding any other provision, the fact that smoke enters one enclosed area from another enclosed area is conclusive proof that the areas share a common or shared air space. 
B.  Unenclosed Places. Smoking shall be prohibited in the following unenclosed places within the town of Mammoth Lakes except in such places in which smoking is already prohibited by state or federal law in which case the state or federal law applies: 
1.  Places of employment; 
2.  Service area; 
3.  Public places including dining area; 
4.  Multi-unit residence common areas; 
5.  Ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of transit depots; and 
6.  The sites of public events including, for example, sports events, entertainment, speaking performances, ceremonies, pageants, and fairs. 
C.  No person shall dispose of smoking waste within the boundaries of an area in which smoking is prohibited, including inside the perimeter of any reasonable distance required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 06-06 §2 (Exh. A (part)), 2006)  
9.26.030 - Reasonable smoking distance required—Twenty feet. 
A.  Smoking in unenclosed areas shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance from any entrance, opening, crack, or vent into an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited. 
B.  Smoking in unenclosed areas shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance from any unenclosed area in which smoking is prohibited under Section 9.26.020(B) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 06-06 §2 (Exh. A (part)), 2006)  
9.26.040 - Duty of person, employer, business or nonprofit entity. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any owner, landlord, employer, business, nonprofit entity, or any other person who controls any property, establishment, or place of employment regulated by this chapter may declare any part of such area in which smoking would otherwise be permitted to be a nonsmoking area. 
B.  "No smoking" or "smoke free" signs, with letters of no less than one-half inch in height or the international "no smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every enclosed and unenclosed place in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter, by the person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity that has legal or de facto control of such place. For purposes of this chapter, the town manager or designee shall be responsible for the posting of signs in regulated facilities owned or leased in part by the town. Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to the violation of any other provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 06-06 §2 (Exh. A (part)), 2006)  
9.26.050 - Penalties and enforcement. 
A.  Violations of this chapter shall be prosecuted as infractions and shall be punished, at a minimum, by a fine of one hundred dollars for a first violation, two hundred dollars for a second violation, and five hundred dollars for a third or subsequent violation. 
B.  Any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited is guilty of trespass and, if the area is accessible by the public or any other employee during the normal course of operations, such smoking constitutes a public nuisance. 
C.  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation. 
D.  The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedy available at law or in equity. 
E.  Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the town of Mammoth Lakes police department. Any peace officer or code enforcement official also may enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. 06-06 §2 (Exh. A (part)), 2006)  
Chapter 9.28 - HOSTING OF PARTIES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WHERE ALCOHOL IS CONSUMED BY MINORS 
Sections: 
 
9.28.010 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  The town council of the town of Mammoth Lakes finds and determines that the consumption of alcohol by minors at private parties or gatherings has been linked to an increase in alcohol abuse by minors and often results in or contributes to physical altercations, violent crimes including sexual offenses, accidental injury, neighborhood vandalism, and excessive noise disturbance, all of which may require intervention by law enforcement. 
B.  The enhancement of law enforcement's ability to abate parties where alcohol is consumed by minors will result in a decrease in the abuse of alcohol by minors, a decrease in the incidence of physical altercations and injuries, as well as decreased neighborhood vandalism and excessive noise disturbance, thereby improving public health and safety. 
C.  Problems associated with parties where minors are consuming alcohol are difficult to resolve unless those responsible for such parties are subject to criminal and/or civil liability for their conduct. 
D.  Town of Mammoth Lakes law enforcement has been required to respond, sometimes on multiple occasions, to parties on private property at which alcoholic beverages are served to or consumed by minors. Responses to such parties result in a disproportionate expenditure of the public safety resources of the town of Mammoth Lakes, and can result in delayed police department response to other law enforcement calls within the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
E.  The consumption of alcohol by minors is harmful to the health, safety and welfare of the community, and imposing criminal and civil liability, as well as liability for response costs, on persons responsible for or permitting such conduct is an effective means to prevent consumption of alcohol by minors. 
(Ord. 06-04 §1 (Exh. A (part)), 2006)  
9.28.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
"Alcohol" means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
"Alcoholic beverage" includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
"Family gathering" is a gathering where each minor present is supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian. 
"Guardian" means: 
1.  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
2.  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
"Juvenile" means any person under eighteen years of age. 
"Minor" means any person under twenty-one years of age. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person. 
"Party" means a group of three or more persons who have assembled or are assembling for a party, social occasion, or social activity at a private residence or on other private property. Party includes a gathering or event. 
"Police department's response costs" means the costs associated with responding to parties held at private residences or other private property at which alcohol is served to or consumed by minors, including but not limited to: 
1.  Salaries and benefits of law enforcement personnel for the time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with such parties; 
2.  The administrative costs attributable to such responses; 
3.  The cost of any medical treatment to or for any law enforcement personnel injured responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of such a party; and 
4.  The cost of repairing any town equipment or property damaged, and the cost of the loss of use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of such a party. 
"Private residence or other private property" means a home, yard, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall, community center, or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling, or only for a party, or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. 
"Responsible person(s)" means and includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  The person(s) who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has control of the premises where the party takes places; 
2.  The person(s) in charge of the premises where the party takes place; 
3.  The person(s) who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts or controls the party; and 
4.  The landlord of the person who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts or controls the party. 
(Ord. 06-04 §1 (Exh. A (part)), 2006)  
9.28.030 - Hosting parties on private property at which alcohol is consumed by minors. 
A.  Prohibition. No responsible person shall allow a party to take place or continue at a private residence or other private property if a minor at the party obtains, possesses, or consumes any alcoholic beverage and the person knows or reasonably should know that the minor has obtained, possesses, or is consuming alcoholic beverages at the party. 
B.  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to religious activities protected by Article 1, Section 4 of the California Constitution or to family gatherings. 
C.  Prima Facie Evidence of Knowledge. Whenever a responsible person is present at that residence or premises at the time that the minor obtains, possesses, or consumes any alcoholic beverage in violation of this section, it shall be prima facie evidence that such person had the knowledge, or should have had the knowledge, that the minor obtained, possessed, or consumed an alcoholic beverage at the party. 
D.  Penalty. A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 06-04 §1 (Exh. A (part)), 2006)  
9.28.040 - Civil fines for violation of chapter. 
In addition to or in lieu of the criminal penalty set forth above, any violation of this chapter may be enforced as a civil matter and civil fines may be imposed as follows: 
A.  The fine for a first violation is five hundred dollars; 
B.  The fine for a second or subsequent violation is one thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 06-04 §1 (Exh. A (part)), 2006)  
9.28.050 - Procedure for imposition of civil fine. 
A.  Citation. Upon discovering or observing a violation of Section 9.28.030 of this chapter the police department may provide the responsible person(s) with a citation. The citation shall: 
1.  Describe the location where the violation occurred, set forth the date and time of the violation and of the issuance of the citation (if different), and indicate the facts giving rise to the violation; 
2.  Inform the responsible person of his or her right to an administrative hearing if timely requested and of the procedure for making such a request as set forth in Section 9.28.080 of this chapter; 
3.  Specify the amounts of the fine or fines being imposed under the authority of this chapter, how such fines increase for subsequent violations, that such fines shall be paid to the town finance director/tax collector and the date by which payment is due. The date shall be thirty days from the date the citation is served. 
B.  Service. A civil citation for violation of this chapter shall be served as follows: 
1.  Personal service on the responsible person(s); or 
2.  Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested to the responsible person(s). Such service shall be deemed effective on the date of mailing. 
(Ord. 06-04 §1 (Exh. A (part)), 2006)  
9.28.060 - Police department's response costs. 
A.  Liability. Responsible persons shall be jointly and severally liable for police department's response costs when town law enforcement is called to respond for a second or subsequent time within any twelve-month period to a party at a private residence or other private property within the incorporated areas of town at which alcohol is served to or consumed by minors, provided that a warning has been given in accordance with subsection B of this section. 
B.  Warning. When town law enforcement makes a first or initial response to a party at a private residence or other private property within the unincorporated area of town, the officer shall inform any responsible person(s) at the scene that: 
1.  The officer has determined that alcohol is being served to or consumed by minors; and 
2.  Responsible person(s) will be charged for any response costs required for subsequent responses to the scene for a party at which alcohol is served to or consumed by minors within a twelve-month period. 
If a responsible person cannot be identified at the scene, the officer may issue a warning to one or more responsible persons later identified. Such warning(s) shall be made in person, or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. 
C.  Notice of Liability for Police Department's Response Costs. Upon the occurrence of a second or subsequent response by the police department to a private residence or other private property for a party at which alcohol is served to or consumed by minors, a notice of liability for police department's costs may be served on the responsible person(s). Service shall be made within thirty days of the response giving rise to such costs. The notice shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name(s) of the person(s) being held liable for the payment of such costs; 
2.  The address of the residence or other private property where the party occurred; 
3.  The date and time of the response; 
4.  The law enforcement provider who responded; 
5.  The date and time of the warning given pursuant to subsection B of this section; 
6.  An itemized list of the response costs for which the person is being held liable; 
7.  That payment shall be made to the town finance director/tax collector and the date by which payment is to be made; and 
8.  That the responsible person has a right to an administrative hearing if timely requested and a description of the procedure for making such a request as set forth in Section 9.28.080 of this chapter. 
D.  Service. A notice of liability for response costs shall be served as follows: 
1.  Personal service on the responsible person(s); or 
2.  Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested to the responsible person(s). Such service shall be deemed effective on the date of mailing. 
E.  Payment. The responsible person shall remit payment of the noticed response costs to the town finance director/tax collector within thirty days of the date of service of the notice of liability. The payment of any such costs shall be stayed upon a timely appeal made pursuant to Section 9.28.080 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 06-04 §1 (Exh. A (part)), 2006)  
9.28.070 - Collection. 
If any civil fine or response costs imposed pursuant to this chapter are not paid within ninety calendar days of the date that the fine or liability was imposed, then the town may file a claim in small claims court for collection thereof. If the amount owed is over five thousand dollars, then the town attorney or district attorney may file suit for collection in superior court. The town may collect on the judgment through any lawful means, including but not limited to recordation of a judgment lien in accordance with applicable legal requirements. 
(Ord. 06-04 §1 (Exh. A (part)), 2006)  
9.28.080 - Appeals. 
A.  Request for Hearing. Any person receiving a civil citation or a notice of liability for police department's response costs pursuant to this chapter may request an appeal hearing before the town manager or his designee (hereafter the "hearing officer") postmarked within ten business days from the date the citation or the notice of liability for police department's response costs was served. The request for a hearing must be made in writing and filed with the town clerk in person or by mail within ten business days from the date the citation was given. 
The failure of any person to timely request a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of his or her right to a hearing. 
B.  Notice of Hearing. 
1.  The town clerk shall set the date, time, and place for the hearing and shall serve written notice of same at least ten business days prior to the date of the hearing to the appellant by any one of the following means: 
a.  Personal service; 
b.  Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested to the responsible. Such service shall be deemed effective on the date of mailing. 
2.  The failure of the appellant to receive notice of the appeal hearing shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. 
C.  Conduct of Hearing. 
l.  The hearing officer shall consider any written or oral evidence presented at the hearing consistent with the following procedures: 
a.  The appellant shall have the burden of proof at the hearing; 
b.  The police department's report of the incident for which the violation and/or notice of liability for police department's response costs was issued shall be accepted into evidence; 
c.  The citation and/or notice of liability for police department's response costs shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein. 
2.  The hearing officer shall consider the facts of the case and shall draw its own independent conclusions as to the merits of the appeal; i.e., the appeal shall be heard de novo. 
3.  Upon conclusion of the hearing and receipt of information and evidence from all interested parties, the hearing officer may immediately render a decision, continue the proceeding or take the matter under submission and later render a decision. 
4.  The order and decision of the hearing officer shall be the final administrative action of the town. If the hearing officer finds that a violation has occurred and/or that the grounds for imposition of liability for police department's response costs exists, he or she may nevertheless, for good cause shown, reduce, waive or conditionally reduce the fines or response costs stated in the citation or notice. The hearing officer may also impose additional conditions and deadlines by which to pay outstanding fines and/or response costs. 
5.  The hearing officer shall produce a written order and decision setting forth findings in its support. The order and decision shall also inform the person who filed the appeal of his or her right under state law to appeal the order to the superior court within twenty days from the date that service of the final order is perfected on the party pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4(b)(1). 
6.  The town clerk shall serve the order and decision on the appellant within five working days after the decision is given to the clerk for filing. Service shall be by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. 
7.  If a citation is appealed under this section, then the fines or penalties will not be collected until the order and decision has been served on the appellant. Such service shall be deemed effective on the date of mailing. 
(Ord. 06-04 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2006)  
9.28.090 - Reservation of legal options. 
Town of Mammoth Lakes does not waive its rights to seek reimbursement for actual costs of enforcement services through other legal remedies or procedures. The procedure provided for in this chapter is in addition to any other statute, ordinance or law, civil or criminal. This chapter in no way limits the statutory authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this chapter. 
(Ord. 06-04 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2006)  
Chapter 9.32 - CURFEW 
Sections: 
 
9.32.010 - Definitions for curfew provisions. 
For purposes of Section 9.32.020 and this section: 
"Curfew hours" means the period from ten p.m. any evening of the week, until six a.m. the following day. 
"Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or a situation requiring the immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
"Establishment" means any privately owned place of business operating for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
"Guardian" means: (1) a person who, under court order is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
"Minor" means any person under eighteen years of age. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person. 
"Public place" means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
"Responsible adult" means a person at least eighteen years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
"Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. 07-03 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
9.32.020 - Curfew restrictions. 
A.  It is unlawful to any minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the town of Mammoth Lakes during curfew hours. 
B.  It is unlawful for any parent or guardian or a minor knowingly to permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the town of Mammoth Lakes during curfew hours. 
C.  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection A or B of this section that the minor was: 
1.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult; 
2.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, or the responsible adult, without any detour or stop; 
3.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
4.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
5.  Involved in an emergency; 
6.  On the street, sidewalk or right-of-way abutting the minor's residence; 
7.  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the town of Mammoth Lakes or county of Mono, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
8.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; or 
9.  Emancipated pursuant to law. 
D.  Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reasons for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under subsection C of this section is present or applicable. 
E.  Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 07-03 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
9.32.030 - Penalty. 
Any minor violating the provisions of Section 9.32.020 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. 
(Ord. 07-03 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
Chapter 9.34 - DAYTIME LOITERING DURING SCHOOL HOURS 
Sections: 
 
9.34.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "daytime loitering ordinance."  
9.34.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words have the following meanings: 
"Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
"Guardian" means (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
"Minor" means a person less than eighteen years of age. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or a stepparent of another person. 
"Public place" means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, parks, playgrounds, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, theatres, game rooms, shopping malls, or any other public place of business. 
"Public street" means a way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular travel or in the case of a sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes the legal right-of-way, including but not limited to, the traffic lanes, curbs, sidewalk whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. The term "street" applies irrespective of what the legal right-of-way is formally called whether alley, court, road, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-29-2009)  
9.34.030 - Loitering During school hours prohibited. 
A.  Minors. Except as provided in Section 9.34.040, it is unlawful for any minor who is subject to compulsory education, or to compulsory continuation education, or to a compulsory alternative education program, to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or be, in or upon any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, parking area, or other public ground, public place, or public building, or any place of amusement or eating place, vacant lot, or the premises of any establishment, or any other place open to the public in the Town of Mammoth Lakes during the minor's regular school hours on any day when school for that minor is in session or, in the case of a minor subject to a compulsory alternative education program, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on any day when that minor would otherwise be required to attend a compulsory education program. 
B.  Parents/Guardians. It is unlawful for the parent or guardian of any minor to knowingly permit or by insufficient control to allow the minor to be in violation of Section 9.34.030(A). 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-29-2009)  
9.34.040 - Defenses. 
It shall not be a violation of Section 9.34.030(A) if, at the time the minor is suspected of violating that Section, one or more of the following circumstances exist: 
A.  The minor is accompanied by his/her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; 
B.  The minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his/her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; 
C.  The minor is going directly to or returning from his/her place of school-sponsored or school-approved employment, and the minor has in his/her possession verification of that employment; 
D.  The minor is going directly to or returning directly from a medical appointment and has in his/her possession verification of that medical appointment; 
E.  The suspected violation occurs during the lunch period of that school that the minor attends and either the school has an "open campus" lunch period policy, or the minor has permission to leave campus for lunch and has in his/her possession a valid, school-issued off-campus permit; 
F.  The minor is attending, going directly to, or returning directly from a school-sponsored activity, such as a sporting event, field trip, movie, or play and the minor has in his/her possession verification of that school-sponsored activity; 
G.  The minor is going directly to or returning directly from an event or activity that is directly related to a medical condition of the parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; 
H.  The minor is the subject of an alternative, modified, or special school schedule or program such that the minor is not required to be at his/her school, even though his/her school is in session; 
I.  The minor is subject to a compulsory alternative education program and is going directly to or returning directly from a compulsory alternative education program activity; 
J.  The minor is exercising rights protected by the First Amendment to the Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and freedom of assembly; 
K.  The minor is not a resident of the Mono County, and the minor possesses a valid passport, visitor's visa, or other form of identification to establish that the minor is temporarily visiting within the county, or the minor is in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-29-2009)  
9.34.050 - Enforcement Procedure. 
Upon observing any violation of Section 9.34.030(A), a peace officer may issue a citation to the minor and may also do one of the following: 
A.  Detain the minor until he or she can be placed in the care and custody of his/her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; 
B.  Transport the minor to his/her home; or 
C.  Transport the minor to the school from which the minor is absent. 
Upon the minor's second and subsequent citation for violating Section 9.34.030(A), a peace officer may also issue a citation to the minor's parent or guardian for violation of Section 9.34.030(B). 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-29-2009)  
9.34.060 - Violations of Section 9.34.030(A). 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, when a minor is charged with a violation of Section 9.34.030(A) and a peace officer issues a notice to appear to that minor pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 256, the charge shall be deemed an infraction unless the minor requests that a petition be filed under Section 601 or 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. Each violation of Section 9.34.030(A) shall constitute a separate infraction. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-29-2009)  
9.34.070 - Penalties for Violations—Minors. 
Any minor found to have violated Section 9.34.030(A) is guilty of an infraction punishable by: (1) a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars and/or ten hours of community service for the first violation; (2) a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars and/or twenty hours of community service for the second violation; or (3) a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars and/or twenty-five hours of community service for the third or subsequent violations. Any community service imposed as punishment hereunder shall be served during a time other than the minor's hours of school attendance or employment. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-29-2009)  
9.34.080 - Penalties for Violations—Parents and Guardians. 
Any parent or guardian found to have violated Section 9.34.030(B) is guilty of an infraction punishable by: (1) a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars and/or ten hours of community service for the first violation; (2) a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars and/or twenty-five hours of community service for the second violation; or (3) a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars and/or fifty hours of community service for the third or subsequent violations. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-29-2009)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - SPEED LIMITS 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Authority. 
A.  Section 22352 of the Vehicle Code sets forth the prima facie speed limits. Therefore, as set forth in subsection (b) of the section, the prima facie speed limits on all town roads is twenty-five miles per hour unless otherwise set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Section 22357 of the Vehicle Code allows local authorities to establish a speed zone higher than the prima facie speed limit of twenty-five miles per hour when such high speed zone is based on an engineering and traffic survey. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.12.010)  
10.04.020 - Limits effective when signs erected. 
The prima facie speed limits set forth in Section 10.04.030 of this chapter shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon such a road. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.12.020)  
10.04.030 - Speed limits—Certain streets designated. 
A.  There is determined and declared a prima facie speed limit of twenty-five miles per hour on the following named road: 
1.  Old Mammoth Road, between Main Street (State Route 203) and a point seven hundred feet south of the intersection of Old Mammoth Road and Chateau Road. 
B.  There is determined and declared a prima facie speed limit of thirty-five miles per hour on the following named roads: 
1.  Lake Mary Road, between Minaret Road/Main Street (State Route 203) and the Ski Tunnel; 
2.  Forest Trail, between Minaret Road (State Route 203) and the easterly end of Pinecrest Avenue; 
3.  Meridian Boulevard, from one hundred and fifty feet east of the intersection of Meridian Boulevard and Sierra Park road to Old Mammoth Road; 
4.  Minaret Road, between Meridian Boulevard and Old Mammoth Road; 
5.  Old Mammoth Road, between Ski Trail and Evergreen Street. 
C.  There is determined and declared a prima facie speed limit of forty miles per hour on the following named streets: 
1.  Meridian Boulevard, between Old Mammoth Road and Majestic Pines Drive; 
2.  Minaret Road, between Lake Mary Road/Main Street (State Route 203) and Meridian Boulevard; 
3.  Old Mammoth Road, from seven hundred feet south of the intersection of Old Mammoth Road and Chateau Road to Ski Trail. 
D.  There is determined and declared a prima facie speed limit of forty-five miles per hour on the following named road: 
1.  Meridian Boulevard, from Main Street (State Route 203) to one hundred and fifty feet east of Sierra Park Road. 
(Ord. 02-04 § 1(part), 2002; Ord. 92-09 § 1, 1992: Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.12.030)  
Chapter 10.08 - ONE-WAY STREETS 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - One-way streets designated. 
The following roadways, streets, or portions thereof as delineated in this section are designated to be one-way in the direction indicated: 
A.  Rainbow Lane, from Warming Hut II parking lot to Mammoth Slopes Drive. The one-way direction of traffic is easterly along said Rainbow Lane from Warming Hut II parking lot to Mammoth Slopes Drive. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.28.010)  
Chapter 10.12 - PARKING 
Sections:  
ARTICLE I. - PARKING REGULATIONS 
 
10.12.010 - Definitions. 
Except as specifically provided in this section, the words used in this article shall be as defined in the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.04.010)  
10.12.020 - Traveled way. 
The traveled way shall be not less than fifteen feet on one-way roads, the roads being so marked by signs, or less than twenty-two feet on all other roads. The traveled way is equally spaced on both sides of the centerline. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.04.020)  
10.12.024 - Violation—Penalty and enforcement. 
A.  All bails for parking violations within the jurisdiction of the town shall be set by resolution of the town council. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter, as well as the provisions of the California Vehicle Code, may be enforced by the members of the town police department. 
(Ord. 03-13 § 3(part), 2003)  
10.12.030 - No parking for more than seventy-two hours. 
A.  No person shall cause or allow any vehicle owned by him or in his possession, custody or control, to be parked upon any street (including the right-of-way thereof), alley, or publicly owned parking lot for more than seventy-two consecutive hours. 
B.  Any member of the police department may remove any vehicle parked upon any street right-of-way, alley or publicly owned parking lot for more than seventy-two consecutive hours and shall, upon such removal, deal with such vehicle as provided in Sections 22650 through 22856 of the vehicle code of the state. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.04.025)  
10.12.040 - No parking zones designated. 
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any motor vehicle whether attended or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in cases of emergency or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the following designated areas: 
A.  Locations where the public works director has determined that such restrictions are necessary in order to improve traffic safety or provide for the orderly flow of traffic. Following the resolution of the town council approving such restriction, the public works director is authorized to place red curb or signs within or adjacent to such portions of town streets indicating such restrictions and the effective time periods. Such restrictions shall apply twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, unless otherwise indicated by the posted signs. 
B.  Locations where the chief of police has determined that traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons. The chief of police shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating such restrictions and the effective time period, provided that such temporary signs are erected or posted prior to the effective time period as follows: 
1.  At least twenty-four hours in advance in locations where parking is permitted for portions of one day, or; 
2.  At least seventy-two hours in advance in all other locations. 
C.  Locations where the public works director has determined that the use of a street or portion thereof is necessary for cleaning, repair, construction, snow removal, or installation of underground utilities. The public works director shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating such restrictions and the effective time period, provided that such temporary signs are erected or posted prior to the effective time period as follows: 
1.  At least twenty-four hours in advance in locations where parking is permitted for portions of one day, or; 
2.  At least seventy-two hours in advance in all other locations. 
(Ord. 03-10 § 1(part), 2003; Ord. 02-04 § 1(part), 2002; Ord. 01-11 § 1(part), 2001; Ord. 00-02 § 1(Exh. A), 2000; Ord. 99-07 § 1(1), 1999; Ord. 99-02 § 1(1); Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.04.030)  
10.12.050 - Exceptions. 
Any and all emergency vehicles, and any and all vehicles owned, operated or otherwise controlled by the town road division of the public works department are excepted from the provisions of Section 10.12.040 when such vehicles are being used on official business of the agency to which the vehicle belongs. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.04.040)  
10.12.060 - Removal. 
In the event any vehicle is stopped, parked, abandoned or left unattended in violation of the provisions of this article, any police officer or person authorized to remove or cause to be removed any such vehicle and to have such vehicle towed or otherwise removed to any public or private garage or parking area and to have such vehicle stored in such garage or parking area until claimed by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. 03-13 § 1(part), 2003; Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.04.050)  
10.12.080 - Angle parking prohibited except in zones designated. 
A.  No person shall stop, park or leave standing any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in any manner except parallel to the curb or edge of the street unless the location has been designated for angle parking as specified herein. 
B.  The public works director shall determine the days, times, and portions of town streets upon which angle parking shall be permitted. Following the resolution of the town council approving such permission, the public works director is authorized to place pavement markings or signs within or adjacent to such portions of town streets in which angle parking shall be permitted, indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked. Angle parking, in accordance with the designation placed by the public works director, shall be permitted during the days and times indicated and within the areas so designated. 
C.  When signs or pavement markings are in place indicating angle parking as herein provided, no person shall park or stand a vehicle at that location other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or pavement markings and within a single space. 
(Ord. 03-06 § 1(part), 2003; Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.04.070)  
10.12.081 - Application of regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing, stopping, or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this town, prohibiting or limiting the standing, stopping, or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. 03-10 § 1(part), 2003)  
10.12.082 - Restriction and limitation on parking. 
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon the street in any one block for a period of time in excess of any restriction or limitation on such stopping, standing, or parking posted on said block by the public works director following the resolution of the town council approving such restriction. Compliance requires that vehicles be removed from the block in which parked at the end of the allotted time so designated and not be parked again in said block for at least a three-hour period. As used in this chapter, "block" means both sides of any street between the nearest adjacent public street intersecting in each direction. 
(Ord. 03-10 § 1(part), 2003)  
10.12.083 - Removal of chalk marks. 
A.  The owner or operator of any motor vehicle exercising the privilege of parking a vehicle on any street or portion thereof where regulations are in effect restricting the length of time vehicles may be parked on a street or portion thereof does so on the condition that the police officers of the town may place chalk or other removable marks on the tire of the vehicle for the purpose of enforcing such parking regulations. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to erase, rub out, conceal or otherwise remove, any chalk or other mark so placed by a police officer while the marked vehicle remains parked on the said street or portion thereof. For the purpose of this section, the movement of a previously marked vehicle in such a manner as to cause the tire marking to be concealed or removed, and without leaving the parking space or the block where such vehicle was parked when its tires were previously marked shall be deemed to be an erasure or removal of such chalk or other marking. 
(Ord. 03-10 § 1(part), 2003)  
10.12.084 - Signs to indicate parking regulations—Authority of public works director. 
A.  Following the resolution of the town council approving such regulation, the public works director is authorized to place signs to indicate parking, standing, or stopping regulations, and the signs shall have the meanings as herein set forth. Such regulations shall apply twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, unless otherwise indicated by the posted signs. 
1.  "Commercial Loading Only" means no stopping, standing or parking during any times or days posted for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of freight, providing that the loading or unloading of freight shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor. "Freight" is defined as goods ordinarily transported by common carrier. 
2.  "Passenger Loading Only" means no stopping, standing or parking during any times or days posted for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or personal baggage provided that the loading or unloading shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor. 
3.  "Taxis Only" means no stopping, standing or parking during any times or days posted for any vehicle other than a taxicab licensed for business by the town. No owner or driver of any taxicab shall park or stand upon any street in the town for any period of time longer than is necessary to discharge or receive passengers then occupying or then waiting for such taxicab. 
B.  When the public works director as authorized under this section has caused signs to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible signs in violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 03-13 § 1(part), 2003)  
10.12.085 - Unauthorized signs, curb, or street markings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to apply to a curb or street, or adjacent to any street, any signs, paint, or markings which shall tend to mislead operators of vehicles into believing that the same is an official traffic parking, loading zone, no parking area, or private parking area. 
(Ord. 03-13 § 1(part), 2003)  
ARTICLE II. - WINTER PARKING ON TOWN ROADS 
 
10.12.100 - Winter parking prohibition. 
A.  The parking or standing of vehicles in designated areas on the roadside of the snow stakes along any town road from November 1st through April 30th is prohibited unless the location has been designated for winter parking as specified herein. 
B.  The public works director shall determine the days, times, and portions of town streets upon which winter parking shall be permitted. Following the resolution of the town council approving such permission, the public works director is authorized to place pavement markings or signs within or adjacent to such portions of town streets in which winter parking shall be permitted. Winter parking, in accordance with the designation placed by the public works director, shall be permitted during the days and times indicated and within the areas so designated. 
(Ord. 03-06 § 1(part), 2003; Ord. 01-06 § 1, 2001; Ord. 99-07 § 1(2), 1999; Ord. 99-02 § 1(2); Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.05.010)  
10.12.106 - Obstructing snow removal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, abandon, or otherwise leave unattended any vehicle as defined in Section 670 of the California Vehicle Code on any town right-of-way at any time or in any manner which will obstruct, hinder, delay or otherwise inconvenience any town officer, employee or town contractor during snow removal operations or which will leave the vehicle in such a position that it is subject to damage by town officers, employees or town contractors engaged in snow removal operations. 
(Ord. 03-13 § 3(part), 2003)  
10.12.110 - Towing of parked vehicles. 
A.  Any member of the California Highway Patrol and any designated employee of the police department of the town, may remove any vehicle parked or left standing upon any town road in violation of this article during the period of November 1st through April 30th of any year. 
B.  Vehicles so towed away pursuant to the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be removed to the nearest facility for the storage and safekeeping of vehicles. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.05.020)  
10.12.120 - Preferential parking areas. 
Preferential parking areas may be established by resolution of the town council and are effective only when properly signed. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.05.030)  
ARTICLE III. - OVERNIGHT PARKING 
 
10.12.140 - Definitions. 
Except as specifically provided in this section, the words used in this article shall be as defined in the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.24.010)  
10.12.150 - Prohibited. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle between the hours of ten p.m. and four-thirty a.m. in the following described areas: 
A.  Shady Rest Park. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.24.020)  
10.12.160 - Exceptions. 
Vehicles, trailers, semitrailers and other wheeled or sledded vehicles authorized under Article 2, Chapter 5, Part 1, Division 1 of the Public Utilities Code, laws of the state, any and all emergency vehicles, and any and all vehicles owned, operated or otherwise controlled by the town are excepted from provisions of Section 10.12.150 of this article. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.24.030)  
10.12.170 - Removal. 
In the event any vehicle is stopped, parked, abandoned or left unattended in violation of the provisions of this article, any police officer or person authorized to remove or cause to be removed any such vehicle and to have such vehicle towed or otherwise removed to any public or private garage or parking area and to have such vehicle stored in such garage or parking area until claimed by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. 03-13 § 1(part), 2003; Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.24.040)  
10.12.200 - Overnight parking at Mammoth Lakes airport. 
A.  No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle at the Mammoth Lakes airport between the hours of eleven p.m. and seven a.m., unless such vehicle is parked in an area designated for overnight parking and pays the fee required for such parking. 
B.  Any person who fails to pay the fee required for overnight parking within seventy-two hours after such fee becomes due, shall be liable to the town for such fee, together with an additional late payment fee of twenty dollars per day for each day, or part thereof, said vehicle was parked, up to a maximum of one hundred dollars. 
C.  Delinquent overnight parking charges may be collected by the town manager or his designee, the town police department, or the airport manager or his designee, by any means available for the collection of delinquent parking charges. Such enforcement may include the issuance of parking tickets and the use of administrative collection processes as are available under state law. 
(Ord. 96-03 § 1, 1996)  
Chapter 10.16 - RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF HIGHWAYS BY CERTAIN VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Selling from vehicles—Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person or persons to park or place any vehicle or structure wholly or partly within any town street or road for the purpose of selling the same or for selling therefrom or therein any article, service or thing. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.08.010)  
10.16.020 - Selling from vehicles—Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person parking any such vehicle or placing any such structure wholly or partly within any such street or road for the purpose of selling such vehicle or structure, or of selling therefrom or therein any article or thing, and any person selling, displaying for sale or offering for sale any article or thing either in or from any such vehicle or structure so parked or placed, and any person storing, servicing, repairing or otherwise working upon any such vehicle, other than upon a vehicle which is temporarily disabled, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars or more than three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in jail for not less than ten days or more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit a seller from taking orders or delivering any commodity on that part of any town street or road immediately adjacent to the premises of the purchaser. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.08.020)  
10.16.030 - Unauthorized vehicles prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drive or permit or cause to be driven any unauthorized vehicle, including snowmobiles, upon any property of the town including street rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.08.030)  
10.16.040 - Golf cart crossing zone. 
A golf cart crossing zone is established on Meridian Boulevard, at the east side of the intersection with Minaret Road. Golf carts are only permitted to use the crossing zone during daylight hours. All provisions of the California Vehicle Code must be obeyed while driving golf carts in the designated golf cart crossing zone. 
(Ord. 97-16 § 1, 1997)  
Chapter 10.20 - ABANDONED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.20.010 - Nuisance declaration. 
A.  In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the town council makes the following findings and declarations: The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, is found to: 
1.  Create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property; 
2.  Promote blight and deterioration; 
3.  Invite plundering; 
4.  Create fire hazards; 
5.  Constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; 
6.  Create a harborage for rodents and insects; and 7. Be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Therefore the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof on private or public property, except as expressly permitted by this chapter, constitutes a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.010)  
10.20.020 - Definitions. 
The definitions contained in Division 1 of the California Vehicle Code shall govern the interpretation of the words used in this chapter except for the following: 
"Hearing officer" means the town manager or his designee. 
"Nuisance" means as specified in Section 10.20.010, and as defined in Chapter 8.20 of this code. 
"Owner of land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
"Owner of vehicle" means "owner" as that term is defined in the California Vehicle Code. 
"Police department" also means any officer or deputy of the town police department or the code enforcement officer. 
"Public property" does not include "highway." 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.020)  
10.20.030 - Exemptions. 
A.  This chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building or is enclosed by a solid approved fence six feet in height in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
2.  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such a storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter; except possession or control of a tow service, garage or other business and when the Vehicle Code sections do not adequately apply to the removal. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.030)  
10.20.040 - Applicable regulations. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the town. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the town, the state or any other legal entity or agency. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.040)  
10.20.050 - Enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the town police department, or the town code enforcement officer. In the enforcement of this chapter, such officer may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle (and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof) declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.050)  
10.20.060 - Removal. 
When the town has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance. Pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 21100(g), all towing services legally operating in the town shall be required to abate and tow any vehicle upon request from the authorized town employee. The town council may, by resolution, fix the rates charged by towing services for towing and/or abating vehicles in the town. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.060)  
10.20.070 - Removal—Administrative cost determination. 
The town council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.070)  
10.20.080 - Authority to abate. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the town, the town police department shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.075)  
10.20.090 - Notice of intent to abate. 
A.  A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified mail, or hand delivered, to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of the owner of the land) 
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Section 10.20.080 of the Mammoth Lakes Code, has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle registered to _______, license number _______, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.20 of the Mammoth Lakes Code. 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the Town, and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or parts of said vehicle) is located. 
As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice of intention, request a hearing and if such a request is not received in the Town of Mammoth Lakes administrative offices, addressed to Code Enforcement, within such 10 day period, the Town shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying the responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle, or in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
Notice mailed _______ 
Signed, 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle-notice should be given to both if different) 
As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle-make, model, license, etc.) you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Chapter 10.20 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Mammoth Lakes has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of said Chapter 10.20. 
You are hereby notified to abate the said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days of this notice. 
As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a hearing and if such a request is not received by the Town of Mammoth Lakes in the administrative offices, addressed to the Code Enforcement Officer, within such 10-day period, the Town shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing. 
Notice Mailed _______ 
Signed, 
B.  Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the town within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a hearing shall be held on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as a abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
C.  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day period, the statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail or hand delivered, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the town shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a hearing. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.076)  
10.20.100 - Hearing—Notice to highway patrol. 
If the abatement officer is other than a peace officer, as that term is defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code, notice of hearing shall also be given to the California Highway Patrol identifying the vehicle or part thereof proposed for removal, such notice to be mailed at least ten days prior to the public hearing or abatement, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.090)  
10.20.110 - Hearing—Procedure—Removal action. 
A.  All hearings under this chapter shall be held before a hearing officer which shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or part thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private or public property. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicles on the land, with his reasons for such denial; however, unless accompanied by written evidence of letters of similar efforts to remove the vehicle, such denial shall not conclusively absolve the property owner of responsibility for vehicle removal and administrative costs. 
B.  The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or part thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the hearing officer may find that a vehicle or part thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which the vehicle or part thereof is located. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or part thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the vehicle is abandoned if the hearing officer finds that all the following exist: the vehicle is illegally parked; the vehicle cannot be safely operated on public streets; the vehicle is not currently registered. The hearing officer may also consider any other similar factors. The hearing officer shall prepare and mail to the vehicle owner and the owner of the land a written version of the order. Any order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
C.  If the owner of the land submits a sworn statement denying responsibility for presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the hearing officer but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.100)  
10.20.120 - Appeals. 
A.  Any interested party may appeal the order of the hearing officer by filing a written notice of appeal with the town clerk within ten days after the order. 
B.  The appeal shall be reviewed by the town council, but the appellant shall not be entitled to de novo review. The determination of the hearing shall be upheld if supported by substantial evidence in the record taken as a whole and the decision is not arbitrary or capricious. 
C.  Notwithstanding, the town council may affirm, amend or reverse the order of the hearing officer or take other action deemed appropriate, including remanding the matter back for further hearing. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.110)  
10.20.130 - Removal of vehicle or parts thereof. 
Ten days after the mailing of the notice of intention to abate specified in Section 10.20.090, ten days after the date of mailing of the order of the hearing officer specified in Section 10.20.100, or ten days after the action of the town council authorizing removal following an appeal as specified in Section 10.20.110, the vehicle or part thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which qualified for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to Section 5004 of the California Vehicle Code, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.120)  
10.20.140 - Removal—Department of motor vehicles noti fication. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates of title and license plates. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.130)  
10.20.150 - Removal—Cost payment—Assessment. 
If the administrative costs and costs of removal which are charged against the owner or a parcel of land pursuant to this chapter are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 25845 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other town taxes. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.140)  
10.20.160 - Storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles prohibited. 
It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to abandon, park, store or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing, or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or part thereof which is in any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property not including highways, within the town for a period in excess of fifteen days unless the vehicle or part thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or others public or private property or is enclosed by a solid approved fence so as not to be visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless the vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler or licensed vehicle dealer. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.150)  
10.20.170 - Failure to remove vehicle an infraction. 
It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or state law where the state law is applicable. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.20.160)  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 12.04 - CONSTRUCTION AND ENCROACHMENTS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
Sections: 
 
12.04.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate work within public rights-of-way to control the nature, type, depth, location of the work and facilities placed therein or thereon; to regulate safety standards, traffic protection, repair of damage, relocation of facilities, liability, bonds and insurance; and to permit the continuance of regulated encroachments within the public right-of-way. The purpose is also to protect the traveling public and pedestrians from unsafe conditions connected with the work. This chapter may be cited as the right-of-way construction chapter. 
In order to further the purposes of this chapter, the director is authorized to administer its provisions, including issuing bulletins and policies to interpret or clarify the technical details of this chapter. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Agent" means a person duly and legally authorized in writing to act for another. 
"Annual permit" means a permit issued annually for ordinary maintenance or emergency work for all permittee's facilities in the right-of-way. 
"Construction standard details" means the rules and regulations of the director specifying details of work to be completed in the right-of-way. 
"Contractor" means any licensed contractor legally acting as an agent of or on the behalf of the owner, or the owner, if the owner is doing the construction himself. 
Council. See "Town council." 
"Department" means the department of public works of the town of Mammoth Lakes, or any of its officers or employees. 
Director. See "Public works director." 
"Emergency" as used in this chapter, means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this town caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this town, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
"Encroachment" includes any tower, pole, pole line, pipe, pipeline, fence, billboard, stand, curb, driveway, paving, facility, building, excavation or any structure or object of any kind or character not specifically mentioned in this definition, which is placed in, under or over any portion of the right-of-way of a town street. 
"Facilities" as used in this chapter, means any permanent, or temporary placement of any tangible item or items in, on or under any town right-of-way, including but not limited to, items such as pipelines, storage tanks and other equipment used in the movement of goods to consumers. 
"Franchisee" means any person who has entered into a duly authorized franchise agreement with the town permitting the placement of structures within the public right-of-way. 
"Permittee" means any person to whom the town has issued a right-of-way construction permit pursuant to this chapter. The permittee shall be the owner or their authorized agent. A person who has applied for, or is in the process of applying for, a right-of-way construction permit pursuant to this chapter may be described as an "applicant." "Permittee" and "applicant" includes agents thereof. 
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, business entity, whether or not incorporated, district, organization or governmental agency other than the town. 
"Planning department" or "planning" means the planning department of Mammoth Lakes, or any of its duly authorized officers or employees. 
"Planning director" means the planning director of the town of Mammoth Lakes, or his/her duly authorized representative. 
"Public works department" or "public works" means the public works department of the town of Mammoth Lakes, or any of its duly authorized officers or employees. 
"Public works director" or "director" means the public works director of the town of Mammoth Lakes or his/her duly authorized representative. 
"Right-of-way" means any public right-of-way, including but not limited to, streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, curb or curb cutouts, or any property which the town may lawfully use as a right-of-way. 
"Right-of-way construction" means the erecting, constructing, enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, improving, removing, converting or demolishing, equipping, using, occupying or maintaining any tangible structure or facility, or excavating any soil, located wholly or partially in, on, above or below any public right-of-way. 
"State" means the state of California or any of its agencies, officers or employees. 
"State specifications" means the current standard specifications of the state Business and Transportation Agency, Department of Transportation (CalTrans). 
"Street" includes all or any part of the entire width of right-of-way of a town street, road or alley, whether or not such entire area is actually used for street purposes. 
"Town" means the town of Mammoth Lakes, or any of it agencies, officers or employees. 
"Town council" or "council" means the town council of the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Town manager" or "manager" means the town manager of the town of Mammoth Lakes, or his/her duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.030 - Permit required. 
A.  No person may engage in or cause any construction within the public right-of-way without first obtaining from the director a right-of-way construction permit or an encroachment permit, as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A, a person is not required to obtain a right-of-way construction permit or an encroachment permit for the following: 
(1)  The ordinary maintenance of existing facilities if such is authorized under a franchise granted by the town. Such facilities shall, however, be maintained in compliance with the construction requirements of this chapter and signing and traffic control shall conform to state specifications. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the franchisee shall notify the town and provide a copy of the plans for such facilities a reasonable time prior to their maintenance. 
(2)  Construction within the town right-of-way performed by the town or pursuant to contracts awarded by the town. 
(3)  Trimming of privately-owned trees around overhead facilities provided traffic control is in accordance with state specifications. 
(4)  Work performed pursuant to an annual permit pursuant to Section 12.04.160. 
(5)  Work performed by a franchisee to make repairs to existing facilities in response to an emergency, as defined in Section 12.04.020, when such repairs are necessary to protect the public health and safety, provided notice is given to the director as soon as reasonably practicable. 
(6)  Work deemed by the director to be of such a minimal scope and non-intrusive nature that it shall be exempted. The director shall have the discretion to review work proposed and is solely authorized to make the determination of eligibility under this subsection. The director may issue a letter of exemption to any person for work exempted pursuant to this section. 
All exempted work shall control erosion and sediment and shall conform to the dust and erosion control practices as outlined in Sections 12.08.090(B) and 12.08.100, the construction standard details on file with the director, and all other standards contained herein. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.040 - Permits—Application. 
A.  Written application. Every application for a right-of-way construction permit shall be in writing upon forms to be provided by the director and shall contain a statement of the location and purpose of the proposed construction, the length of time for the construction, a diagram or detailed drawings of the construction, a traffic control plan, and a work staging plan. The application shall be dated and shall bear the signature and address of the applicant. 
B.  Plans. The proposed work shall be shown on a set of plans, two sets of which are to be submitted to the department, along with the application for permit. If required by the director, the facility to be installed shall be staked on the ground or otherwise marked. 
C.  Fees. No right-of-way construction permit shall be issued until the applicant has paid the fee for said permit. The amount of the fee shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the town council. The fee shall cover the town's costs to process the application and to maintain any inventory or data base of facilities that are installed, maintained or repaired. 
D.  Inspection deposit. Prior to the issuance of a permit, a deposit in an amount sufficient to cover the estimated cost of inspections shall be made. An accounting shall be kept of all fees charged against the deposit and the permittee may be asked to supplement the deposit if the director believes the deposit will be insufficient and in such case the permittee will do so within five days of the request. All surplus amounts shall be returned to permittee. The director may, in the case of a utility holding an annual permit, upon receipt of a written promise by the utility to pay such fees, permit the utility to pay such fees on a quarterly basis. No subsequent permits shall be issued to any applicant until inspection fees and other charges previously incurred have been paid in full. 
E.  Security. Except for work performed by franchisees, both a performance security and a warranty security, in the form and amount acceptable to the director, shall be required prior to the issuance of a permit. Failure to provide appropriate security as required will be grounds for denial of the permit requested. The securities shall comply with the following: 
1.  The amount of the performance security shall be sufficient to defray the cost of repairing the streets and any other disturbed facilities at prevailing wage plus cover all costs incurred by the town, and shall be in an amount equal to one hundred fifty percent of the cost of the work contemplated, as supported by documentation provided by the applicant or permittee. In addition, a warranty security in the amount of twenty-five percent of the performance security shall be provided. 
2.  In lieu of the security described in Section 12.04.040(F)(1), a person may furnish an annual performance security to cover their contemplated work for a calendar year. The amount of such an annual security shall be one hundred fifty percent of the amount of cost of the work contemplated during the year, as supported by documentation provided by the applicant or permittee, as determined by the director. In addition, a warranty security in the amount of twenty-five percent of the annual performance security shall be provided. 
3.  The security may be a bond, a certificate of deposit, a letter of credit or cash deposit, or other form approved by the town attorney. The security shall be issued by an entity in good standing with sufficient assets to secure the obligation, as determined by the town's director of finance. 
4.  All performance securities submitted shall be held until sixty days following the satisfactory completion of the work as approved by the director. All warranty securities shall be held until one year following the completion date and only released upon the certification by the director that all work is in a satisfactory condition. 
F.  Insurance. The applicant shall provide proof of adequate insurance as provided in Section 12.04.170. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.050 - Permits—Issuance. 
A.  Issuance. If the applicant complies in all respects with this chapter and with all other applicable laws, rules, regulations or ordinances of the town, or of any other public agency, and pays the fees and posts security required by this chapter, then the director may approve the application and issue the permit. 
B.  Responsible party; transfer. Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be issued only to the owner, or his/her agent, of the facilities that are planned to be placed in the public right-of-way, or other person responsible for the construction. A separate permit will be required for work at each location unless the locations are contiguous and the entire work is included in the plans accompanying the application. In the event an agent is acting for the owner of the facilities, when authorized in writing by the owner, the agent may pay the fee and sign for the permit; however, the original of the permit will be transmitted to the owner of the facility and the owner and agent shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event a private property owner is the owner of the facilities, the permit shall run with the property and it shall be considered transferred to any subsequent property owner. The permit shall not be otherwise transferred, and any such attempted transfer shall be void. 
C.  Findings. No permit shall be issued if the issuance of such permit will pose a safety hazard to the public, if there are alternative and superior means of accomplishing the work without the proposed construction, if the work will permanently degrade public facilities, or if other similar cause for denying the permit exists. No permit shall be issued by the director for any purpose if the construction thereof will violate the provisions of any federal or state law, or town ordinance. Any permit issued contrary to the provisions of this chapter may be voided by the director at any time. 
D.  Permit. Each permit shall describe the location and extent of the work, the start date and duration, the permittee to whom the permit is issued, any conditions placed on the permit, and such other information as the director shall prescribe. 
E.  Acceptance. It is understood and agreed by the permittee that the doing of any work or the maintaining of any encroachment under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute an acceptance of the terms and provisions of the permit. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.060 - Work to be diligently prosecuted—Completion by town. 
A.  Compliance. Any act done under the authority of a written permit, issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be done in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the terms and conditions specified in the permit. Noncompliance with this chapter or the permit issued shall be cause for the director to stop all work until compliance is achieved or the condition remedied. In such case, the director may issue a stop work order, impose new conditions on the permit, or suspend or revoke the permit by notifying the permittee in writing. 
B.  Diligent prosecution. After commencement of work, the work shall be prosecuted with due diligence to completion, and in a manner so as not to obstruct any public right-of-way more than is permitted by the permit. If the work is not so prosecuted, or if the work does not, in the judgment of the director, comply with the terms of this chapter, or if a condition of hazard or nuisance is created which is a threat to public health, safety or welfare, the director shall notify the permittee, in writing, and require the permittee to take such corrective measures as may be determined by the director. 
C.  Action by town. In any case where the work is not completed or restored in the time and manner as specified in the permit, this chapter or the construction standard details, the director shall order the permittee to complete the work as directed within a specified period. If the permittee should fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the order, the director may complete, cause to be completed, or remove such work in such manner as the director deems expedient and appropriate. The permittee shall compensate the town for any costs associated with the administration, construction, consultants, equipment, inspection, notifications, remediation, repair, restoration, or any other actual costs incurred by the town. The director shall keep a record of all costs incurred in performing such work and shall present permittee with a demand for payment upon completion of the work, and permittee shall pay the same within thirty days thereafter. When, in the judgment of the director, a hazard to the public exists, the director may take immediate action appropriate to the hazard and necessary for the protection of the public, without giving prior notice to the permittee, as provided in Section 12.04.090. 
D.  Expiration. A right-of-way construction permit shall expire if work has not commenced within thirty days following the issuance of the permit, or such other time as may be specified in the permit, or if work has timely commenced, shall expire upon the date specified in the permit for completion of the work. The director may grant extensions for good cause. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.070 - Permit requirements. 
A.  All work shall be performed in accordance with town and state specifications for signage, barricades, lighting, traffic control, and similar matters to protect the public safety. 
B.  The proposed closing of any street or lane, detour routes, or other traffic control plans including signage shall be stated on the permit application and the plans. The director has the sole authority to authorize the closing of any street under the permit issued pursuant to this chapter and may do so based upon considerations of hazard to the public and public inconvenience. 
C.  The permittee may place materials within the street right-of-way as necessary for doing the work authorized by the permit, provided that such materials are placed, barricaded and lighted as required by this chapter or any other law or ordinance of the town or state, and approved by the director. 
D.  When required by the planning department, above ground facilities shall be screened from public view in an approved manner. 
E.  The permit or a copy thereof shall be kept at the job site during construction and/or installation of any facilities authorized by such permit, and shall be made available upon request to any town employee, police officer, peace officer, CalTrans employee or other person having jurisdiction in such right-of-way. 
F.  No person shall perform excavation work until after he or she has called USA ALERT at 1-800-642-2444. Underground utilities shall be marked on the ground prior to the start of any excavation work. 
G.  As-built plans shall be submitted to the department upon completion of the work specified in the permit if required by the permit. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.080 - Restoration of public right-of-way. 
A.  Conditions regarding completion. The permittee shall return the disturbed portion of the street and other affected public structures and facilities to as good, or better, condition as before, as determined by the director and shall conform to such other conditions as the director may require for the protection of the street and safety of the public. 
B.  Cleaning up streets. In every case and at all times, the work of removing from the street all obstructions, surplus materials, debris and waste matter of every description caused by and accumulated from the excavation shall be responsible of the permittee. 
C.  Subsequent failure. If, subsequent to the first repair of a surface of a right-of-way damaged or destroyed by construction or an encroachment, it becomes necessary again to repair such surface due to settlement, or any other cause directly attributable to such construction or encroachment, the director shall inform the permittee in writing of the director's findings, the corrective action required, and the reasons therefore. In such event, the director shall have the same authority as provided in Section 12.04.060C. 
D.  Repair of sunken pavement. In case the pavement or the surface of the street or alley over any excavation should become depressed or broken at any time within three years after the excavation has been completed and before resurfacing of the street or alley, natural wear of the surface excepted, the permittee shall, upon written notice from the director, immediately proceed to inspect the depressed or broken area over the excavation to ascertain the cause of the failure. The permittee shall make repairs to the installation or backfill and have the pavement restored as specified by the director within such time period as may be specified by the director. If the pavement is not restored as specified by the director within the time period specified by the director, and unless delayed by a strike or conditions beyond permittee's control, the director may cause the work to be done after giving the permittee ten days' written notice. The cost thereof, including any inspection costs and administrative overhead incurred by town, shall be assessed against the permittee. After the cost is paid to town, the town shall be responsible for any future repairs of that portion of pavement over the excavation that was repaired by town. 
E.  Liability of permittee. Except as specifically provided in this section, repair or restoration by the town in accordance with this chapter shall not relieve the person(s) from any and all liability at the site of the repair or restoration, including, but not limited to, future failures. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.090 - Emergency remediation by the department. 
A.  If, in the judgment of the director, the site of an excavation is considered hazardous, constitutes a public nuisance, public emergency, or other imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare that requires immediate action, the director shall order the condition remedied by written, oral, telephonic or facsimile communication to the permittee or any agent thereof and shall designate the permittee as the responsible party. 
B.  If a responsible party is inaccessible or fails, neglects, or refuses to take immediate action to remedy the condition as specified in said communication, the director shall remedy the condition or cause the condition to be remedied in such a manner as the director deems expedient and appropriate. The person(s) identified by the director as the responsible party shall compensate the town for any reasonable costs associated with the administration, construction, consultants, equipment, inspection, notification, remediation, repair, restoration, or any other actual costs incurred by the town. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.100 - Relocation of facilities. 
In the event of any future construction, reconstruction, maintenance, widening, regrading or similar improvements, of any town right-of-way or place, any facilities placed in such right-of-way or placed under permit are subject to relocation, lowering replacement, repair or removal when requested by the town to avoid conflicts with the proper governmental use of town's right-of-way or place. Any relocation, lowering replacement, repair or removal of the facilities that may be required by the town shall be done at the expense of the owner of the facilities. The town shall give at least one hundred eighty days' written notice of the need to relocate the facilities. In the event the owner fails to timely relocate the facilities, the town may remove or disconnect the facilities and charge the owner the reasonable and actual costs thereof. Any facilities placed under franchise to the town shall be relocated according to the terms of the franchise. This section shall not apply to facilities in place prior to the existence of the road. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.110 - Standards of right-of-way construction. 
A.  Standards. All construction and excavations shall be performed according to the terms of the permit and the construction standard details on file with the director. 
B.  Special specifications. The director may issue special specifications for the work which, if said specifications conflict with the provisions of this chapter, shall supercede the construction standards set forth herein. The standards and requirements may impose different requirements for different excavations, taking into consideration relevant factors, such as the location, type, and extent of excavation performed, the condition of the surface being excavated, and the period of time elapsed since the construction or most recent resurfacing of the surface being excavated. In the event specifications do not expressly conflict, the permittee is required to comply with both the provisions of this chapter and the special specifications. 
C.  Lateral support. All excavations, both with the right-of-way and within property adjacent to the right-of-way should be performed, and all facilities shall be constructed and maintained, so as to afford lateral, sublateral, adjacent and overhead support to surrounding embankments and structures, including in the case of adjacent property, proper lateral support for town streets, lines, pipes, and facilities. 
D.  Review by director. All work shall be done subject to the review of, and to the satisfaction of, the director. 
E.  Periodic review. The standards and requirements shall be reviewed at least once every five years to determine whether any changes can be made to improve the standards for the performance of the work hereunder, to prevent or substantially reduce the degradation and damage caused to the street surface by excavation, to enhance the protection of the public in the performance of the work, and to enact other changes beneficial in the opinion of the director. As part of such review, the director shall provide affected utilities with an opportunity to review and comment upon the standards and requirements and any changes proposed thereto. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.120 - Inspection of work. 
A.  The director may require a permittee to reimburse the town for actual and reasonable costs of all inspections. 
B.  The permittee shall call the public works department of the town a minimum of twenty-four hours prior to any work in the right-of-way to provide notification that the permitted work is about to begin, and to schedule inspections by the department. 
C.  The contractor shall call the director for final inspection to determine that all work has been satisfactorily completed pursuant to the permit. The approval by the town shall be in writing by issuance of a certification of completion. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.130 - Presence of water. 
A.  Where evidence indicates that the presence of surface or subsurface waters may contribute to construction hazards, difficulties, or settlement of a trench zone either in its natural state or as a result of trenching operations, the director may require construction or installation of above or below ground, temporary or permanent, facilities to collect the waters and convey them to an acceptable point of discharge. Such facilities may also include off-site facilities. 
B.  Should any springs, aquifers or other sources of underground water be discovered during any excavation or trenching operation, the excavation or trenching in the area shall be discontinued until provisions acceptable to the director are made to remedy the condition. The director may require the project to be redesigned by an engineer to accommodate the additional waters, including removal and replacement of any unsuitable materials, dirt, pavement or other similar materials. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.140 - Revegetation. 
Either the public works director or the planning director may require revegetation of disturbed areas of landscaping or to prevent future soil erosion. All clearing, grading, excavation and fill work, including excavation and embankment slope surfaces, shall be protected from erosion by revegetation and/or convenient other means, as required by the director. Vegetation and/or seed mixes must be approved by the department. The erosion control facilities will be designed to reduce the run-off velocities and prevent erosion and sedimentation. This section applies to exempted work, work performed under a grading permit, as well as any work done under a right-of-way construction permit or encroachment permit. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.150 - Hours of work. 
A.  November 1 through April 30. From November 1 through April 30, no right-of-way construction work may be performed except where the work is expressly authorized in writing by the director. When work is authorized as provided herein, the director shall set forth in writing the hours during which work may be performed. 
B.  May 1 through October 31. If operations under any right-of-way construction permit are within five hundred feet of residential or commercial occupancies, such operations shall be limited to the hours of seven a.m. to eight p.m. daily. Operations on Sundays and town-recognized holidays are permitted only upon written approval of the town manager or designee and limited to nine a.m. to five p.m., except that maintenance and emergency repair work exempted pursuant to Section 12.04.030(B) may be performed at any time provided that a nuisance is not created by such maintenance operations. Major repair work to equipment on the site is not permitted except upon approval by the town manager or his designee. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.160 - Annual permits. 
Any person may, at the discretion of the public works director, be issued an annual permit for ordinary maintenance of, or emergency work to, its facilities located or installed in town streets. The annual permit may be revoked if the permittee fails to comply with the terms of this chapter and of such a permit. Any emergency work done under an annual permit shall be reported to the department the next working day after the work has been performed and a permit applied for if required by the director. The department shall be notified a minimum of twenty-four hours in advance of any ordinary maintenance being started. Ordinary maintenance includes regular, ongoing maintenance, and does not include new construction, upgrades of infrastructure, expansion of capacity or reconstruction activity. The director shall determine whether any activity is permissible maintenance under an annual permit, and the director's determination shall be final. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.170 - Liability, responsibility and insurance. 
A.  Liability. Any person performing work or maintaining any facilities within a public right-of-way, whether in accordance with this chapter or in violation of this chapter, whether in conformance with the terms of the permit or in violation of the terms of the permit, or any person causing such work or maintaining such facilities shall bear full responsibility for any and all liability which may arise from that work, and shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the town, its officers and employees from any and all claims which may arise from such work. The approval of any plans or issuance of any permit does not relieve the permittee from full responsibility for any injury or damage caused by the permittee's operations. 
B.  Insurance. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the applicant shall provide acceptable proof of insurance as required by this section. Insurance policies shall be procured and at all times maintained by the applicant or permittee, at its sole cost and expense, in a form and content satisfactory to director, the following policies of insurance: 
1.  Comprehensive General Liability Insurance. A policy of comprehensive general liability insurance written in the amount of: (i) one million dollars per person and two million dollars in the aggregate for bodily injury, and one million dollars per occurrence and two million dollars in the aggregate for property damage; or (ii) a combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage of two million dollars per occurrence and four million dollars in the aggregate. 
2.  Worker's Compensation Insurance. A policy of worker's compensation insurance in such amount as will fully comply with the laws of the state of California and which shall indemnify, insure and provide legal defense for both the applicant or permittee, and the town against any loss, claim or damage arising from any injuries or occupational diseases occurring to any worker employed by or any persons retained by the applicant in the course of carrying out the work or services under the permit. 
C.  Adjustment. The risk manager of town shall monitor market conditions for insurance and if the coverage provided herein is insufficient, risk manager may recommend additional coverage to the town council who may increase the coverage required hereunder by resolution. 
D.  Certificate. The director may require that an applicant provide acceptable proof of insurance in the amounts required by this section prior to issuing any permit. Failure to provide acceptable proof of insurance when requested by the director will be grounds for denial of the permit requested. The director shall require the applicant or his contractor to furnish a certificate of insurance countersigned by an authorized agent of the insurance company setting forth the general provisions of the liability insurance coverage. This certificate shall name the town, its officers, employees and agents as additional insured under the policy. The certificate shall contain a statement of the obligation of the insurance company to notify the director at least ten working days prior to any material change or cancellation of the coverage. Upon application to the director and with good cause, a reduction in insurance requirements may be allowed. 
E.  Cancellation. Cancellation of any insurance required under this section will be grounds for the director to revoke the permit issued and to halt any work on the job until insurance is reestablished. 
F.  Assumption of risk. Facilities placed within the right-of-way shall be there at their own risk. The town shall not be responsible for any damage to such facilities, no matter what the cause of such damage, and the permit shall so state. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.180 - Hold harmless clause. 
The owner shall execute a hold harmless clause in the permit which shall read as follows: 
"The Permittee for himself, his contractors, and employees agrees to save, indemnify, and hold harmless the Town, its officers, employees and representatives from all liabilities and claims from any cause whatsoever while in, upon or in any way connected with the work covered by this permit until completion is approved by the Director and a certificate of completion filed. The Permittee does further agree to defend the Town in any claim arising out of, or as a result of, the work done under this permit." 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.190 - Encroachments. 
A.  Encroachment permit issuance. Notwithstanding Section 12.04.030, the director may issue in writing an encroachment permit to any person who wishes to maintain facilities within the public right-of-way or on public property where the director finds that the issuance of a franchise for such facilities is not appropriate and that such facilities are not detrimental to the public safety, health and welfare. An encroachment permit may authorize a permittee to do any of the following acts: 
1.  Place or display in, under or over any town street any type of informational sign or similar device where permitted by the town sign ordinance. Any sign or device placed contrary to the provisions of this chapter is a public nuisance and shall be removed immediately. Any permitted sign shall also conform to the applicable provisions of the town sign ordinance and state and federal law. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the posting of any notice in the manner required by law or by the order of any court of this state; 
2.  Plant, remove, cut down, injure or destroy any tree, shrub, plant or flower growing along such town streets or town property; 
3.  Temporarily place or store any construction materials, storage bin, container or similar objects; 
4.  Construct, leave, place, store or maintain any temporary or permanent object, including walls, fences or similar structures; 
5.  Construct, leave, place or maintain any building or part thereof, including an accessory structure. 
B.  Snow removal. It shall be unlawful to push snow, haul snow, place snow in any town right-of-way or snow storage easement, or leave snow in a position where it will fall into the town right-of-way or snow storage easement, without written authorization from the town. Hauling snow in the town right-of-way is allowed only if it is to deposit such snow legally in the town snow storage pit, on a lot approved for snow storage by a temporary use permit, or other town authorized hauling operations. 
1.  The town right-of-way generally extends ten feet beyond the snow stakes, both sides of the road but may exceed this in places. Town rights-of-way are normally sixty feet of width for residential streets but will exceed this on collector or arterial roadways. This area is for the storage of snow by the town or its authorized agents only. Placement of snow in any town right-of-way or town-owned storage easement is illegal; and any costs of removing such snow may be assessed against the snow removal operator placing such snow in the right-of-way or snow storage easement and/or against the property from which such snow came, in addition to any other penalties authorized by the town municipal code and other applicable laws. 
2.  Off-site snow storage is prohibited without a snow storage permit. It is prohibited to use the right-of-ways for any temporary or permanent snow storage without an approved encroachment permit. Under no circumstances shall there be any remains of snow left in the public right-of-way other than what has naturally occurred or was placed there by town authorization. 
3.  It shall be the responsibility of the permittee, property owner, and snow removal operator to know where the property boundaries, rights-of-way boundaries, and snow storage easements are for the purpose of on-site snow storage. 
C.  Form. The encroachment permit is in the nature of a license revocable with or without cause by the town at any time. The permit shall include conditions established by the director to protect the public health and safety, minimize public inconvenience, and ensure the town's proprietary interest in its streets and public places. The encroachment permit shall be in a form approved by the town attorney. The town attorney may require the circulation of a notice concerning the proposed encroachment to interested parties. 
D.  Maintenance. The permittee agrees, by the acceptance of a permit pursuant to this section, to exercise reasonable care to maintain properly any encroachment placed by the permittee or owner in the street and to exercise reasonable care to inspect and immediately repair any damage to any portion of the street which occurs as a result of the encroachment in the street, or as a result of the work done under the permit. The term "damage" as used in this section, includes, but is not limited to, any and all damage to the street which would not have occurred had such work not been done or such encroachment not placed therein. 
E.  Liability. The permittee shall maintain insurance and indemnify, defend and hold harmless the town and its agents and officers, in accordance with Section 12.04.160. Any and all encroachments are the responsibility of the permittee. The town assumes no responsibility or liability for any damages to, or caused by, such encroachments. Failure to keep encroachments in a state of repair to the satisfaction of the director shall constitute grounds for revocation of the encroachment permit and all rights thereof at the sole cost of the permittee. 
F.  Removal. The permittee, in consideration of the terms of this section, agrees to, at the permittee's sole expense, within sixty days after receipt of written notice by the director, remove the encroachment and restore the street or public property to a good and first class condition satisfactory to the director. Should the permittee fail, neglect, or refuse to remove the encroachment and restore the street or public property, the permittee expressly authorizes the town to remove the encroachment and restore same and promises and agrees to pay to the town the actual expense involved therein, in the same manner as provided in Section 12.04.160. Permittee expressly releases the town, the town public works department and all officials, agents and employees of the town of any and all liability of claim of damage by reason thereof. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.200 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any peace officer, code enforcement officer, the public works director or any person duly authorized by the town. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.210 - Appeals. 
A.  Appeal to town manager. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director under the provisions of this chapter may, within ten days after the rendering of such decision, file a written appeal with the town clerk. 
1.  If a hearing is not requested within the ten days, the decision of the director shall be final and the right to all further hearings shall be waived. 
2.  Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the manager shall calendar a hearing, not less ten days nor more than thirty days from the receipt of the request. 
3.  The manager, at the time set for the hearing, shall hear and consider all relevant information presented and shall receive information from owners, witnesses, town personnel and other interested persons relative to the violation or nuisance and to any proposed means for rehabilitation, repair or demolition of such. 
4.  The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
5.  Upon or after the conclusion of the hearing, the manager shall, based upon such hearing, determine whether the site, or any part thereof, as maintained, constitutes a violation of the town ordinances or a nuisance as defined by Section 8.20.020. If the manager finds that such a violation or nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to rehabilitate, demolish or repair the same, the manager shall make a written order setting forth his findings and ordering the owner, contractor, or other person having charge of such site to abate such violation or nuisance by having such sites rehabilitated, repaired, or demolished in the manner and means specifically set forth in the order. Such order shall set forth the times within which such work shall be commenced and completed. 
6.  Such order and findings shall be served upon the owner, contractor, or person in charge of the site by ordinary first class mail to the address provided by such person at the time of hearing, if any, and otherwise, to the address where the nuisance has been determined to exist and shall contain a detailed list of needed corrections and abatement methods. If no mailing address is so available, such order and findings shall be posted at least three conspicuous places near the site, including near the front entrance, if such can be determined. 
B.  Appeal to town council. Any person who has taken an administrative appeal to the town manager pursuant to subsection A of this section may, within ten days from the issuance of the order by manager, file a written appeal to the town council with the town clerk. 
1.  If a hearing is not requested within the ten days, the decision of the manager shall be final and the right to all further hearings shall be waived. 
2.  The appeal shall be set for hearing and heard at a meeting of the council not more than thirty days after the filing of such appeal. 
3.  The council at the time set for hearing, shall hear and consider all relevant information presented and shall receive information from owners, witnesses, town personnel and other interested persons relative to the violation or nuisance and to any proposed means of rehabilitation, repair or demolition of such. 
4.  The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
5.  The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
C.  Judicial review. Judicial review of any final decision of the town council may be sought by petition for writ of administrative mandamus in the manner and in the time provided in the Code of Civil Procedure, Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. 
D.  Emergency action. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, in accordance with Section 12.04.090, the director is authorized to take emergency action. In such cases, the director may take immediate action irrespective of the filing of any appeal. If the permittee chooses to file an appeal, the appeal may still be processed hereunder and the hearing body may grant such retrospective relief as it may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.220 - Violation—Civil liability. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is civilly liable to the town for the cost of the removal of the structure and repair of any town street or property together with any and all other damages directly or indirectly caused by the violation. Civil action may be commenced by the director for and on behalf of the town in the name of the town. 
B.  In addition to any other remedy or provision of law, upon order of the town manager, the district attorney or the town attorney shall bring an action in the superior court under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure Section 525 et seq. to enjoin violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
12.04.230 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person performing work in violation of this chapter shall receive a stop order from the department ordering the work to stop immediately, citing the violations and listing remedies to be undertaken. The person receiving such a notice must stop work immediately and respond to the department within forty-eight hours or such additional time as the director may permit. The department shall then set a time frame for bringing the work into compliance with this chapter. If the work is being done without a permit, all work shall stop until the owner of the facility, or his agent, for which the work is being performed shall obtain a permit in compliance with the chapter and such permit is issued. Permit fees shall be doubled for work being done without a permit. This shall be in addition to any other penalties imposed. 
B.  Upon failure of any person to comply within forty-eight hours, or the time frame given to make corrections, with any written order of the department made under these provisions, or to make satisfactory progress in so doing, the town may proceed pursuant to subsections C, D and E of this section or as otherwise permitted by law to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a criminal violation in accordance with Title 1, Chapter 1.12 of this code and shall also be subject to a penalty of one hundred dollars, or five percent of the encroachment fee, whichever is greater, for each and every day the violation exists, plus all town enforcement, administrative and legal fees. This penalty is in addition to any other penalties which may be applicable. 
D.  Any amount required to be paid pursuant to this chapter shall be paid, unless otherwise specified, within fifteen days of the receipt of notice requesting payment. Failure to make payment after such date shall draw interest at the maximum legal rate, in addition to any other penalties or costs provided for herein. 
E.  Assessment of penalties may be against the permittee, the property owner, the agent or any other person responsible. It is illegal to continue any work in the right-of-way, and if any fees or penalties are owed by an agent or property owner, an encroachment permit will not be issued to such agent for any property or to the respective property until such penalties are paid. Failure to submit fees or penalties within sixty days of notice, shall result in all additional administrative, enforcement and legal costs being assessed and collected pursuant to subsection E of this section. 
F.  Violation of this chapter is considered to be a public nuisance. Collection of all owed penalties and fees shall constitute a lien on all property owned by persons against whom the penalties and fees have been assessed. The director may cause a notice of such lien to be recorded in the manner provided in Chapter 8.20. 
(Ord. 03-08, 2003)  
Chapter 12.08 - LAND CLEARING, EARTHWORK, AND DRAINAGE FACILITIES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
 Prior ordinance history: Prior code §§ 13.08.010-13.08.430; Ord. 89-14. 
 
12.08.010 - Purpose. 
A.  It is the declared intent of this town to promote the conservation of natural resources, including the natural beauties of the land, streams and watersheds, hills, trees and vegetation; to protect the public health and safety, including the reduction or elimination of the hazards of earth slides, mud flows, rock falls, undue settlement, erosion, siltation and flooding; to prevent damage to property, undermining of tree roots; and to generally preserve the terrain and the flora in their natural state as much as possible. 
B.  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate work on public and private property in order to control grading, earthwork, clearing, erosion, sedimentation, drainage interference and to protect water quality and to safeguard the health, safety, and the public welfare. These regulations apply to all persons or groups of persons not specifically exempted in this chapter. 
C.  This chapter may be cited as the grading chapter. 
D.  The issuance of a grading permit is subject to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act and all applications shall be referred to the planning director for the preparation of an initial study. If the planning director finds that the proposed project may have a significant effect on the environment, a mitigated negative declaration or an environmental impact report (EIR) shall be prepared. If an EIR is required, no grading permit shall be issued until a final EIR has been prepared, considered and certified by the town or other lead agency. In any case, the planning director shall report, in writing, to the public works director on any aspect of the proposed grading permit that affects or relates to the general plan, the zoning ordinance or the environment. No permit shall be issued until the requirements of this subsection have been met. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.020 - Definitions. 
In addition to those definitions given in Section 1.04.050, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as defined for this chapter: 
"As built" or "as graded" means the surface condition that exists upon completion of grading including the existing condition and location of all facilities. 
"As built plans" means a set of plans prepared by the engineer to show the "as built" and/or "as graded" condition. 
"Bedrock" means the in-place solid rock either at the ground surface or overlain by unconsolidated material. 
"Best management practices" means a technique or series of techniques which, when used in an erosion control plan, is proven to be effective in controlling runoff, erosion and sedimentation, either construction related or in the "as graded" condition. 
"Civil engineer" or "engineer" means a professional engineer licensed by the state of California Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and authorized by such license to practice engineering in his field of expertise. 
"Clearing" means the removal of vegetation. 
"Contour rounding" means the rounding of cut and fill slopes to blend with existing contours or to provide variation, to eliminate the artificial appearance of cut and fill slopes. 
"Contractor" means any licensed contractor legally acting as an agent for or on the behalf of the owner, or the owner, if the owner is doing the construction himself. 
"Compaction" means the densification of a fill, fill material or natural ground by mechanical means. 
"Department" means the department of public works of the town of Mammoth Lakes, or any of its officers or employees. 
"Depth of cut or fill" means the vertical distance between existing natural ground and the finished elevation at the toe of cut or top of fill. 
"Director" means the director of public works of the town of Mammoth Lakes or his duly authorized representative. 
"Design engineer" means the civil engineer, including a soils engineer, responsible for the design and/or construction supervision for the project. 
"Erosion" means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, ice and/or snow. 
"Excavation" means the mechanical removal of soil or rock from it natural location with earthmoving equipment. 
"FEMA" means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
"Fill" means a deposit of soil or rock, or any combination thereof, placed by artificial means with earthmoving equipment, properly placed and compacted. 
"Geologist" means a California licensed engineering geologist having expertise in soil science and related fields. 
"Grading" means the physical movement of earth, rock or vegetation with earthmoving equipment. It includes, but is not solely limited to excavating, filling, storing of earth or rock materials, scraping, scarifying and compacting. 
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, district or organization. 
"Planning department" or "planning" means the planning department of the town of Mammoth Lakes, or any of its officers or employees. 
"Planning director" means the planning director of the town of Mammoth Lakes, or his duly authorized representative. 
"Public works director" or "director" means the public works director of the town of Mammoth Lakes, or his duly authorized representative. 
"Quarry" means any premises or site from which any rock, sand, gravel, stone, earth, soil or mineral is excavated, processed and removed for disposition away from the immediate premises, whether disposition is immediate or delayed. The following are exceptions to this definition: 
1.  Excavation necessary for the construction of a building on the site of the excavation if building permits and a grading permit have been issued; and 
2.  Excavation necessary to bring the contour of the land within an approved subdivision to the grades shown on the improvement plans which has been approved by the public works department. 
"Relative compaction" means the ratio between the density of the material in place and the maximum density, expressed as a percent, as determined by using a standard test procedure approved by the director. 
"Rock" means any consolidated or coherent and relatively hard natural formed mass of mineral material. 
"Security" means a bond, letter of credit, certificate of deposit or cash deposit to guarantee completion of the work. 
"Soils" means all the relatively loose incoherent earth material of whatever origin which overlies the bedrock. 
"Soils engineer" means a registered civil engineer or registered geotechnical engineer licensed by the state Board of Professional Engineers, experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of soils engineering, who is responsible for the supervision of soils work outlined in this chapter. 
"Soils engineering" or "geotechnical engineering" means the application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof. 
"State" means the state of California or any of its agencies officers or employees. 
"State specifications" means the current standard specifications of the state Business and Transportation Agency, Department of Transportation. 
"Stockpile" means the temporary or permanent storage of fill materials, rock or soils. 
"Test procedures" or "tests" means the testing and control procedures, or tests made in conformance with those procedures, currently in use by the state Department of Transportation. These test procedures shall be the standard test procedures for work performed under this chapter unless other procedures are approved by the director. The town may perform tests, and in case of conflict with tests performed by others, the decision of the director as to which tests obtain shall be final. 
"Town" means the town of Mammoth Lakes, or any of its agencies, officers or employees. 
"Town attorney" means the town attorney of the town of Mammoth Lakes, or his duly authorized representative. 
"Town council" or "council" means the town council of the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Town manager" or "manager" means the town manager of the town of Mammoth Lakes, or his duly authorized representative. 
"Wetland" means any area characterized by vegetation requiring saturated or seasonally saturated soil for growth or reproduction and includes such terms as marshes, bogs, sloughs, wet meadows, springs and seeps. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.030 - Administration. 
The director shall administer this chapter. The director is authorized to issue bulletins to interpret or clarify the administration and technical details of this chapter. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.040 - Permits—Issuance. 
Permits as required by this chapter will be granted only to the owner, or his/her agent, of the property on which the work is planned. A separate permit will be required for work on each site or assessors parcel number unless the sites are contiguous and the entire area is included in the plans accompanying the application and the area is being resubdivided through a parcel or subdivision map. Sites separated by an existing public road will not be considered contiguous. In the event an agent is acting for the owner of the property, the agent may pay the fee and sign for the permit, however, the original of the permit will be transmitted to the owner of the property. The permit shall run with the property and it shall be considered transferred to any subsequent property owner. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.050 - Prohibited actions. 
A.  Without first obtaining a letter of exemption or a permit specifically allowing the work from the director, no person shall: 
1.  Perform any land clearing, grading, excavation, make any fill, change or interfere with drainage, do any work that causes or may cause erosion, a nuisance or endangers the health or safety of the public; 
2.  Excavate, grade, stockpile or place fill material on or within any property so that soil or debris washed, eroded or moved from the property by natural or artificial means creates, or has the potential for creating, a public nuisance or hazard on other property, public street or utility easement or endangers the health or safety of the public; 
3.  Obstruct, divert or interfere with natural or artificial surface drainage, swales, ditches, gutters or other improved or unimproved drainage channels or drainage ways, except that construction or operations approved by a special district or other entity having jurisdiction over the work which does not come under the provisions of this chapter; 
4.  Fill or drain any wetland area; 
5.  Perform any other work or actions on any property without a grading permit when such work or actions would have required a grading permit pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  The permit or a copy thereof shall be kept at the job site during construction and/or installation of any facilities authorized by such permit, and shall be made available upon request to any town employee, police officer, CalTrans employee or other person having jurisdiction in such right-of-way. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.060 - Work exempted. 
Except for subsections (A)(3) and (A)(4) of Section 12.08.050 of this chapter, grading permits will not be required for the following work. All exempted work shall control erosion and sediment and shall conform to the erosion and dust control practices as outlined in Section 12.08.090(B) of this chapter. 
A.  Clearing of an area of land which does not exceed fifty percent of the lot or five thousand square feet, whichever is less; or the amount and location as shown on a site plan approved by planning and public works; and for which a building permit or a letter of exemption has been issued; 
B.  An excavation below natural grade and within the footprint of the structure for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall or other structure, cesspools, septic tanks and swimming pools for which a building permit has been issued by the town building division of the department. This does not exempt any fill made with material from such excavation nor does it exempt any excavation or fill made in violation of this chapter; 
C.  Quarry excavations for which a use permit has been granted by the town. This does not exempt any fill made with material from such excavation nor does it exempt any excavation or fill made in violation of this chapter; 
D.  Excavation for a utility or storm drain trench which is to be backfilled to original ground surface and that is covered by a permit or letter of exemption issued by the town; 
E.  Excavations for installation of underground storage tanks for oil, gasoline and water where the capacity of the tank does not exceed ten thousand gallons and where the tanks are being installed under a permit issued by a federal, state or local agency or is controlled by one of the agencies. This does not exempt any fill made with material from such excavation nor does it exempt any excavation or fill made in violation of this chapter; 
F.  Cemetery graves; 
G.  Excavation for mine shafts, wells or tunnels for utilities and other purposes that are under the jurisdiction of a federal, state or local agency; 
H.  Embankments made in connection with earth-filled dams regulated by the state Division of Dam Safety; 
I.  Improvement or construction of creek channels and water supply channels for the collection, storage or transmission of water including floodwater for drainage, irrigation and domestic use or the generation of electrical energy performed under the jurisdiction of a federal, state or local agency; 
J.  Excavations of less than fifty cubic yards and not exceeding three feet in maximum height (as measured vertically from the top to the bottom of the cut) with slopes and setbacks conforming to the requirements of this chapter for which a letter or exemption or a building permit has been issued by the director; 
K.  Fills less than three feet in maximum height above the original ground surface, placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical, which do not exceed fifty cubic yards, with slopes and setbacks conforming to the requirements of this chapter for a letter of exemption or a building permit has been issued by the director. Fills that are intended to support any structure are not exempt from the grading permit requirements of this chapter; 
L.  Subdivision improvements that are to be offered for dedication for which improvement plans have been approved by the department; 
M.  Logging operations to the extent that they are regulated by the Forest Practice Act. It is encouraged, however, that access roads constructed for logging operations comply with this chapter; 
N.  Work conducted in any town street or right-of-way by public utilities for normal maintenance and operation work and for which an encroachment permit has been issued by the department; or work by a public utility in an easement reserved for public utility purposes; 
O.  Agricultural grading, leveling, land preparation and irrigation for agricultural uses and tillage practices, providing that these operations do not become a public nuisance and avoid significant environmental impacts. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.070 - Letter of exemption. 
No person shall do any work on any private property within the town limits without first notifying the department of such intended work and either obtaining a letter of exemption or a permit allowing the work. The notification shall include a plot plan showing the intended work including, but not limited to, grading, drainage modification, driveways, and structures and their setbacks. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.072 - Work authorized by permit. 
Any act performed under the authority of a written permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the terms and conditions specified in the permit. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.075 - USA ALERT. 
Prior to any excavation, the contractor shall call USA ALERT at 1-800-642-2444. Underground utilities shall be marked on the ground prior to the start of any work. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.076 - Grading permits. 
A.  Grading may be conducted under the following permits within the limits of each: 
1.  A letter of exemption, for minimal work; 
2.  A building permit, allowing grading within the footprint and as needed for the foundation excavations; and 
3.  A grading permit, for all other conditions. 
B.  Two types of grading permits may be issued: 
1.  A standard grading permit; and 
2.  An engineered grading permit. 
Application for both types of grading permit shall be submitted on the form provided by the department. The applicant must demonstrate that work proposed is allowed under the type of permit requested. Should the standard grading permit be issued incorrectly it shall be invalid and an engineered grading permit required. 
C.  Any application or plans and specifications found inadequate or not in compliance with this chapter will not be approved until revised to conform to the conditions and regulations prescribed under this chapter. Rejection of the application or plans and specifications based on insufficient or inadequate design shall not preclude the applicant form submitting revised plans in connection with the pending application. Applications shall be considered pending until a grading permit is issued, or the application is denied or withdrawn. The application shall expire twelve months from the date of its filing. 
D.  No work regulated by this chapter shall be done before a grading permit is issued for the work. 
E.  The grading permit will be issued when all requirements are met, all fees are paid and security necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter is posted. 
F.  No permit shall be issued by the director for any purpose if construction thereof will violate the provisions of any federal or state law, or town ordinance. No permit of any nature may be issued under the provisions of this chapter which is not in accordance with this chapter or will violate federal or state law. Any permit issued contrary to the provisions of this chapter may be voided by the director at any time. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.078 - Standard grading permit requirements. 
A.  Two copies of a site plan must be submitted for review showing the area to be disturbed and all proposed construction. The area of disturbance must include any graded areas, storage areas, work areas, parking areas, etc. This site plan may be the same one submitted with the building plans if the affected areas are shown. The site plan shall show all limiting dimensions, elevations or finished contours to be achieved by the grading, and proposed drainage channels and related construction. The proposed drawings shall indicate clearly all cuts, fills and slopes. Contours shall be shown according to the following schedule: 
Natural Slope 	Maximum Interval 
10% or less 	2 feet 
10% to 20% 	5 feet 
over 20% 	10 feet 
 
B.  A building permit, once issued, will allow the same grading work to be performed as a standard grading permit. Work must be performed subject to the same conditions as those set for the standard grading permit. 
C.  The standard grading permit fee shall be the minimum allowed by the master fee schedule. 
D.  The standard grading permit is subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Grading shall not exceed two hundred cubic yards of cut or fill, whichever is a large quantity. The cut quantity may exclude cut within the footprint of the structure. 
2.  Permit is valid for one lot and up to four dwelling units. 
3.  Lots with impervious areas of four thousand square feet or more shall install a drywall meeting either the town standard or the design of a registered civil engineer. 
4.  The natural slope of the lot may not exceed thirty percent as defined in Section 17.16.040. 
5.  Fill shall conform to the following: 
a.  Existing ground to receive fill shall be cleared and grubbed of all deleterious materials; 
b.  Existing ground to receive fill shall be scarified a minimum of six inches; 
c.  When the natural slope exceeds twenty percent, the existing ground shall be keyed and benched. The bench shall be at least ten feet wide; 
d.  No rock larger than thirty-six inches in its greater dimension shall be buried in fill without a soils engineer review and approval. All rocks larger than twelve inches shall be filled and compacted around carefully to assure no voids are left. All rocks on any slope shall be stable and minimum one third buried in the fill; 
e.  All fill shall be compacted to ninety percent of optimum density as determined by ASTM D1557; 
f.  Fill slopes shall be steeper than is safe for its intended use and shall be no steeper than a ratio of two horizontal to one vertical; 
g.  Drainage (other than a minimal amount of sheet flow) shall not be allowed to run over a fill slope without cobble, rip rap or other downdrain; 
h.  The tow of any fill slope shall be a minimum of three feet from the property line; 
i.  The maximum slope height shall be five feet measured vertically from the toe to the top of slope; 
j.  Fills greater than five feet behind a retaining wall may be exempted upon review by the director; 
k.  No structures are to be supported on the fill placed under this permit; 
l.  All organic material is to be removed from the fill. 
6.  Cut shall conform to the following: 
a.  Cut slopes shall be no steeper than is safe for its intended use and shall be no steeper than a ratio of two horizontal to one vertical. 
b.  The top of any cut slope shall be a minimum of three feet from the property line. 
c.  the maximum slope height shall be five feet measured vertically from the toe to the top of the slope. 
d.  A regraded or overcut cut slope shall meet the requirements of a fill slope. 
7.  Drainage. Whenever possible no work shall be done in a drainage course. 
a.  A minor drainage course shall be one carrying less than five cfs or draining an area of less than five acres. 
b.  Minor drainage courses if disturbed shall be repaired by replacing the natural channel with a two-foot deep, one foot wide at the bottom channel with side slopes of 2:1 and cobble lining with three inch minimum dimension rock. 
c.  Finish grade shall be sloped to provide proper drainage away from all exterior walls or foundations. The slope shall not be less than one-half inch per foot for a distance of not less than three feet from any point of the exterior wall or foundation. Drainage swales shall not be less than one and one-half inches deeper than the adjacent finished grade at the foundation. 
d.  A 1603 agreement approved by the California Department of Fish and Game may be required prior to the issuance of any permit involving a stream course or drainage area. 
e.  Any work within a perceived "wetland" may require written approval by the United States Department of the Interior, Corps of Engineers prior to issuance of any permit. 
8.  Violation of the conditions and limits of the standard grading permit will render the permit void and an engineered permit will then be required. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.080 - Engineered grading permit requirements. 
A.  An application for a grading permit shall be submitted on the form provided by the department. The property owner shall be the applicant for the permit. All data to accompany the application shall be prepared by a civil engineer. A registered architect may prepare the application and plans if the work is under the supervision of a registered civil engineer and bears his stamp. Data relating to the soils may be prepared by an engineer licensed to perform such work, or an approved soils laboratory under the direction of a licensed civil engineer. 
B.  The applicant shall furnish the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the architect(s) or engineer(s) who will be preparing the plans, specifications and other data for the grading permit and his contractor(s) who will be actually doing the grading permit work. 
C.  Site data shall be submitted with the application and shall include, but not be limited to, the following items: 
1.  A vicinity map showing the location of the site in relationship to the surrounding area's watercourses, water bodies, drainage courses, roads, structures and other significant geographic features; 
2.  A map showing property boundaries and dimensions of the area covered by the application for the permit including the proposed division of land, if any; 
3.  A site plan showing buildings, roads, utilities or other improvements within the area and adjacent thereto that may be affected by the proposed work; 
4.  a.  Two copies of engineering plans of the proposed work drawn at a scale that adequately shows the details of terrain, drainage and erosion control and the conditions existing before and after the proposed work. The plans shall show any significant features and structures outside of the property boundaries that may be affected by the proposed work; in any case, the plans shall include any structures and contours and other features for a minimum of ten feet outside the property boundaries. Where unusual topography exists adjacent to the site, i.e., natural watercourses, etc., the contours shall be extended to include the same. Contours shall conform to the schedule in Section 12.08.078(A). 
b.  The plans shall show contours and dimensions and elevations within the limits of the graded area on completion of the work; the proposed drainage channels and facilities; the planned elevations, grades and slopes of excavations and embankments. The plans shall show the location of observed springs, swampy areas, areas subject to flooding, landslides, surface faults and mud flows. Elevations shall be based on the USGS Sea Level Datum of 1929, unless waived by the director. 
c.  A site plan of the entire property (two copies if it is a separate plan from that submitted with the building plans) must be submitted showing the limits of the area to be disturbed and all proposed construction. The area of disturbance shown must, as a minimum, include any graded areas, storage areas, work areas, parking areas, landscaped areas, and any proposed structures. This site plan may be the same one submitted with the building plans if the affected areas are shown. 
5.  Cross-sections of the ground showing both original and proposed ground surfaces, with the grades, slopes and elevations noted. The number cross-sections shall be sufficient to show the details of the proposed work. 
6.  a.  A soils report prepared by a soils engineer. The report shall include a general description of the earth and rock materials involved in the work as to classifications, bedding or other geological features, information on the classification, depth, water table and other pertinent information as revealed by test borings, slide conditions existing or anticipated, the suitability of the material for its proposed use including data on allowable bearing pressures, expansive or unsuitable soils, recommendations for construction procedures to obtain required stability and relative compaction; 
b.  For small projects, upon application to the director by the engineer, with good cause, the soils report may be waived. Good cause means that there are obviously no soils problems, no structures are intended to be supported on fills, there are no high cut or fill slopes, and there are no possible drainage problems. 
7.  The plans shall show the location, circumference, species and approximate base elevation of all trees over six feet in height and four inches in diameter (or as required by the planning department) within the property boundaries including any trees that may be affected by the grading whether inside or outside of the property boundaries. The design shall save, wherever possible, all trees and other natural features of high aesthetic value. A registered forester or similar specialist may be required to review the trees to be saved for physical condition and prepare a report setting requirements of grading and development adjacent to the saved trees. These requirements shall be a part of the grading permit. 
8.  The plan shall show the one-hundred-year flood boundary as shown on a flood insurance rate map published by FEMA; all flood hazard area and other areas known or suspected to be subject to flooding or drainage hazard, as specified in the flood damage prevention ordinance of the town code and good engineering practice. 
9.  The plans shall show all surface and subsurface drainage systems and facilities, walls, cribbing and all erosion protection devices. 
D.  Whenever any work requires entry onto adjacent property for any reason, the applicant shall obtain written consent of the adjacent property owner and shall file a signed and notarized copy of such consent with the director. No permit shall be issued until the requirement is met. 
E.  Unless incorporated in the plans and specifications or waived by the director, the following data shall be furnished prior to permit issuance in duplicate: 
1.  Plans and specifications for the control of construction methods and materials in the work, including: 
a.  Provisions for control of grading operations, including the firm responsible for staking the project; 
b.  Any safety methods to be followed, including traffic control where necessary; 
c.  Control of dust; 
d.  Interim erosion and sediment control plan; 
e.  The location, design and specifications for the final erosion and sediment control plan, including the method of maintaining facilities; 
f.  An engineer's estimate of the quantities and cost of the work; 
g.  A time schedule for doing the work, including but not limited to, the proposed grading schedule, proposed conditions of the site on October 15th of each year that the grading permit is in effect, the proposed schedule for installation of interim erosion and sediment control measures, devices and plantings, construction of final improvements, installation of final erosion and sediment control measures and devices, and the proposed date of final completion; 
h.  Proposed hours and days of equipment operation; 
i.  Tree and vegetation protection and revegetation plans including specifications covering the methods to be used in saving, clearing, storing and disposing of trees and vegetation; 
j.  Drainage design including drainage areas, method of calculation, design flows and other related drainage design features and information; 
k.  Other related matters, as determined by the director. 
2.  Plans, design and details of retaining walls, cribbing, slope protection facilities and planting. Structural work will require submission of structural design calculations and may require building permits. 
3.  Method for the removal and disposal of surplus material and the destination or disposal site of all exported material. 
F.  Grading in, on, under, over or adjacent to old fills, wetlands, or in areas known or believed to be potential slide areas shall be permitted until a report by a soils engineer has been approved by the director and such grading complies with the provisions of this chapter. If the area has expansive soils, a report shall be submitted by the soils engineer for the director's review and approval. The report shall certify that the proposed construction will be stable within itself and will not be hazardous to any adjoining property or to any public road, utility or other facility, or a danger to the public health and safety. Any recommendations presented in the report regarding material, equipment or procedures to be incorporated in the construction or operation to insure adequate stability and safety may be included as a condition in the grading permit. 
G.  When requested by the director, the applicant shall furnish additional engineering, geologic and legal reports, plans or survey and other material necessary to determine and evaluate site conditions and the effect of the proposed work on abutting properties, public welfare and safety. 
H.  When a completed application, including plans and specifications, and other required data is received, the director shall review the application. One copy of the plans with comments by the director will be returned to the engineer. The necessary changes shall be made to the plans and other documents and the originals returned to the director for review and signature. A sepia copy of the signed original plans shall be returned to the engineer. 
I.  All survey maps, engineering plans, specifications and reports submitted shall be prepared under the direction of and signed by person licensed by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers under Chapters 7 and 15 of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code. 
J.  Height of Slopes. Cut slopes shall not be constructed over thirty feet in height unless the director is provided a written report by a soils engineer certifying that the slope is stable with a factor of safety of at least 1.5. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.082 - Acceptance of provisions. 
It is understood and agreed by the permittee that the doing of any work, or the movement of equipment onto the work site, under any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute an acceptance of the provisions of the permit. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1 (part), 1991)  
12.08.084 - No precedent establishment. 
Grading permits are granted with the understanding that the conditions or allowances specified in the permit is not to be considered as establishing any precedent on the question of permitting any certain kind of condition or allowance to become a standard or policy of the town. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.086 - Paving and parking lot standards. 
All public and private paving and parking lots shall conform to the following standards: 
A.  Minimum parking lot grade for asphalt concrete shall be one percent and preferred shall be two or three percent due to snow conditions. 
B.  Minimum grade for concrete ribbon drains shall be 0.5 percent. 
C.  An approved soil sterilizer shall be used on all subgrade surfaces prior to placement of paving. 
D.  Two special inspections are required. The first at the time the base is placed and the second when the asphalt concrete has been placed, unless an engineer's report verifies compliance with design. A fee shall be charged per inspection in conformance with the master fee schedule. 
E.  The contractor shall be responsible for the clearing of the proposed work are, and relocation and cost of all existing utilities. The town shall be informed twenty-four fours prior to beginning of construction and prior to any inspections required. 
F.  A compaction report or letter certifying compaction by a soils engineer shall certify ninety-five percent compaction of the base and ninety percent compaction of the subbase prior to calling for the second inspection and to placing the asphalt concrete. 
G.  If no preliminary soils report is provided specifying the paving section, the structural section shall be three inches of asphalt concrete and four inches of class II aggregate base. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.090 - Drainage and erosion design standards. 
A.  In addition to the Lahontan Regional Water Quality Control District requirements, runoff calculations and design and must conform to the following standards: 
1.  Maximum runoff shall be calculated using the rational method or other applicable method. The rainfall-intensity curves shall be those shown in the town's master shore drain plan or other curve and C values approved by the director. 
2.  Runoff design shall be based on full development within the drainage area as provided for in Title 17. 
3.  Drainage channels having a drainage area of ten acres or greater shall be designed for a one-hundred-year storm, for drainage areas less than ten acres, the design storm shall be a twenty providing that finish floor elevations allow for the one hundred year storm. 
4.  New construction resulting in a total impervious surface on a lot of four thousand square feet or more shall meet Lahontan requirements if they apply, or shall provide a dry well per town standards if the Lahontan requirements do no apply. 
B.  Erosion and sedimentation control shall effectively control erosion and sedimentation and shall conform to these standards as well as standard engineering practices. Unless otherwise recommended in an approved soil engineering or engineering geology report, cut and fill slopes shall be planted in accordance with this section, and the protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to calling for the final permit approval unless bonding has been accepted by the town. 
1.  The faces of cut and fill slopes must be permanently protected against damage by erosion and the methods used must offer effective erosion control prior to the beginning of each winter season. 
2.  The faces of all cut and fill slopes steeper than three to one shall be protected with temporary soil stabilization measures such as jute matting or an equivalent mulch until planting is established. Hydro mulch alone in not considered as meeting this requirement. 
3.  The top of all excavation slopes shall have slope rounding for three to five feet on each side of the catch point. The distance will be approved by the director. Rounding may be waived by the director. 
4.  Slopes over five feet of vertical height shall be planted with drought-resistant perennial grasses, native plants, or other ground cover as approved by the director. Drought-resistant and low water use plants in conformance with water district guidelines are preferred and, in the event of drought and postponement of planting, jute matting shall be provided and planting bonded for. (See subdivision 10 of this subsection.) Other plants recommended by a state licensed landscape architect may be used subject to the approval of the director and other slopes as deemed necessary by the director may also be required to be planted. 
5.  In addition to other vegetative cover, slopes higher than fifteen feet shall be planted with drought-resistant shrubs spaced eight feet maximum on centers or drought-resistant trees spaced fifteen feet maximum on centers or a combination thereof. Shrubs and trees may be placed on random centers to achieve a more natural look. All landscaping must be approved by the planning director prior to planting or seeding. 
6.  The planting or seeding of vegetative cover, including shrubs and trees, must be effective in preventing erosion and sedimentation. If the vegetation does not grow and offer the proper protection, as determined by the director, it shall be replanted or reseeded. 
7.  The maintenance of vegetative protection shall be the responsibility of the owner of the land and shall be guaranteed until the vegetation is well established as determined by the director. 
8.  Sediment control facilities must be constructed and in working order prior to the beginning of the winter season and must prevent sediment from being transported from the site. 
9.  During snow melt runoff conditions, and at other times as necessary, the permittee shall inspect all erosion and sediment control devices and repair any damage. 
10.  Waiver of Planting Requirements. Waiver of planting and/or irrigation requirements may be approved by the director upon application. Possible reasons that may be accepted are as follows: 
a.  The erosion resistant character of the material composing the slopes makes planting unnecessary or impractical (i.e., all rock slopes); 
b.  The unavailability of water making irrigation either impossible or impractical, in which case bonding and slope matting may be required; 
c.  Slope heights are less than five feet vertical height or slopes less steep than a three to one ratio. 
11.  If a landscaping plan is require, the department shall collect a plan check fee per the master fee schedule prior to accepting a set of plans or specifications for plan checking. Site inspections will also be subject to an inspection fee in accordance with the fee schedule. 
C.  The director may accept bonding for any landscaping not completed by the time occupancy is requested. Such bonding shall remain in place until such time as the director determines that eighty percent of the planting for erosion control has been permanently established and one hundred percent of an erosion control facilities or structures are completed. Bonding release shall require a site inspection by the department and shall be subject to an inspection fee as set forth in the master fee schedule. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.100 - Dust control. 
Dust shall be controlled by watering. During drought conditions watering shall be done with a water truck using reclaimed water in accordance with Mammoth County water district rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.130 - Right of entry and inspections. 
A.  The director shall have the right to enter upon the property at any time to inspect the conditions of the site, the methods of operation, and to check or test any feature or operation involved in fulfilling the conditions of the grading permit. 
B.  The permittee shall notify the department forty-eight hours prior to starting work on the project and on each occasion when work has stopped for more than a week. The permittee or his/her contractor shall ensure that all underground work is inspected by the department before the work is covered up. 
C.  The engineer shall submit a progress report at the end of every month, if required by the department. 
D.  In the event of default in the performance of any term or condition of the grading permit, the surety or any person employed or engaged on its behalf and/or the director shall have the right to go on the property to inspect and complete the required work at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.140 - Continuous supervision and inspection. 
When the size of the project precludes adequate inspection by the town staff and frequent or continuous inspection during construction is deemed necessary by the director, the permittee shall have a soils engineer furnish continuous supervision and inspection of the work including all the necessary field tests during the performance of the work. The soils engineer shall certify in writing that the grading, drainage provisions, slope stability, erosion prevention methods and methods of placing, stabilizing and compacting fills was performed under the engineer's supervision and in accordance with the requirements of the permit. The cost of the continuous inspection and reports shall be borne by the permittee. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.180 - Job plans and permit posting. 
One set of "stamped approved" plans and specifications and accompanying documents including the permit or copy thereof shall be kept available for reference at the job site during the period of time that work under the permit is underway and/or not completed; and shall be made available upon request to any town employee, police officer, peace officer or CalTrans employee. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.190 - Changes to permit. 
A.  After the issuance of the permit, all proposed changes in the planned work shall be submitted to the director for approval before any change from the approved work is begun. 
B.  Upon submittal of proposed changes, the director may amend the grading permit to allow the requested changes to the plans and specifications. Failure to obtain prior approval for any change in the work shall be cause for suspension of all work until approval is obtained. Unauthorized changes may result in revocation of the grading permit. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.200 - Time extension. 
Before the expiration of a grading permit, the permittee may apply for an extension of time in which to complete the work. 
A.  An extension of time may be granted by the director if in his judgment conscientious effort has been made and the public health, safety or welfare is not impaired. The extension shall be for a period the director deems appropriate but not longer than one year. Such extension may include conditions the director deems appropriate for the balance of the work. 
B.  Written consent of the surety, if any, to any extension of time and change in conditions shall be furnished before approval is effective. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.240 - Conflicts. 
In case of a difference of opinion between the director and the soils engineer, the director shall weigh all factors and make a decision in the matter. Except upon appeal, the director's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.250 - Safety precautions. 
In addition to the specific requirements of the grading permit, the permittee shall comply with all federal and state laws, town ordinances and all regulations including the regulations of the state Department of Industrial Relations, Industrial Accident Commission Occupational Safety and Health Act, relating to the character of the work equipment and labor personnel involved on the project. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.260 - Hours of work. 
If operations under the grading permit are within five hundred feet of residential or commercial occupancies, grading operations shall be limited to the hours between seven a.m. and eight p.m., Monday through Saturday, with Sunday operations permitted only on the approval of the public works director or designee, and limited to the hours between nine a.m. and five p.m., except that maintenance and service of equipment may be performed at any time provided that a nuisance is not created by such maintenance operations. Major repair work to equipment on the site is not permitted, except upon approval by the public works director or designee. 
Deviations from any provision of this regulation are subject to the approval of the public works director or designee. Requests for such approval shall be submitted in writing to the public works director a minimum of one business day in advance of the scheduled work. 
(Ord. 02-02 § 1(part), 2002: Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.270 - Encroachment on rights-of-way. 
An encroachment permit issued by the director is required for any encroachment or any operation connected therewith on or within any public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.280 - Nuisances. 
Operations shall be controlled to prevent nuisances due to dust, drainage, removal of natural support of land, structures, encroachment, noise and vibrations. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.290 - Use of explosives. 
All operations involving the storage, handling and use of explosives shall be in accordance with the provisions of Division II, Part I of the California Health and Safety Code and all other applicable federal, state or local laws and regulations. Drilling and blasting shall only be done under the direction of licensed personnel. All precautions necessary for the protection of life and property shall be taken during blasting operations and adequate warning shall be given to workers, inspectors, the public, and property owners that blasting is in progress. Blasting or other use of explosives shall also be subject to regulation by the town, the Mammoth Lakes police department, the Mammoth Lakes fire protection district and the state Fire Marshal. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.300 - Completion. 
A.  Upon completion of the work, the engineer shall notify the director. The director and the engineer shall make a final inspection of the work covered by the permit. Upon approval of the work by the director, the engineer shall file a certificate of completion with the director including a set of as-built plans. If no changes were made during the construction, the engineer shall still submit as-built plans indicating that fact. 
B.  Upon acceptance by the director of the engineer's certificate of completion and as-built plans, the permittee shall post the required maintenance security as required in this chapter. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.310 - Adverse weather conditions. 
Clearing or grading may be prohibited by the director during the winter months or whenever adverse weather conditions may prevent compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.320 - Damage to property. 
The department may direct a permittee, in writing, to postpone or terminate all clearing, grading or drainage interference operations when damage may occur to the surrounding property. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.330 - Drainage, erosion and pollution. 
Drainage facilities, erosion and sedimentation control devices shall be provided to convey surface waters to a natural channel or watercourse or to a storm drainage facility without causing erosion, damage or sedimentation. Such facilities may also include off-site facilities. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1 (part), 1991)  
12.08.335 - Grading for drainage. 
Finished surfaces shall be graded to prevent ponding and to provide flow to the drainage facilities. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.340 - Presence of water. 
A.  Where evidence indicates that the presence of surface or subsurface waters may contribute to sliding or settlement of the land either in its natural state or as a result of grading operations, the director may require construction or installation of above or below ground facilities to collect the waters and convey them to an acceptable point of discharge. Such facilities may also include off-site facilities. 
B.  Should any springs, aquifers or other sources of underground water be discovered during the grading operation, all grading in the area shall be discontinued until provisions are made to remedy the condition. The project shall be redesigned by the engineer to accommodate the additional waters. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.350 - Revegetation. 
All clearing, grading, excavation and fill work, including excavation embankment slope surfaces, shall be protected from erosion by revegetation and/or convenient other means. The erosion control facilities will be designated to reduce the runoff velocities and prevent erosion and sedimentation. This section applies to exempted work and work performed under an encroachment permit as well as any work done under a grading permit. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.370 - Excavation slopes. 
A.  Excavation slopes shall not steeper than two horizontal to one vertical. The director may approve a steeper slope provided that a report prepared by a soils engineer states that the slope will be stable and that it will not constitute a hazard. If an adjacent foundation or structure may be in danger because of the excavation, a flatter slope may be required. 
B.  The top of all excavation slopes shall not be closer than three feet to any property line, measured from the edge of slope rounding. Front property lines adjacent to public rights-of-way are exempt from this requirement. 
C.  On high slopes, the design shall include provisions to prevent runoff water from flowing over the top of a cut slope onto the slope face. The soils report shall address this factor. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.380 - Unsuitable material. 
Material encountered that is determined to be unsuitable for the planned use by the engineer or the director shall be removed and replaced with suitable approved material. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.390 - Fills. 
A.  The area on which fill is to be placed shall be cleared of all vegetation such as trees, logs, stumps, roots, brush and heavy growth of grass and any other material such as debris, metal and nonearthen materials which cannot be properly consolidated or will not support the load of the fill and/or structures. The cleared area shall extend three feet outside the area of filled. 
B.  The ground area on which any fill is to be constructed shall be compacted to a minimum relative compaction of ninety percent throughout the top six inches. The installation of any required subdrains to intercept underground water shall also be accomplished prior to fill construction; this includes any drainage facilities necessary to the design of the fill. The soil around subdrains shall be pea gravel and need not be compacted. 
C.  Fills to be constructed on existing ground slopes that are steeper than five horizontal to one vertical shall be keyed into the existing slope by benches excavated in the existing ground. The excavated material together with the fill material shall be recompacted to a relative compaction of ninety percent. The width of the benches for keying new fills into existing shall be such that a slip plane is not created between the original ground and the fill. 
D.  The slopes of a fill shall not be steeper than two horizontal to one vertical except where the soils report states that steeper slopes may be constructed and maintained safely. 
E.  As a minimum the top and bottom of fill slopes shall be so located that they conform to the table below: 
Height of Fill 
(in feet) 	Distance From 
Top of Fill to 
Property Line 
or Structure 	Distance From 
Toe of Fill to 
Property Line 
or Structure 
Any 	3 feet minimum 	5 feet minimum 
0 to 20 	height/2 	height/2 
20 to 30 	ten feet 	height/2 feet 
over 30 	ten feet 	15 feet 
 
The above requirements shall be met unless the soils report recommends different requirements. The requirements shall provide for the safety of the adjacent properties and structures to prevent damage resulting from water runoff, erosion of the slopes or the resultant sedimentation. 
F.  Fill or backfill of earth and rock shall be placed and compacted pursuant to Section 19 of the state specifications except that the required compaction shall be ninety percent. 
G.  The side slopes of all fills shall be compacted and otherwise treated as specified by the soils report. 
H.  When a soils engineer is required by this chapter to inspect the fill construction, the report of the inspection and testing shall be furnished to the director without charge. Sufficient field tests shall be taken to determine the density of the ground and embankment material but shall not be less than one test in each two feet of vertical lift of fill. The absence of test reports, or inaccuracy or inconsistency in test reports, shall be cause to reject the construction. The work will not be approved nor the certificate of construction accepted until the tests and reports are satisfactory to the director. All fills shall be designed to protect any existing trees that are to remain. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.392 - Transfer of permit. 
The transfer of a grading permit from the permittee to another person will only be approved when ownership of the property has changed hands. The permit may then be transferred to the new owner with the approval of the director. The person to whom the grading permit is transferred shall agree to comply with the requirements of the original permit, to any modification or conditions of the site or change in plans and/or specifications since the permit was issued and to agree to furnish the required security. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.394 - Grading permit fees. 
The applicant shall pay to the department a plan check fee and a grading permit fee based on the latest master fee schedule as adopted by resolution of the town council, plus any other fees or penalties which may be due the town associated with the property. The plan check fee, and any other fees or penalties due the town, shall accompany the application. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.398 - Liability, responsibility and insurance. 
A.  Any person performing grading work, whether in accordance with this chapter or in violation of this chapter, whether in conformance with the terms of a grading permit or in violation of the terms of a grading permit, or an person causing such work on be performed shall bear full responsibility for any and all liability which may arise from that work, and shall indemnify and defend the town from any and all claims which may arise from such work. 
B.  Any person applying for a permit under this chapter must provide evidence of current workers compensation insurance which will cover all employees on the job. 
C.  The director shall require that an applicant supply acceptable proof of liability insurance in advance of issuing any permit. Failure to provide acceptable proof of insurance when requested by the director will be grounds for denial of the permit requested. 
The director shall require the applicant or his contractor to furnish a certificate of insurance countersigned by an authorized agent of the insurance company setting forth the general provisions of the liability insurance coverage. This certificate shall name the town, its officers, employees and agents as additional insured under the policy. The certificate shall contain a statement of the obligation of the insurance company to notify the director at least ten working days prior to any material change or cancellation of the coverage. Liability insurance coverage limits for the town, its officers, employees and agents shall be within the minimum policy limits of five hundred thousand dollars each person and one million dollars each occurrence for bodily injury liability and two hundred fifty thousand dollars each occurrence and five hundred thousand dollars aggregate for property damage liability and two hundred fifty thousand dollars each occurrence and five hundred thousand dollars aggregate for property damage liability or a combined single limit for bodily injury liability and property damage liability combined of one million dollars each occurrence and one million dollars aggregate. Upon application to the director and with good cause, a reduction in insurance requirements may be allowed. 
D.  Cancellation of any insurance required under this section will be grounds for the director to revoke the permit issued and to halt any work on the job until insurance is reestablished. 
E.  Facilities placed within the right-of-way shall be there at the owner's own risk. The town shall not be responsible for any damage to such facilities, no matter what the cause of such damage. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.400 - Security required. 
A.  The director, before issuing a permit, shall require the applicant to furnish a security, in a form satisfactory to and approved by the town attorney in the sum of one hundred twenty percent of the estimated cost of the total work at prevailing wage, plus a twenty percent contingency, conditioned on the faithful performance of the work within the time specified or within an extension thereof granted by the director. The security shall obligate the owner, his surety, executors, administrators, successors and assigns jointly and severally, to the town for the faithful performance of the work required. If the estimated cost of the work is less than one thousand dollars, no security shall be required. 
B.  In lieu of the security required in subsection A of this section, the applicant may post a security that guarantees the restoration of the site to its original condition in the event of abandonment of the work by the owner, if acceptable to the director. 
C.  The term of each security shall begin on the date of its posting and shall end on the satisfactory completion of the terms and conditions of the permit as set forth in Section 12.08.300 of this chapter. 
D.  Upon completion of the work, the permittee shall provide a security to guarantee the maintenance of the vegetative erosion protection measures as specified in this chapter. The amount of the security shall be as set forth by the director but shall be no less than ten percent of the security specified in subsection A or B of this section. This security shall be held until a minimum of eighty percent of the revegetation, as determined by the director, has adequately been permanently established. Such securities will be reviewed for release after October 15th of each year. 
(Ord. 07-04 § 3 (Exh. B), 2007; Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.402 - Suspension, revocation or default. 
A.  A grading permit may be suspended, revoked or declared to be in default for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Conditions at the site indicate a variance from or noncompliance with the approved plans and/or specifications, grades or other conditions of the grading permit; or 
2.  When a cessation of work before completion has left the site in a condition hazardous to the public or to the adjacent properties; or 
3.  The permittee does not comply with reasonable requirements to safeguard workmen, the public, or other persons acting in a lawful manner during construction operations; or 
4.  In transporting materials or in the operation of equipment in connection with the operations for which the permit was issued, the permittee cause materials or litter to encroach, obstruct or be deposited on pavement or in drainage channels, or causes unauthorized obstructions or diversion of drainage channels within the site area, or violates any other provisions of this chapter or the laws of the town or the state; or 
5.  Ineffective slop stabilization, erosion control or other planned measures that are not working as planned. 
B.  1.  Upon issuance of a written notice to stop work or the suspension of the grading permit, the permittee shall immediately stop all work connected therewith. The stop work order shall remain in force until the objectionable condition, hazard or encroachment has been corrected and provisions to prevent reoccurrence have been made. The director shall give written notice to the permittee of the removal of the stop work order; or 
2.  Whenever a permit has been revoked, work on the site shall not begin again until a new permit with the necessary revisions to the plans and specifications or methods of operation required to fulfill the intent of this chapter has been approved by the director; or 
3.  If grading permit is revoked pursuant to Section 12.08.402, full fees shall be paid for the issuance of a new permit in addition to any other fees or penalties that may be applicable. 
C.  The security in effect at the time of revocation shall remain in effect until the requirements of the grading permit have been fulfilled. If the permittee refuses to abide by the requirements of the permit, the director shall exercise his/her right as outlined in this chapter to correct the reasons for the revocation. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.404 - Default and notice. 
A.  Whenever the director finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any terms or conditions of any permit issued under the requirements of this chapter, a written notice of default shall be given to the owner. When a security has been posted, the surety shall also be given a copy of the notice of default. Notices shall be mailed by first class mail at the address given for the owner in the application and given for the surety in the posted security documents. The notice of default shall state the work necessary to be done to achieve a safe and satisfactory condition, the approximate period of time deemed reasonably necessary by the director to complete the work, and any additional penalties and fees resulting from the default. 
B.  Should the owner fail to perform the work set forth in the notice within the specified time, the director shall claim the security and take the action necessary to complete the work. When the work is completed to the director's satisfaction, he shall determine the town's costs in having the work performed, including all administrative, enforcement, legal cots, penalties, fines and fees. This cost shall be deducted from any funds remaining, and the balance shall be returned to the owner or his surety, as the case may be. In the event the costs exceed the amount of the security, the owner shall be liable for such excess costs and such costs may be liened against the property. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.406 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any peace officer, the code enforcement officer, the public works director or an person duly authorized by the town. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.410 - Appeals. 
A.  Appeal to Town Manager. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director under the provisions of this chapter may, within ten days after the rendering of such decision, file a written appeal with the town clerk: 
1.  If an appeal is not filed within ten days, the decision of the director shall be final and the right to all further hearings shall be waived. 
2.  Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the manager shall calendar a hearing, not less than ten days nor more than thirty days from receipt of the request. 
3.  The manager, at the time set for the hearing, shall hear and consider all relevant information presented and shall receive information from owners, witnesses, town personnel and other interested persons relative to the violation or nuisance and to any proposed means for rehabilitation, repair or demolition of such. 
4.  The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
5.  Upon or after the conclusion of the hearing, the manager shall, based upon such hearing, determine whether the site, or any part thereof, as maintained, constitute a violation of the town ordinances or a nuisance as defined by Section 8.20.020. If the manager finds that such a violation or nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to rehabilitate, demolish or repair the same, the manager shall make a written order setting forth his findings and ordering the owner, contractor or other person having charge of such site to abate such violation or nuisance in the manner by having such sites rehabilitated, repaired or demolished in the manner and means specifically set forth in the order. Such order shall set forth the times within which such work shall be commenced and completed. 
6.  Such order and findings shall be served upon the owner, contractor, or person in charge of the site by ordinary first class mail to the address provided in the written appeal for the hearing, if any, and otherwise, to the address where the nuisance has been determined to exist and shall contain a detailed list of needed corrections and abatement methods. If no mailing address is so available, such order and findings shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the front entrance of the site on which the violation or nuisance has been determined to exist. 
B.  Appeal to Town Council. Any person who has taken an administrative appeal to the town manager pursuant to subsection A of this section may, within ten days from the issuance of the order by the manager, file a written appeal to the town council with the town clerk. 
1.  If an appeal is not filed within ten days, the decision of the manager shall be final and the right to all further hearings shall be waived. 
2.  The appeal shall be set for hearing and heard at a meeting of the council not more than thirty days after the filing of such appeal. 
3.  The council at the time set for hearing, shall hear and consider all relevant information presented and shall receive information from owners, witnesses, town personnel and other interested persons relative to the violation or nuisance and to any proposed means for rehabilitation, repair or demolition of such. 
4.  The hearing may be continued from time to time 
5.  The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
C.  Judicial review of any final decision of the town council may be sought by petition for writ of administrative mandamus in the manner and in the time provided in the Code of Civil Procedure, Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. 
(Ord. 91-0 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.420 - Violation—Civil liability. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is civilly liable for damages to the town for the cost of the removal and restoration of any grading together with any and all other damages directly or indirectly caused by the violation. Such action may be maintained by the director for and on behalf of the town and in the name of the town. In addition to any other remedy or punishment, upon order of the town manager, the district attorney or the town attorney shall bring an action in the superior court under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure Section 525 et seq. to enjoin violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.430 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person performing work in violation of this chapter shall receive a stop work order from the department ordering the work to stop immediately, citing the violations and listing remedies to be undertaken. The person receiving such a notice must stop work immediately and respond to the department within forty-eight hours to be in compliance with this chapter. The department shall then set a time frame for bringing the work into compliance with this chapter. If the work is being done without a permit, all work shall stop until the owner of the land, or his/her agent, upon which the work is being performed shall apply for a permit in compliance with this chapter. 
B.  Upon failure of any person to stop work immediately and/or to comply within forty-eight hours, or the time frame given to make corrections, with any written order of the department made under these regulations, or to make satisfactory progress, as determined by the director in so doing, the town may proceed pursuant to Sections 12.08.420 and 12.08.430 to enforce the provisions of this chapter and any other means legally available to it. 
C.  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a criminal violation in accordance with Title 1, Chapter 1.12 of this code and shall also be subject to penalties as follows: 
1.  For properties in violation of this chapter and which do not have a grading permit: one hundred dollars or five percent of what would be all grading permit fee costs, whichever is greater, plus all enforcement, administrative costs and expense, and legal fees. 
2.  For properties in violation of this chapter and the respective active grading permit: all fees and costs associated with the issuance of the grading permit shall be a penalty owed the town and no further work shall commence until paid in full. 
These penalties are in addition to any other penalties or fees which may be applicable. 
D.  Assessment of penalties may be against the property owner, agent or both. It shall be illegal to continue any grading work on the property until all fees, penalties and remedies are satisfied. Failure to submit such fees or penalties within sixty days of notice, shall result in such fees, plus all additional administrative, enforcement and legal costs being assessed and collected pursuant to subsection E of this section. 
E.  Violation of this chapter is considered to be a public nuisance and collection of any owed penalties and or fees shall be recorded and liened against the respective property pursuant to the procedures outlined in Chapter 8.20, nuisances. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
12.08.440 - Hold harmless clause. 
The owner shall execute a hold harmless clause in the permit which shall read as follows: 
The permittee for himself, his contractors and employees agrees to save, indemnify and hold harmless the town, its officers, employees and representatives from all liabilities and claims from any cause whatsoever while in, upon or in any way connected with the work covered by this grading permit until completion is approved by the director and a certificate of completion filed. The permittee does further agree to defend the town in any claim arising out of, or as a result of the work done under this permit. 
(Ord. 91-02 § 1(part), 1991)  
Chapter 12.10 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 
 
12.10.010 - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the town council of the town of Mammoth Lakes does adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. 00-13 § 1(part), 2000: Ord. 93-14 § 2(part), 1993)  
12.10.012 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. 00-13 § 1(part), 2000: Ord. 93-14 § 2(part), 1993)  
12.10.014 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use of development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; 
H.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions; and 
I.  Implement the policies of the safety element of the general plan. 
(Ord. 00-13 § 1(part), 2000: Ord. 93-14 § 2(part), 1993)  
12.10.016 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 00-13 § 1(part), 2000: Ord. 93-14 § 2(part), 1993)  
12.10.020 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application: 
"Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
"Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
"Apex" means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front. 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Areas of Special Flood Hazard. See "Special flood hazard area." 
"Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one hundred-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
Building. See "Structure." 
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Encroachment," as used in this chapter, means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots, on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of these floodplain management regulations. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for serving the lots, on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
"Flood, flooding or floodwater" means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows), and 
2.  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
"Flood Hazard Boundary Map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
"Floodplain" or "flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. (See "Flooding.") 
"Floodplain administrator" is the individual designated in this chapter to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations and open space plans. 
"Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter, in addition to the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control), and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for the purpose of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93 for guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
"Floodway fringe" is that area of the floodplain on either side of the "regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
"Fraud and victimization," as related to Section 12.10.060, Variance procedure, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the planning commission will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Governing body" is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
"Hardship," as related to Section 12.10.060, Variance procedure, means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The planning commission requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without getting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
"Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
"Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, with are constructed and operated in accord with the sound engineering practices. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. (See "Basement.") 
1.  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including but not limited to: 
a.  The wet floodproofing standard in Section 12.10.050(A)(3)(c); 
b.  The anchoring standards in Section 12.10.050 (A)(1); 
c.  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 12.10.050(A)(2); 
d.  The standards for utilities in Section 12.10.050(B). 
2.  For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements. (See "Basement.") This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include lots for rent or sale. 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
"Market value" shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences. 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
"New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots, or spaces, on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community. 
"Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
One-Hundred-Year Flood. See "Base flood." 
"Public safety and nuisance," as related to Section 12.10.060, Variance procedure, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; and 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; and 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
"Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
"Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the regulations or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Sheet Flow Area. See "Area of shallow flooding." 
"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH. 
"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. 00-13 § 1(part), 2000: Ord. 93-14 § 2(part), 1993)  
12.10.030 - General provisions. 
A.  Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the town. 
B.  Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the Town of Mammoth Lakes, dated September 30, 1992, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), dated September 30, 1992, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the town council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at the Town Offices, 437 Old Mammoth Road, Suite R, Mammoth Lakes, California. 
C.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered, without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the town from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Any violation shall also be subject to civil penalty provisions of this code. 
D.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
E.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
F.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not cerate liability on the part of the town, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
G.  Severability. This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 00-13 § 1(part), 2000: Ord. 93-14 § 2(part), 1993)  
12.10.040 - Administration. 
A.  Establishment of Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 12.10.030(B). Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
1.  Site plan, including but not limited to: 
a.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site, 
b.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities, 
c.  If available, the base flood elevation from the Flood Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map, and 
d.  If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway; and 
2.  Foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Proposed elevation in relationship to sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement of all structures), and 
b.  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 12.10.050(A)(3)(c) of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93, and 
c.  For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to ninety-five percent using the Standard Proctor Test method); and 
3.  Cross section through building and special flood hazard area, with elevations; 
4.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 12.10.050(A)(3)(b) and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93; and 
5.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 12.10.040(C)(4); and 
6.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
B.  Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The town engineer is appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
C.  Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that: 
a.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
b.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
c.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and 
d.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
2.  Review, Use, and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 12.10.030(B), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Section 12.10.050. Any such information shall be submitted to the town council for adoption. 
3.  If no base flood elevation data is available for a federal or state agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations dated July, 1995, in order to administer Section 12.10.050. 
a.  Simplified Method. 
i.  One-hundred-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. Geological Survey publication, or the discharge-drainage area method, and 
ii.  Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program developed by FEMA; or 
b.  Detailed Method. 
i.  One-hundred-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-HMS computer program, and 
ii.  Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-RAS computer program. 
4.  Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
a.  In addition to the consultation required under Section 21080.3 of the Public Resources Code, notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
b.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
c.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse is maintained. 
5.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
a.  Certification required by Sections 12.10.050(A)(3)(a) and 12.10.050(D) (lowest floor elevations); 
b.  Certification required by Section 12.10.050 (A)(3)(b) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
c.  Certification required by Section 12.10.050 (A)(3)(c) (wet floodproofing standard); 
d.  Certification required by Section 12.10.050 (C)(2) (subdivision standards); 
e.  Certification required by Section 12.10.050 (F)(1) (floodway encroachments). 
6.  Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard. Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevations shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 12.10.060. 
7.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 12.10.030(C). 
D.  Appeals. The planning commission of the town shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement of this chapter. 
A decision of the planning commission may be appealed within fifteen days to the town council by the applicant or another person as described in Chapter 17.68. Action by the town council on an appeal from a decision of the planning commission shall be final. 
(Ord. 00-13 § 1(part), 2000: Ord. 93-14 § 2(part), 1993)  
12.10.050 - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
A.  Standards for Construction. In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
1.  Anchoring. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effect of buoyancy. 
b.  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 12.10.050(D). 
2.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed: 
a.  With flood resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2-93, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
b.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
c.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
d.  Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from any proposed structures. 
3.  Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Section 12.10.020 definitions for "basement," "lowest floor," "new construction," "substantial damage" and "substantial improvement.") 
a.  Residential construction, new or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
i.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified; 
ii.  In an A zone, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation; such base flood elevation shall be determined by one of the methods in Section 12.10.040(C)(2); 
iii.  In all other zones, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
b.  Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with Section 12.10.050(A)(3)(a) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
i.  Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under Section 12.10.050(A)(3)(a) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
ii.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
iii.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this Section 12.10.050(A)(3)(b) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
c.  All new construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93, and must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; or 
ii.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
d.  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 12.10.050(D). 
B.  Standards for Utilities. 
1.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
a.  Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and 
b.  Discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
2.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
C.  Standards for Subdivisions. 
1.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
2.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of the proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
4.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
5.  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
D.  Standards for Manufactured Homes. 
1.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located: 
a.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
b.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
c.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
d.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to a minimum of one foot or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored permanent foundation system to resist erosion, flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
2.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30, V and VE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 12.10.050 (D)(1) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
a.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation, or 
b.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade. 
Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
E.  Standards for Recreational Vehicles. 
1.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map shall either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions; or 
b.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 12.10.040 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 12.10.050(D)(1). 
F.  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 12.10.030(B) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
1.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
2.  If Section 12.10.050(F)(1) is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this Section 12.10.050. 
(Ord. 00-13 § 1(part), 2000: Ord. 93-14 § 2(part), 1993)  
12.10.060 - Variance procedure. 
A.  Nature of Variances. The variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
It is the duty of the planning commission to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in this chapter are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
B.  Appeal Board. 
1.  In passing upon requests for variances, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the: 
a.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner(s) and future owners of the property; 
d.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
g.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
k.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system, and streets and bridges. 
2.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
a.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage; and 
b.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Mono County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
3.  A decision of the planning commission may be appealed within fifteen days to the town council by the applicant or another person as described in Chapter 17.68. Action by the town council on an appeal from a decision of the planning commission shall be final. 
4.  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
C.  Conditions for Variances. 
1.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 12.10.040 and 12.10.050 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
2.  Variance may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures (as defined in Section 12.10.020) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
3.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
4.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the planning commission need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the planning commission believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of this chapter. 
5.  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
a.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship (as defined in Section 12.10.020) to the applicant; and 
c.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Section 12.10.020-see "Public safety or nuisance"), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 12.10.020) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
6.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Sections 12.10.060(C)(1) through 12.10.060(C)(5) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to the public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
7.  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 12.10.060(B)(1), and the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 00-13 § 1(part), 2000: Ord. 93-14 § 2(part), 1993)  
Chapter 12.12 - FIRE HYDRANTS 
Sections: 
 
12.12.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Fireman" means those persons duly authorized by state, county or district entities to engage in the training, vocation or avocation of fighting fires of any kind, type or nature. 
B.  "Hydrant" includes any device for the control of water such as, but not limited to, stopcock, valve, gate or other device established for the purpose of the delivery of water supply for fire suppression purposes. 
C.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or other formal or informal association of individuals. 
(Prior code § 10.44.010)  
12.12.020 - Prohibitions. 
No person shall touch, contact, operate, turn off or on or obstruct the free access to any fire hydrant, as that term is used in this chapter, without a written permit from the appropriate authority having possession, control or ownership of the hydrant. 
(Prior code § 10.44.020)  
12.12.030 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by any law enforcement officer, peace officer, special peace officer, state or district fire chief or other duly authorized fire enforcement individual. 
(Prior code § 10.44.030)  
Chapter 12.16 - SNOW REMOVAL 
Sections:  
ARTICLE I. - ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
12.16.010 - Property owner responsibility. 
It shall be the duty of the owner or representative of the owner or owners of each parcel of real property within the town to clear off snow, and maintain free from snow, sufficient space on such real property as is necessary to meet the off-street parking requirements for such parcel and structures thereon, as provided in Title 17. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.32.011)  
12.16.020 - Civil remedy. 
Upon a second or subsequent violation of the provisions of this chapter and in addition to the penalties set forth in this chapter, the town, by and through the office of the district attorney, may apply to the Superior Court of the state, in and for the town, for an order temporarily restraining the owners of such property from conducting any business on such property, the order to remain in effect until proof of compliance with the provisions of this chapter is shown or as otherwise provided for by law. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.32.013)  
12.16.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Failure of a property owner to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an infraction and shall be punished upon a first violation, by a fine of not less than fifty dollars, nor more than two hundred fifty dollars. A second or subsequent violation of the provisions of this chapter within one year shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than five hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.32.012)  
ARTICLE II. - ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 
 
12.16.040 - Disposal of snow on town streets. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or entity to dispose of snow on any town road. It is also unlawful to push snow across or onto any town road for the purposes of disposing of the snow elsewhere. "Town road" is defined as that portion of the right-of-way between the snow stakes. Under special circumstances, town road may be defined as including the entire right-of-way. 
B.  The phrase "dispose of snow" includes blowing, pushing, ramping, shoving or otherwise depositing snow on town roads. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.32.021)  
12.16.050 - Identification of private snow removal equipment. 
All private snow removal equipment operating on town roads shall have some form of identification on both sides of the equipment. This shall be the operator's name or firm name and phone number. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.32.022)  
12.16.060 - Removing snow on Main Street landscaped areas. 
In order for a business owner or a snow removal operator to remove snow in the landscaped areas on Main Street, they must first obtain a permit from the town. If it is necessary to occupy the state right-of-way, a permit must also be obtained from Caltrans in Bishop, California. Removal times are from two a.m. until six a.m. A security deposit will not be required by the town unless excessive damage due to carelessness occurs. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.32.023)  
12.16.070 - Ramping snow on town rights-of-way. 
When snow ramps are built that start on town road rights-of-way, they shall not extend into the roadway as defined by the snow stakes. Ramps constructed in violation of this section will be cut off by town snow removal crews. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.32.024)  
12.16.080 - Lighting buildings at night. 
For safety purposes, in the winter season, all property owners are required to provide night time exterior lighting for the front of their buildings that face any town road. The purpose is to make the buildings visible to snow removal operators, thereby reducing the possibility of snow removal damage to property or persons. 
(Ord. 89-15 § 1(part), 1989: prior code § 11.32.025)  
Chapter 12.20 - PARK AND RECREATION AREAS AND FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
12.20.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section. 
"Alcoholic beverage" means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing one half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or combined with other substances. 
"Amplified sound" means sound projected and transmitted by electronic equipment, including amplifiers. 
"Amplified speech" means speech projected and transmitted by electronic means. 
"Buildings" means those structures or any portion thereof under the management of the town and made available for the use of permittees, including parking areas. 
"Designated representative" means a person appointed by the town manager or the town council to act as a representative. 
"Director" means the director of the town parks and recreation department or a designated representative to act in his/her place. 
"Facilities" or "area" means town owned or leased property, improved or unimproved town park and park amenities. 
"Parks" means all grounds, roadways, and lands acquired by the town or any area thereof which is controlled by the town. 
"Permit" means a document that authorizes use of parks, equipment, or buildings as provided for and defined within town ordinances. 
"Persons" means individuals, groups, organizations, associations, partnerships, firms and corporations. 
"Section" means a section of this chapter unless some other statute or policy is specifically identified. 
"Shall" means mandatory; "may" means permissive. 
"Town" means the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Town equipment" means any personal property, real property or fixtures owned by the town located in any town facility. 
"Town manager" means the town manager of the town, or a designated representative to act in his/her place. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 1, 1987)  
12.20.020 - Authority and enforcement. 
The elected town council authorizes the town manager to implement and administer the policies, ordinances, and regulations contained in this chapter. Whenever a power is granted to or a duty imposed on the town manager, the powers may be exercised or the duty performed by a designated representative of the town manager, unless this policy expressly provides otherwise. The town manager shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 2, 1987)  
12.20.030 - Peace officer. 
The town and Mono County employees who are certified peace officers shall have the authority to warn, evict, arrest, and cite persons who violate any provisions of this chapter. Town and county peace officers shall carry proper identification. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 3, 1987)  
12.20.040 - Entry to activities. 
The town manager, or a duly authorized representative, may enter any park area or recreation facility at any time to inspect the premises for safety, compliance of use, hazards, or other reasons deemed necessary by the town. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 4, 1987)  
12.20.050 - Hours of use and park closure. 
A.  Hours. The use of all public parks and recration areas within the town limits is prohibited between the hours of ten p.m. to six a.m., unless a permit is obtained from the town. 
B.  Park Closure. The town manager, or a duly authorized representative, may close a park area or recreation facility at any time there is an apparent danger to the persons using the property itself, or for any cause which would provide for the safety and protection of the public. This section may be enforced without concurrence of those individuals or groups involved in the use of the parks. Remaining in an area closed by the town manager or authorized representative is prohibited. 
(Ord. 89-17 § 1, 1989; Ord. 87-04 § 5, 1987)  
12.20.060 - Use of town equipment by non-city groups. 
Town equipment is provided for the express purpose of carrying out the town functions. Requests received from nonagency local groups or organizations for the use of town equipment shall be made in writing to the town. Such requests may be granted by the town manager provided that such use does not interfere with town operations, ordinances, regulations, policies, or procedures. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 6, 1987)  
12.20.070 - Exclusion from town area or facilities. 
When in the interest of public health, safety or welfare, it is determined that it is in the best public interest to exclude persons or groups from any town area and/or facility, such action may be taken by the town manager, or his designated representative, subject to appeal to the town council. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 7, 1987)  
12.20.080 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the operation of town owned or operated vehicles or personnel who engage in official town business. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 8, 1987)  
12.20.090 - Liability. 
A.  All persons to whom a use permit is granted must agree in writing to hold the town harmless and indemnify the town from any and all liability for injury to persons or property occurring as the result of the activity sponsored by permittee, and the persons shall be liable to the town for any and all damages to parks, equipment, and buildings owned and controlled by the town which result from the activity or permittee or is caused by any participant in the activity. A person exercising any of the privileges authorized by this policy does so at his own risk without liability on the part of the town for any injury to persons or property resulting therefrom. 
B.  When an association or organization which carries public liability insurance requests the use of town facilities, or when the town is involved with scheduling and/or coordinating their activities, a certificate of co-insurance naming the town as an additional insured must be filed with the town five days prior to the first day of use of facilities involved. The town may require proof of liability insurance with limit of bodily injury and property damage of not less than one million dollars and a certificate of co-insurance for any group when it is determined that the planned activity is judged to be other than a lowrisk activity. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 9, 1987)  
12.20.100 - Damage to buildings, facilities and equipment. 
Individuals or groups causing damage to any building, grounds, fixtures, furniture, or appurtenances shall be required to reimburse the town for all costs involved to restore the building, grounds, fixtures, furniture or appurtenance to its original condition. Such individuals or groups shall be subject to refusal of use in the future. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 10, 1987)  
12.20.110 - Vandalism. 
Persons causing vandalism, or parents of persons under the age of eighteen, will be held financially responsible for the full amount of damages, or the maximum allowed under the California Civil Code, Sections 1714.1 and 1714.3 or subsequent sections. All provisions of the California Penal Code, Section 594, referring to malicious mischief, are applicable. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 11, 1987)  
12.20.120 - Security. 
To ensure proper use and control of facilities and equipment, a security guard may be required when an event is the major use of a facility. Additional security measures may be required to protect the general public and town property. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 12, 1987)  
12.20.130 - Undesirable conduct. 
No person shall wilfully disturb the peace and quiet by loud and unusual noise, tumultuous or offensive conduct or threatening, traducing, quarreling, challenging to fight or fighting or by using any vulgar, profane or indecent language within the presence of park patrons in a loud boisterous manner. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 13, 1987)  
12.20.140 - Application for use. 
A.  The town manager shall reserve the right to grant or deny all applications for the use of parks or buildings within the town. Unless waived by the town manager, all applications for use of town parks or buildings shall be signed by an adult twenty-one years of age or over who shall be responsible for compliance with the terms of the permit. 
B.  Requests for use shall be made a minimum of seven days and a maximum of six months prior to the date of requested use. Exception: alcoholic beverage permits must be made in person a minimum of sixty days prior to the event. 
C.  Denial of an application shall be based on the following criteria: 
1.  When a building or a park with the required capacity for the proposed use is not available; 
2.  Refusal by an applicant to agree in writing to conditions of the permit; 
3.  Failure of an applicant to file an application in sufficient time for administrative review; 
4.  The failure to provide the required number of personnel to properly police and protect the activity and other users of the facility or area due to the size or nature of proposed activity; 
5.  The filing of more than one application for the same facility at the same time. Under these circumstances, the town manager will give consideration to the application first received and the schedule of priority classification; 
6.  When usage of facility may damage, destroy, or detract from the town property and/or cause harm, injury, discomfort, or displeasure to the other persons in or near the park; 
7.  Record of applicant or event not complying with regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 14, 1987)  
12.20.150 - Priority of use. 
A.  Use of facilities is based on priority ranking. Groups ranked at a low priority may be subject to rescheduling with thirty days written notice; in that event, the town will attempt to relocate the group to another town facility. 
B.  Group priority rating shall be as follows: 
1.  Town and town parks and recreations department sponsored activities; 
2.  Other governmental agency meetings open to the public; 
3.  Youth, family, or adult community recreation activities open to the general public, sponsored or conducted by recognized community organizations; 
4.  Groups conducting recreation activities open to only their own members, closed meetings; 
5.  Nonrecreation use, service organizational meetings, or restricted activities not open to the public; 
6.  Religious, sectarian or political groups; 
7.  Commercial use for financial gain; 
8.  Out-of-town groups; where fifty-one percent of the participants do not reside or work within the town limits. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 15, 1987)  
12.20.160 - Revocation of permit. 
A permit may be revoked if any terms or conditions of the permit are violated by the permittee or any agent or employee of the permittee. The permit may be revoked by the town manager with or without notice to the persons to whom the permit was issued. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 16, 1987)  
12.20.170 - Right of appeal. 
An applicant may appeal the decision of a town representative regarding park and building permits. The applicant must file such appeal through the following appeal process: first, appeal through the director; second, appeal through the town manager; third, and final appeal is made to the town council. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 17, 1987)  
12.20.180 - Permit. 
The application for a permit shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
A.  Name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization(s), and name of the person in charge of the proposed activity; 
B.  Address and telephone number of applicant(s); 
C.  Park or building being applied for and the area involved; 
D.  Starting time of the proposed activity; 
E.  Finishing time of the proposed activity; 
F.  Number of persons expected; 
G.  Additional town personnel or items requested, such as tables, chairs, and associated equipment; 
H.  Nature of the proposed activity or activities, including equipment and vehicles to be brought into the park, duration and nature of the use of any amplified sound whether sound or speech; 
I.  Fees charged and moneys collected; 
J.  Individual(s) who will receive moneys collected and purpose for money; 
K.  Notice of requirement of certificate of co-insurance for public liability, in the form of attachment to application, if required. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 18, 1987)  
12.20.190 - Extended usage. 
Facility usage may be granted for a maximum of six months. Requests for facility usage exceeding six months are subject to administrative approval and will be reviewed each six months for compliance to the town priority schedule. Scheduled groups may be subject to cancellation upon ten days notice. When cancellation is necessary the town will attempt to relocate the activity. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 19, 1987)  
12.20.200 - Fees and deposits. 
Fees and deposits may be levied to offset town expenses incurred in providing services. Basic rates for use of facilities are established by resolution adopted by the town council and are subject to change by the town council. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 20, 1987)  
12.20.210 - Use of parks. 
The town reservable areas may be made available for the use of persons and groups subject to the issuance of a permit and the payment of fees therefor. Use of any park for pre-advertised assemblies may not be made without the issuance of a permit. All applications for use of any park must be signed by an adult twenty-one years of age or over who shall agree to be responsible for the exclusive use. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 21, 1987)  
12.20.220 - Use of recreation center and athletic fields. 
A.  Recreation center and athletic fields within the town parks, are available for the use of persons and groups subject to the issuance of permit and payment of fees thereof. All applications for use must be signed by an adult twenty-one years of age or over who shall agree to be responsible for the use. No use permit shall be granted if there is a conflict with a prior reservation. 
B.  Any reguest which will place a major impact on a given facility will be subject to review by the town review process. "Major impact" is defined as any activity that impedes the normal use of more than one area of any town facility. All requests are subject to town priority ranking classification as set out in Section 12.20.150 of this chapter. The town reserves the right to cancel a permit or application for a permit upon one week's notice. 
C.  Applications are immediately revocable if false statements are made in reserving a facility, or if the individual or group wilfully violates any rule or regulation established by the town. Applicants shall be responsible for the condition in which they leave town premises. If town property has been damaged or abused beyond normal wear, applicants shall be responsible for reasonable costs to replace, repair or clean such property. 
D.  Persons or groups may use any designated reservable or nonreservable facility of any park on a first-come, first-served basis; however, such groups must vacate any reserved facility at the time a permitted use group arrives. Individual picnic tables are available on a first-come, first-served basis in all non-reservable areas. 
E.  No use permit shall be granted for any reservable field before eight a.m. nor beyond one hour before sunset. 
F.  Town personnel may be on duty to supervise the use of the facility. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 22, 1987)  
12.20.230 - Rental periods. 
Minimum building rental periods are based on two hour increments. The time indicated on the application will reflect the actual facility use time which includes setup, decoration, and cleanup. Additional time beyond the two hour block can be charged on an hourly rate. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 23, 1987)  
12.20.240 - Setup. 
Setup, breakdown, and basic cleanup will be the responsibility of the group utilizing the facility. When town personnel are to be utilized to setup, finalized setup sheets must be submitted seven days prior to the event. Changes after the final setup sheet is submitted shall be the responsibility of the user. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 24, 1987)  
12.20.250 - Decorations. 
Decorations of any building or on any structure is prohibited unless approval is obtained by the user from the town representative. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 25, 1987)  
12.20.260 - Sales for profit and solicitation. 
No permit shall be issued authorizing the use of any park or building thereof when the activity proposed is to be held for the sole purpose of advertising for sale any product, goods, wares, merchandise, services, or event, that is designed to be held purely for private profit; distributing handbills or circulars or posting, placing, or erecting any bills, notices, paper, or advertising matter of any kind or conducting or soliciting for any trade, occupation, business or profession without first obtaining permission from the town. The town may authorize issuance of such permits on an annual basis for the conduct of such trade, occupation, business or profession when it is compatible with usual park activities and uses, is of convenience or benefit to the park patrons and does not conflict with the business of established concessions. The town manager shall charge a set fee or percentage of sale, fixed by the town council for such permits. A person shall not solicit in any manner or for any purpose, or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, or give or distribute handbills, advertising matter, or literature except under the following conditions: 
A.  When a concession is operating under lease or contract authorized by the town council; 
B.  When the park, or portion thereof is the location for one event which will not in any way detract from the use of the park by the general public and the proceeds are used for charitable purposes, permission may be granted by the town manager; 
C.  When found by the town manager to be consistent with the policies of the town under conditions prescribed by the town; 
D.  When all necessary fees and deposits have been made. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 26, 1987)  
12.20.270 - Overnight camping. 
Overnight camping without a permit is prohibited with the following exceptions: 
A.  Youth Groups. A permit may be issued to any youth group of a responsible nature allowing the members to camp overnight at a designated location in a park. The members of the group shall be supervised by an adequate number of responsible adults, twenty-one years of age or older. The members of the group and/or adult supervisors in charge of a youth group shall comply with time, location, and conditions specified in the permit. The use shall not interfere with the use of the park or in any way be detrimental to the park. 
B.  Trailers, Campers and Motorhomes. Overnight parking of trailers, campers or motorhomes is prohibited on park property without a town permit. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 27, 1987)  
12.20.280 - Fires. 
Open fires in town parks without a permit are prohibited. No permit shall be issued without a fire permit from the fire department. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 28, 1987)  
12.20.290 - Amplified sound. 
Amplified sound, whether for speech, music, or otherwise is prohibited without first obtaining a town permit. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 29, 1987)  
12.20.300 - Hot air balloons, hang gliders and sky divers. 
The operation or landing of hot air balloons, hang gliders and sky divers is prohibited in town parks without first obtaining a town permit. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 30, 1987)  
12.20.310 - Model airplanes, boats, cars or model rock ets. 
The operation of motor-driven airplanes, boats, cars, or model rockets is prohibited on park property except in designated areas and without first obtaining a town permit. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 31, 1987)  
12.20.320 - Golf. 
The use of golf clubs for playing or practicing is prohibited on park property except in designated areas and without first obtaining a town permit. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 32, 1987)  
12.20.330 - Dumping. 
Dumping rocks, soil, grass clippings, branches, leaves, equipment, vehicles, furniture, furnishings or accessories, or any other item or material is prohibited without first obtaining a town permit. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 33, 1987)  
12.20.340 - Animals. 
Dogs and cats are prohibited on park property unless kept on a leash at all times and under full control of the owner. The removal of feces of animals who defecate on park property is required of the owner or custodian of the animal. Horses, mules, goats, donkeys or similar animals are not permitted on park property unless granted by permit of the town manager. No animal shall be allowed to graze or run at large within the boundaries of a town park. No animal shall be killed, harmed or removed from any park unless by a town employee during the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 34, 1987)  
12.20.350 - Smoking. 
Smoking is prohibited in all town buildings where it is posted "No Smoking." 
(Ord. 87-04 § 35, 1987)  
12.20.360 - Trespassing. 
Trespassing into areas designated "No Trespassing" is prohibited. This includes, but is not limited to, rooms in town buildings or structures, swimming pools during specific posted hours, fenced control areas such as storage areas, shop areas, holding areas, construction sites, and all other areas posted for protection of property, health, safety or welfare or where damage to body and limb, equipment, fixtures or accessories or property may occur. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 36, 1987)  
12.20.370 - Motor vehicles and parking. 
Motorized vehicles shall not be operated or parked on town property except on designated roadways or within designated markings, without first obtaining a town permit. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 37, 1987)  
12.20.380 - Posted property. 
Motor vehicles shall not be operated over roads which are posted against public use or provided with closed gates. Motor vehicles shall not be operated over riding or hiking trails unless permission is posted. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 38, 1987)  
12.20.390 - Intoxication. 
A person shall not enter, remain in or be in any facility while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or dangerous drugs or substances as defined under California Penal Code Section 647(f). 
(Ord. 87-04 § 39, 1987)  
12.20.400 - Alcoholic beverages, narcotics and dangerous drugs. 
A.  A person shall not enter, be or remain in any park in the town boundaries while possessing, transporting, purchasing, selling, giving away or consuming any alcoholic beverage. This prohibition shall not apply to alcoholic beverages purchased at properly licensed and authorized concession stands. 
B.  A person shall not enter, be or remain in any park in the town boundaries while possessing, transporting, purchasing, selling, giving away or consuming any narcotic and/or dangerous drug not prescribed to the user. 
C.  All parks within the authority of the town are declared "drug-free zones" pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11380.5. 
(Ord. 95-02 § 1, 1995: Ord. 87-04 § 40, 1987)  
12.20.410 - Flora and turf. 
Removing or injuring any form of plant life on park property, including the removal of wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, and gravel is prohibited except by a duly authorized town employee or authorized contractor in the performance of his/her duties or unless specifically authorized by the director. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 41, 1987)  
12.20.420 - Litter, rubbish and glass containers. 
Carrying onto any park property any garbage, trash or other refuse is prohibited. Trash generated on the park property must be deposited in provided trash receptacles or carried off the park property. Glass containers are prohibited. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 42, 1987)  
12.20.430 - Throwing missiles. 
Throwing missiles, mud, sand, or any object that may cause bodily harm to others is prohibited on park property. Objects safely and reasonably used in the course of recreational activities are exempt from this section. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 43, 1987)  
12.20.440 - Firearms and weapons. 
Possession or discharging of firearms, airguns, slingshots, or bow and arrows is prohibited on park property including any portion of the riding and hiking trails. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 44, 1987)  
12.20.450 - Fireworks and dangerous objects. 
The possession or firing of firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, or fireworks on park property is prohibited. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 45, 1987)  
12.20.460 - Interference. 
No person shall use, attempt to use or interfere with the use of any facility which is reserved for another person or group holding a permit issued from the town. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 46, 1987)  
12.20.470 - Compliance. 
No person shall enter, occupy, or remain in any park or building of the town unless compliance with the appropriate regulations set forth in this chapter are adhered to. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 47, 1987)  
12.20.480 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and may be punished accordingly. 
B.  Any provision or requirement of this chapter, the violation of which is the failure to comply with which, is designated as an infraction, shall be prosecutable as a misdemeanor upon a third violation and each violation thereafter of the same provision by the same individual. In addition, any such violation or failure to comply may be prosecuted originally as a misdemeanor in the discretion of the town attorney or any deputy district attorney, upon a showing by the enforcing agency of the seriousness of the particular alleged violation. 
(Ord. 87-04 § 48, 1987)  
12.20.500 - Skateboard and inline skating facilities owned or operated by the town. 
A.  With respect to any skateboard facility or inline park owned or operated by the town, any person riding a skateboard, inline skates, or similar device shall wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads at all times. 
B.  The town shall post signs at all facilities affording reasonable notice that any person riding a skateboard or inline skating in a facility designated for one or the other of these purposes must wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads, and that any person failing to do so shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to citation. 
C.  Any person who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this section and who is injured while using the park or facility shall be deemed negligent per se. 
D.  No person shall use the skating surface of the Volcom Brothers Skate Park other than for proper use of a skateboard or inline skates. Use of a bicycle on the skating surface of the Volcom Brothers Skate Park is strictly prohibited and any person failing to comply with this requirement shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to citation. 
(Ord. 02-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2002: Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997) 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, § 1(Att. A), 10-6-2010)  
Chapter 12.28 - ANIMAL POISONING AND TRAPPING 
Sections: 
 
12.28.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term "trap" means and includes any device which is a steel-jawed, leg-hold, coniber, snare, dead-fall, cage or any other device designated to confine, hold, grasp, clamp or crush animals. 
(Prior code § 10.80.010)  
12.28.020 - Prohibited acts. 
No person shall use or attempt to use poison on any animal, or use or set any trap to confine, hold, grasp, clamp or crush any animal located within the boundaries described in Section 12.28.050 located in the town. 
(Prior code § 10.80.020)  
12.28.030 - Exemptions. 
The following persons and entities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Any owner or lessee or renter of real property or the agent of such owner or lessee or renter may poison or trap mice, rats, rodents and other vermin of less than five pounds live body weight; 
B.  Any officer, employee or agent of the California Department of Fish and Game acting in his or her official capacity; 
C.  Any officer, employee or agent of the United States Forest Service acting in his or her official capacity; 
D.  Any officer, employee or agent of the Valentine Eastern Sierra Reserve acting in his or her official capacity within the boundaries of the Valentine Eastern Sierra Reserve. 
E.  Any officer, employee or agent or person acting with permission of the animal control department of the town acting in his or her official capacity. 
F.  All entities, officers, agents, employees and other persons listed under subsections B, C and E of this section shall use live non-injurious trapping methods only, unless given the prior written consent of the town manager. 
(Prior code § 10.80.030)  
12.28.040 - Violations—Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and may be punished accordingly. 
B.  Any provision or requirement of this chapter, the violation of which or the failure to comply with which, is designated as an infraction, shall be prosecutable as a misdemeanor upon the third violation and each violation thereafter of the same provision by the same individual. In addition, any such violation or failure to comply may be prosecuted originally as a misdemeanor in the discretion of the town attorney or any deputy district attorney, upon a showing by the enforcing agency of the seriousness of the particular alleged violation. 
(Prior code § 10.80.040)  
12.28.050 - Map—Prohibited area. 
  
(Prior code § 10.80.050)  
Chapter 12.30 - FISHING FROM STREETS, TRAILS OR BRIDGES 
Sections: 
 
12.30.010 - Purpose of provisions. 
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit fishing from public streets or bridges within the town of Mammoth Lakes to protect the safety of anglers, pedestrians, cyclists, motorists and any other person using public streets. 
(Ord. 92-12 § 1(part), 1992)  
12.30.020 - Definitions. 
"Bridge" means a structure within a public right-of-way which spans a creek, stream, culvert or any other depression requiring the construction of a street or trail above the existing grade. This definition does not include private bridges. 
"Fishing" means an activity involving the taking of fish or attempting to take fish from streams, creeks, lakes, ponds or wetlands. For this chapter, a person shall be considered "fishing" whether or not that person is holding or closely attending fishing equipment. 
"Street" means and includes all or any part of the entire width of right-of-way of a public street, road or alley, within the town limits, including streets on land administered by United States Forest Service, whether or not such entire area is actually used for street purposes. This definition does not apply to private streets. 
"Trail" means any multi-use or special-purpose trail constructed or existing in substantial compliance with the Mammoth Lakes Trail System as adopted or amended by the town council. This definition does not apply to private trails or trails not identified in the Mammoth Lakes Trail System. 
(Ord. 92-12 § 1(part), 1992)  
12.30.030 - Prohibitions. 
It is prohibited and in violation of this chapter to fish from any public street, bridge or trail. 
(Ord. 92-12 § 1(part), 1992)  
12.30.040 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by any law enforcement officer, town officer, or town employee, as authorized in Section 1.16.020 of this code. 
(Ord. 92-12 § 1(part), 1992)  
12.30.050 - Violations—Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and may be punished accordingly. 
B.  Any provision or requirement of this chapter, the violation of which or the failure to comply with which, is designated as an infraction, shall be prosecutable as a misdemeanor upon the third violation and each violation thereafter of the same provision by the same individual. In addition, any such violation or failure to comply may be prosecuted originally as a misdemeanor in the discretion of the town attorney or any deputy district attorney, upon a showing by the enforcing agency of the seriousness of the particular alleged violation. 
(Ord. 92-12 § 1(part), 1992)  
Chapter 12.32 - SLEEPING OR CAMPING IN TOWN RIGHT-OF-WAY OR PUBLIC PARKS 
Sections: 
 
12.32.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Recreational vehicle" means a motorhome, travel trailer, truck camper, van or camping trailer, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation or recreational, emergency or other occupancy. "Recreational vehicle park" means any area or tract of land, or a separate designated section within a mobilehome park, where two or more lots are rented, leased, held out for rent, or leased to owners or users of recreational vehicles. 
"Vehicle" shall be as defined in the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 98-05 § 1(part), 1998)  
12.32.020 - Restrictions. 
No person shall sleep in or occupy any vehicle or recreational vehicle which is parked on any public street, parking lot, town right-of-way, public park, or other public place, between the hours of ten p.m. of one day and seven a.m. of the next day. 
No person shall erect, pitch or sleep in any tent, camp or temporary shelter upon any public park, parking lot, street or other public place. 
(Ord. 98-05 § 1(part), 1998)  
12.32.030 - Exceptions. 
Not included in this chapter are recreational vehicles authorized by authorized representatives of the town or by law. 
(Ord. 98-05 § 1(part), 1998)  
12.32.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person or persons who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every night during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and may be punished accordingly. 
Any provision or requirement of this chapter, the violation of which or the failure to comply with which, is designated as an infraction, shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor upon a third violation and each violation thereafter of the same provision by the same individual. In addition, any such violation or failure to comply may be prosecuted originally as a misdemeanor in the discretion of the town attorney or any district attorney, upon a showing by the enforcing agency of the seriousness of the particular alleged violation. 
(Ord. 98-05 § 1(part), 1998)  
12.32.050 - Violation—Removal. 
Any vehicle, recreational vehicle, tent, camp, or temporary shelter occupied or erected in violation of this chapter may be removed, towed away or otherwise taken from the area occupied at no expense to the town or its authorized agents, representatives or departments. 
(Ord. 98-05 § 1(part), 1998)  
12.32.060 - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this chapter shall be by any peace officer, special deputy or regular deputy of the Mammoth Lakes police department. 
(Ord. 98-05 § 1(part), 1998)  
Chapter 12.40 - PUBLIC FRANCHISES 
Sections: 
 
12.40.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the town council of the town of Mammoth Lakes by enacting this chapter to protect the public's welfare in the town's capacity as caretaker of the public rights-of-way and to establish nondiscriminatory procedures for the granting of franchises to use and occupy the public rights-of-way. The requirement for franchise agreements shall enhance the safety and ongoing maintenance of the town's right-of-way while ensuring a uniform procedure that provides equal treatment for all potential users of the right-of-way. The town has the authority to manage public property through its police power and other statutory and constitutional powers granted to municipalities. The authority and procedures contained herein are intended to preserve the town's responsibility to control and protect the public rights-of-way from uses that are inconsistent with the best interest of the public and to maintain its ability to demand a fair rate of compensation for such use, while establishing procedures to treat applicants fairly in the interest of due process. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.020 - Definitions. 
"Commercial" means a non-public, for profit, entity or use. 
"Exclusive franchise" means a franchise for a term of years which grants privileges available to one and only one franchisee within the boundaries and services defined by the franchise agreement for the duration of the franchise. 
"Franchise" means and includes any authorization granted hereunder in terms of franchise, privilege, or otherwise to erect, construct, install, operate, or maintain a facility for commercial purposes by occupying the public right-of-way within a specified area in the town. Any such authorization shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the town generally as required by other ordinances and laws of this town. 
"Franchise agreement" means an agreement entered into by the town at its option with the franchisee which sets forth the terms and conditions of the grant of franchise. 
"Franchisee" means the person, firm, or corporation granted a franchise by the town council under this chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee of such person, firm, or corporation. 
"Nonexclusive franchise" means a franchise which grants privileges available to multiple simultaneous franchisees within the boundaries and services defined by the franchise. 
"Public works director" means the individual acting in the capacity of the town engineer and director of public works department. 
"Right-of-way" means any public highway, public street, public way, or public place in the town, either owned by the town or dedicated to the public for public purposes. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.030 - Authority. 
The town council of the town of Mammoth Lakes shall have the authority, in conjunction with any applicable state or federal law provisions, to grant a franchise, whether exclusive or nonexclusive, to erect, construct, install, operate, or maintain any structure or equipment for commercial provision of utilities by occupying the public right-of-way as approved by the town council and subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter and any franchise agreement executed between the town and the franchisee. Further, the town of Mammoth Lakes shall have the authority to require reasonable compensation as determined by the town council in the form of a franchise fee for the privilege granted by any franchise in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.040 - Franchise required. 
A.  Following the effective date of this chapter, no person shall erect, install, or construct any permanent structure or equipment related to provision of utilities, including both tank and distribution lines, cables, pipes and other related facilities, for commercial purposes on, above, or below the public right-of-way unless the person has first obtained a franchise for such use granted by the town council under such terms and restrictions as are set forth herein. 
B.  No person shall operate or maintain any permanent structure or equipment, related to the provision of utilities, for commercial use, which is erected, installed, or constructed on, above, or below the public right-of-way following the effective date of this chapter unless the person has first obtained a franchise for such use pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or has obtained some other specific grant of authority from the town for the use of the public right-of-way. 
C.  This chapter shall not apply to temporary or long-term encroachments which are governed under the provisions of Chapter 12.04 of this municipal code. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.050 - Applicable laws. 
Franchisee shall be subject to all provisions of the franchise agreement and all applicable municipal, state, and federal laws and regulations and any other public agency having jurisdiction over territory located within the town. The grant of a franchise shall not relieve the franchisee of any obligation under the town of Mammoth Lakes municipal code to obtain any building and construction permits, right-of-way permits, public works permits, excavation permits, use permits, or any other specific authorization that may be required for the proposed project. Unless the franchise agreement adopted by the town council provides otherwise, a franchise does not grant a right to construct or install physical improvements at specified locations, until such time said locations shall be determined and approved pursuant to Chapter 12.04 or applicable planning or engineering processes and permits. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.060 - Procedures for nonexclusive franchise. 
A nonexclusive franchise shall be considered and granted according to the following procedures: 
A.  Each applicant for a franchise, or a transfer of a franchise, shall submit the following to the town: 
1.  A written "Request and Application for Franchise" to the town manager or his/her designee as prescribed by the town manager or designee; and 
2.  A proposal identifying the requested use of the public right-of-way, proposed locations of right-of-way occupation, descriptions of proposed physical improvements if they are to be constructed above ground, method of construction, time of construction, hours of operation, resources and procedures for maintenance, and amount and method of compensation in the form of franchise fees to the town, and the initial term of the proposed franchise and any renewal, if applicable; and 
3.  All applicable application processing fees required by ordinance or resolution of the town council; and 
4.  Any other information required by the town manager or designee. 
B.  The town manager or designee shall negotiate proposed terms and conditions in the interest of the town for a draft franchise agreement between the applicant and the town in consultation with the town attorney or legal specialist. 
C.  The town council shall hold a public hearing to consider a resolution accepting the franchise agreement and granting the franchise accordingly. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the town shall (1) publish notice of public hearing and intent to grant a franchise in any newspaper of general circulation in the community, (2) send written notice by first class mail to the franchisee, and, (3) post said notice in at least three posting places throughout the town. 
D.  The town council may approve or modify and accept the franchise agreement and grant the franchise by resolution, deny the application for franchise, or continue the decision to grant the franchise and return the franchise agreement with direction for further negotiation between town staff and the applicant. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.070 - Procedures for exclusive franchise. 
An exclusive franchise shall be considered and granted according to the following procedures: 
A.  Each applicant for an exclusive franchise or the transfer of an exclusive franchise, shall submit the following to the town: 
1.  A written "Request and Application for Exclusive Franchise" to the town manager or his/her designee as prescribed by the town manager or designee; and 
2.  A proposal identifying the requested use of the public right-of-way, proposed locations of right-of-way occupation, description of proposed physical improvements if they are to be constructed on, above, or below ground, method of construction, time of construction, hours of operation, resources and procedures for maintenance, the amount and method of compensation in the form of franchise fees to the town, and the initial term of the proposed exclusive franchise and any requested consideration of renewal, if applicable; and 
3.  All applicable application processing fees required by ordinance or resolution of the town council; and 
4.  Any other information required by the town manager or his or her designee. 
B.  The town council may receive the application and consider a "Resolution of Intention to Consider an Exclusive Franchise and Call for Proposals" which recites the terms under which the town intends to grant the exclusive franchise. 
C.  If said resolution is adopted by the town council, the town shall publish within ten days after adoption of the resolution a "Notice of Intention to Consider an Exclusive Franchise and Call for Proposals" in any newspaper of general circulation in the community and post said notice in at least three posting places throughout the town. The notice shall invite competing proposals to be submitted to the town manager within sixty days of the date the "Resolution of Intention to Consider an Exclusive Franchise and Call for Proposals" was adopted. The town manager or designee may also send notice to any other persons known to be interested in submitting a proposal. 
D.  The town manager or designee shall consider all proposals and submit one or more of the proposals to the town council for final selection. The town council may select one proposal and direct the town manager or designee to negotiate a draft exclusive franchise agreement between the town and the party submitting the selected proposal. The town manager or designee may negotiate the draft exclusive franchise agreement in accordance with the terms of the proposal, the provisions of this chapter, and the best interests of the town. If the town council rejects all proposals submitted by the town manager, the process provided for in this chapter is concluded. 
E.  The town council shall hold a public hearing to consider a resolution accepting the exclusive franchise agreement and granting the exclusive franchise accordingly. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the town shall publish notice of public hearing and intent to grant an exclusive franchise in any newspaper of general circulation in the community and post said notice in at least three posting places throughout the town. The notice shall state the date, time, and location of the public hearing for protests and public comments to be heard. 
F.  The town council may approve or modify and accept the exclusive franchise agreement and grant the exclusive franchise by resolution, deny the application for exclusive franchise, or continue the decision to grant the exclusive franchise and return the exclusive franchise agreement with direction for further negotiation of terms and conditions between town staff and the proposed franchisee, subject to acceptance by the town council. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.080 - Franchise conditions, restrictions and regulations. 
Franchisee shall be subject to all other conditions, restrictions, and specifications as outlined in the franchise agreement negotiated between the town and franchisee as adopted and approved by resolution of the town council. Further, the town reserves the power to adopt and enforce additional requirements and regulations as are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted hereunder. In the event of any inconsistency between the franchise agreement or the requirements of this chapter and state or federal law, the provisions of state or federal law shall control. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.090 - Waiver of procedures by town council. 
The town council may waive any procedural requirement imposed under this chapter when the town council determines that, it is impossible, impractical or not feasible to comply with the procedural requirements and the public health, safety or welfare would be jeopardized by requiring full compliance. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.100 - Transferability. 
Franchisee shall not assign or otherwise transfer a franchise granted by the town council pursuant to this chapter without the express prior written consent of the town council. The consent by the town council shall not be unreasonably withheld. The determination shall include a review of whether the proposed transferee has the financial ability, technical expertise and experience to carry out the obligations of the franchisee. The review for approval shall also include a determination that the franchisee is not in breach of the franchise agreement. If the franchisee is in breach, the town council may approve the transfer adding conditions to the transfer to require correction of the breach. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.110 - Indemnification. 
Franchisee shall agree to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the town pursuant to a specific indemnity provision in its franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.120 - Term. 
Franchise agreements shall generally be granted for a period of no more than twenty years unless otherwise required by the state or federal law. Franchises can be granted for longer periods when the town council makes specific findings in the ordinance or resolution granting the franchise that the longer term is needed to amortize the franchisee's investment or for other reason which promotes the public health, safety or welfare. During the term of the franchise, the franchise may be extended upon the approval of the town council without compliance with the provisions of this chapter respecting the granting of a franchise. In deciding whether or not to extend a franchise, the town council shall consider the capitalization, investment and financing requirements of the franchisee and the benefits accruing to the town for such extension. 
(Ord. 04-09 § 1, 2004: Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.130 - Valuation of franchise in the event of acquisition by town. 
In the event the town should acquire the physical assets of the system under franchise or any portion thereof through voluntary acquisition or through the use of its power of eminent domain, the town shall pay for the fair market value of the facilities and property acquired, but the franchise agreement shall be deemed automatically terminated in the condemnation action and the town shall not pay any additional amount for the value of the franchise itself. Any condemnation action shall be conducted in accordance with all procedures of state law. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.140 - Safety plan. 
Within ninety days following the granting of any franchise, the franchisee shall file with the public works director a written safety plan including provisions: (a) identifying the location of all facilities, (b) discussing how the facilities might be damaged and the consequences to public health and safety, (c) any emergency response procedures, (d) providing for notice to appropriate agencies of the plan, response procedures and method of notification, (e) traffic control measures, (f) compliance and procedures with all other state and federal laws, and other procedures as required by the public works director. The franchisee shall submit the plan to the public works director for review and comment on the plan as well as any applicable state or federal agencies of appropriate jurisdiction. The franchisee shall make all necessary revisions to the safety plan, and thereafter periodically, and, at least once per year, update the plan. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.150 - Posting of security. 
In granting any franchise, the town council shall determine the amount of financial security which shall be posted to secure franchisee's obligations under the franchise. The financial security shall be as such amount to cover the cost of franchisee's fulfilling its obligations hereunder, and may be utilized if franchise fails to perform as required hereunder or fails to reimburse the town in the event town has to remedy any breaches by franchisee. The security may be a bond, letter of credit, cash deposit, deed of trust or other form approved by the town's attorney. The security shall be drawn on a responsible institution and shall be promptly replenished if drawn upon by an amount to be determined by the public works director. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.160 - Acceptance. 
After the granting of the franchise by the town council, the applicant shall have sixty days to file all certificates of insurance, post all bonds, comply with all other conditions set by the town council and file franchisee's certificate of acceptance. The execution of the certificate of acceptance and filing of the same with the town clerk shall be franchisee's acknowledgment that all conditions of the franchise are acceptable and shall constitute a waiver of all claims by franchisee, and thereafter franchisee shall be estoppel from challenging such approval or the terms thereof. In the event franchisee fails to timely file such acceptance, the franchise and the town council's approval thereof shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.170 - Nonconforming uses. 
Any person or entity utilizing town right-of-way as a commercial enterprise which has not entered into a franchise agreement with the town which would be required as a new use to obtain a franchise hereunder, but which use existed prior to the adoption of this ordinance, is hereby declared to be a nonconforming use. Within thirty days of the effective date of this chapter, the public works director shall give all persons known to be subject to this chapter written notice of the provisions hereof. Whether or not they receive such notice, within sixty days of the effective date of this chapter, all persons subject to this chapter shall give the public works director written notice of their intent to seek a franchise or discontinue and remove such facilities. A decision to remove any active lines shall require a removal plan to ensure uninterrupted service to the utility user. Any such nonconforming use shall have a period of six months from the effective date of this chapter to negotiate and enter into a franchise agreement pursuant to this section unless the town council agrees to an extension based on evidence that negotiations are progressing in good faith. In the event a franchise agreement is not executed within the six month period, as extended, any such existing use is subject to an immediate back payment of franchise fees pursuant to Public Utilities Code Section 6205.1, and shall be responsible for payment for up to four years prior to the effective date of this chapter and for future franchise fees. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.180 - Removal and abandonment. 
A.  In the event that the use of the franchise system is discontinued for any reason for a period of twelve consecutive months, or in the event such franchise system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of the franchise or this chapter, or the franchise has been terminated, canceled or has expired, the franchisee shall within thirty days, upon being given written notice from the public works director, provide a removal plan to the public works director describing the method and procedure to cause the removal from the streets or public places all such property and equipment of such franchise system unless the public works director permits such to be abandoned in place. Franchisee shall commence removal in accordance with the plan within thirty days of the removal plan approval unless a longer period is approved by the public works director as necessary to comply with the provisions of Chapter 12.04 of the town of Mammoth Lakes municipal code restricting the time periods for construction work in the public right-of-way. 
B.  After removal, the franchisee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed in accordance with the conditions and in the manner provided in Chapter 12.04 of the town of Mammoth Lakes municipal code. 
C.  Failure of the franchisee to submit a removal plan, as provided in (A) above within the thirty days, or failure to complete removal in accordance with the plan, shall result in the town making a determination as to whether to cause the removal or leave the property or equipment abandoned in place. Any removal or legal costs or fees incurred by town pursuant to this section shall be repaid by franchisee. 
D.  The removal or abandonment of any property or equipment shall not release the franchisee from any warranty and indemnity provisions in the franchise, including but not limited to the hazardous waste indemnity, which shall survive the termination of the franchise agreement unless otherwise provided by the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.190 - Changes required by public improvements. 
The franchisee shall from time to time protect, support, temporarily dislocate, temporarily or permanently as may be required, remove or relocate, without expense to the town or any other governmental entity, any facilities installed, used, and maintained under the franchise, if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment, or width of any public street including the construction of any subway or viaduct, by the town or any other governmental entity or made necessary by any other public improvement or alteration in, under, on, upon or about any public street or other public property, whether such public improvement or alteration is at the instance of the town or another governmental or propriety function, or made necessary by traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation or any other public project or purpose of town or any other governmental entity. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
12.40.200 - Revocation. 
The town council reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, in the event that the franchisee violates any material provision of the franchise agreement, this chapter, or any other material provision of the Mammoth Lakes municipal code or other law subject to enforcement by the town. Upon suspicion of such a violation, the town manager shall provide written notice to the franchisee with a time for curing the violation. Failure to cure within the specified time shall result in a hearing before the town manager. If the town manager believes a violation is occurring and not cured in a timely fashion, he may schedule a hearing before the town council to consider revocation of the franchise and notify franchisee thereof by certified and regular first class mail at least thirty days prior to said hearing. Franchisee may present evidence rebutting the violation or evidence showing an effort to correct the violation and mitigate its effects. Following the hearing, the town council may revoke the franchise, continue the franchise, or continue the franchise subject to additional conditions, at its discretion. The right to revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies available to the town. 
(Ord. 03-07, 2003)  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.04.010 - Definitions—Generally. 
For purposes of this title, the following words shall have the meanings set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.015 - Applicant. 
"Applicant" means the person, firm, association, corporation or government agency applying for a development permit, storm drainage permit, or other applicable city permit. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.020 - Average month. 
"Average month" means thirty days. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.025 - Basin capital charge. 
"Basin capital charge" means that portion of the service charge to a property that is related to that property's share of the capital improvements, made by the town, for the special and specific benefit of properties within a distinct and designated drainage basin such as the Old Mammoth Basin or the Murphy Gulch Basin. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.030 - Billing period. 
"Billing period" means the time interval between two consecutive billings for service. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.035 - Building permit. 
"Building permit" means the written authorization issued by the public works department allowing the initiation of construction of structures or the connection of any building, mobile home, structure or vehicle with the storm drainage system. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.040 - Commercial property. 
"Commercial property" means all property in the town, private or public, used for any purpose other than single-family uses, to include business, industrial, multifamily, nonprofit and governmental purposes and uses. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.045 - Connection fee. 
"Connection fee" means the charge levied, as a condition of issuing a development permit, for the pro rata share of the physical storm drainage system. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.050 - Customer. 
"Customer" means the person in whose name service is rendered as evidenced by the signature on the application or contract for a town service, or in the absence of a signed instrument, by the receipt and payment of bills regularly issued in his/her name regardless of the identity of the actual user of the service. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.055 - Date of presentation. 
"Date of presentation" means the date upon which a bill or notice is mailed (as postmarked) or delivered to the customer by the town. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.060 - Department. 
"Department" means the public works department. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.065 - Developed property. 
"Developed property" means any property which has been changed from the natural state, resulting in five hundred square feet or more of impervious area occurring on the property. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.070 - Development permit. 
"Development permit" means any required permit leading to a project which will result in five hundred square feet or more of new impervious area on previously undeveloped or developed property. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.075 - Director. 
"Director" means the public works director or his designee. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.080 - Equivalent billing unit (EBU). 
"Equivalent billing unit (EBU)" means a measure of the impact of commercial properties on the drainage system. It is equal to each two thousand five hundred square feet of impervious area which has been determined to be the average amount of impervious area on single-family properties in the town. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.085 - Impervious area. 
"Impervious area" means any part of any parcel of land that has been or will be modified by the action of persons to reduce the natural ability of the land to absorb and hold rainfall. This includes areas which have been cleared, graded, filled, paved or compacted, including gravel and soil surfaces. Excluded are all lawns and landscaped areas, or areas used for agricultural purposes. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.090 - Multifamily property. 
"Multifamily property" means all property zoned and/or used for purposes of multifamily housing. For the purposes of this title, trailer parks shall be considered multifamily property, and "mixed uses" shall not be considered multifamily property. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.095 - Nonprofit property. 
"Nonprofit property" means property upon which a facility exists which has been granted nonprofit status under the rules of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.100 - Permanent service. 
"Permanent service" means service which, in the opinion of the town, is of a permanent and established character. The use of the service may be continuous, intermittent or seasonal in nature. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.105 - Person. 
"Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation, governmental agency or other organization operating as a single entity. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.110 - Private streets. 
"Private streets" means tracts of land, not publicly owned, but which are generally open to the public in the same manner as public rights-of-way and which serve residential developments, but shall not include driveways or paved surfaces providing vehicle access within a multifamily or commercial development. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.115 - Service charge. 
"Service charge" means the amount the customer must pay the town for the availability of a utility service, irrespective of whether or not such service is used. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.120 - Service classification. 
"Service classification" means the effective land-use category under which a property is currently used. For purposes of service charge computations two basic categories are established and defined herein: 
A.  Single-family, including duplexes; and 
B.  Commercial, including business, industrial, multifamily, nonprofit and governmental. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.125 - Service connection. 
"Service connection" means the point of connection of the customer's piping or storm drainage discharge with the town's facilities. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.130 - Single-family property. 
"Single-family property" means and includes all detached single-family dwellings and each half of duplex properties. It does not include multifamily units of more than two units on a single parcel of land. Such multifamily units will be considered "commercial property." 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.135 - Storm drainage system. 
"Storm drainage system" means all elements of the natural and manmade drainage system that collect and transport stormwater from the first point of contact with the ground to discharge at the town boundaries or other designated point of discharge. Included are all impervious manmade areas, street paving, curbs and gutters, catchbasins, pipes, culverts, ditches, natural swales and streams, wetlands, lakes and storage areas and all other features appurtenant thereto. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.140 - Town. 
"Town" means town of Mammoth Lakes, a consolidated municipality and its authorized employees. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.04.141 - Transit and Transportation Services. 
"Transit and transportation services" means all elements of a public transportation system, whether publicly or privately operated, that conveys persons from place to place within or outside the boundaries of the town. 
(Ord. 03-02 § 1 (part), 2003)  
13.04.145 - Utility. 
"Utility" means any activity or service of the town which is supported wholly or in part by charges for the use of, connection to or participation in, the activity or service which is operated as an enterprise. For purposes of this chapter, the terms "utility" and "enterprise" shall be synonymous and may include, but are not limited to, such typical municipal utilities as: 
A.  Water; 
B.  Sewers; 
C.  Storm drainage; 
D.  Solid waste; 
E.  Power, electricity and natural gas; 
F.  Streets and transportation; 
G.  Public golf courses and recreation; 
H.  Cable TV service; 
I.  Geothermal heating;and 
J.  Transit and transportation services. 
Only those utility functions detailed in this chapter will be considered authorized and functional. 
(Ord. 03-02 § 1 (part), 2003); Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
Chapter 13.08 - POWERS 
Sections: 
 
13.08.010 - Ownership of utilities. 
The town may own, acquire, modify, sell and in every other way manage any utility enterprise authorized under this chapter. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.08.020 - Operation of utilities. 
The town may operate, maintain, expand or enlarge and manage any utility enterprise authorized under this title of this code. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.08.030 - Charges for service. 
The town may establish, by resolution, a system of fees and charges covering the services provided by an authorized utility to all users and property owners within the town. Billing for such services shall be at such frequency and by such methods as may be established by the town finance director. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.08.040 - Impact and connection fees. 
The town council may adopt, by resolution, charges and fees for the connection to any of the utility systems operated by the town in accordance with this title. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.08.050 - Enterprise funds. 
Each utility authorized under this title shall have established in the town's accounting system a separate fund into which all expenditures and revenues will be accounted. No funds for any one utility shall be used to support the activities of another utility or of the town general fund except for those specific services provided to that utility by one of the other funds. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.08.060 - Bonding. 
The utilities established under this title shall have all powers related to the issuance of debt instruments as authorized by California state law. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.08.070 - Regulations. 
The town council may adopt regulations for the use and application for services for any of the utilities authorized under this title. Such regulations shall be specific to the utility to which they apply and shall be adopted by separate ordinance. The town may establish, by administrative procedure, any charges to be paid by applicants for utility services. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
Chapter 13.12 - WATER UTILITY 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 13.16 - SEWER UTILITY 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 13.20 - STORM DRAINAGE UTILITY 
Sections: 
 
13.20.010 - Storm drainage utility authorized. 
The town council hereby authorizes the creation of a storm drainage utility enterprise. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.20.011 - Description of the storm drainage system. 
The storm drainage system consists of all elements of the natural and manmade drainage system that collects and transports stormwater from the first point of contact with the ground to discharge at the town boundaries or other designated point of discharge. Included are all impervious manmade areas, street paving, curbs and gutters, catch-basins, pipes, culverts, ditches, natural swales and streams, wetlands, lakes and storage area, and all other features appurtenant thereto. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.20.012 - Storm drainage fund established. 
In accordance with the Government Code of the state, the storm drainage system of the town is hereby designated as an enterprise fund to be operated as a self-sustaining enterprise from the revenue produced by service charges, connection fees, impact fees, permit fees and other charges for services rendered. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.20.013 - Area of applicability. 
The storm drainage enterprise shall be effective everywhere within the boundaries of the municipality; provided, that the service charges and connection fees established herein shall only apply to developed property within the town. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.20.020 - Powers and duties. 
The following powers and duties are assigned to the storm drainage utility: 
A.  The storm drainage utility shall be operated under the direction of the town's director of public works, who shall organize, direct and manage the storm drainage utility in accordance with this section and directives of the town manager, town council and other appropriate requirements of this code and state law. 
B.  The storm drainage utility shall have responsibility for the operation, repair, maintenance and enhancement of the storm drainage system of the town. 
C.  The storm drainage utility shall be responsible for implementation of flood damage prevention of the town and for the direction of efforts to prevent, mitigate and respond to flooding events. 
D.  The storm drainage utility shall be responsible for all activity related to the water quality of runoff entering and discharging from the town's storm drainage system, to include the application for and compliance with any permits required by the state of California or the federal government under the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). 
E.  To effect the duties inherent in the above responsibilities, the storm drainage utility may establish rules, regulations and standards for the design, construction and use of the storm drainage system to include both development on private property and facilities in the public right-of-way. 
F.  The director of public works shall promulgate a system of permits and standards for the connection and discharge to the storm drainage system together with appropriate fees and charges for the review, processing, inspection and enforcement of said permits and standards. Such standards shall include provisions dealing with both the quantity and water quality of storm drainage runoff from public and private lands. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.20.030 - Storm drainage service charges. 
The schedule of rates for services provided by the storm drainage utility, including operation, maintenance, repair, replacement, expansion and management of same, shall be established by resolution passed by the town council. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.20.040 - Storm drainage impact fees. 
Each property that shall apply for and receive approval of a building permit and/or storm drainage permit following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be subject to a storm drainage connection, or impact, fee at the time of sale or occupancy of the permitted improvement. The storm drainage impact fee shall be established by a resolution passed by the town council and shall become a lien against the property for which a permit has been issued. The town clerk may record a lien against the property at the time a permit is issued. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.20.050 - Billing, protests, penalties for nonpayment of charges, senior citizen assistance. 
Billing, protests, penalties for nonpayment of charges, and senior citizen assistance are set out in Sections 13.20.051 through 13.20.054 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.20.051 - Billing of storm drainage service charges. 
A.  The storm drainage service charge for a property shall be billed on the regular town utility bill for the property. Where a developed property does not receive other town services, a new billing will be created for storm drainage service. 
B.  The town shall bill the owner of each property subject to the service charge for the payment of such rates and charges specified in this section; provided, that the town shall bill a lessee or lessees obligated to pay such rates and charges upon written notice delivered to the director of public works and executed by both the owner or owners and the lessee or lessees of the connection property. The rates and charges shall be due regardless of the person or persons billed therefor or so designated to be billed therefor. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.20.052 - Protests to rates and charges. 
A.  If any customer is dissatisfied with any charge imposed under this section, he or she may file a written protest with the utility billing office setting forth their objections, provided such protest is filed within thirty days of receipt of the bill being protested. 
B.  Upon receipt of any such protest, the town public works director shall, within fifteen working days, make a determination in writing as to the correctness of the bill. 
C.  If the protestant is dissatisfied with the town's decision, they may appeal to the town council, provided a written notice of such appeal is filed with the town clerk within ten days of receipt of the town's decision. 
D.  The customer shall deposit with the town the amount of the protested bill. Failure to make such deposit shall not serve to extend the time for payment of said bill. 
E.  The decision of the town council shall be final. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.20.053 - Penalties for nonpayment. 
A.  Any bill not paid within sixty days of presentation is delinquent. 
B.  A penalty charge of five percent shall be imposed on past-due bills for each thirty days that the bill is unpaid. 
C.  Any customer who has a bill or a portion of a bill that is sixty days past due shall be declared delinquent and a lien may be placed upon the property being served by filing notice with the county recorder. The county recorder shall send a written notice of filing to the recorded owner of the property. 
D.  Partial payments shall be applied to the most recent charges, and remaining arrearage shall continue to accrue time and penalties. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
13.20.054 - Senior citizen assistance. 
Town policy toward the adjustment of utility bills for senior citizens as stated in the Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code shall also apply to storm drainage service charges under this section. 
(Ord. 92-08 § 1(part), 1992)  
Chapter 13.24 - GEOTHERMAL UTILITY 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 13.25 - TRANSIT AND TRANSPORTATION SERVICES UTILITY 
Sections: 
 
13.25.010 - Transit and transportation services utility authorized. 
The town council authorizes the creation of a transit and transportation utility enterprise. 
(Ord. 03-02 § 1 (part), 2003)  
13.25.020 - Description of the transit and transportation utility. 
The transit and transportation utility consists of all elements of the town transit and transportation system, including capital facilities, rolling stock, personnel, and all other related costs and equipment necessary to the creation, operation and maintenance of a public transit and transportation system which conveys persons from place to place within and outside the boundaries of the town. 
(Ord. 03-02 § 1 (part), 2003)  
13.25.030 - Transit and transportation fund established. 
In accordance with the government code of the state, the transit and transportation system of the town is designated as an enterprise fund to be operated as a self sustaining enterprise from the revenues produced by state or federal grants, fare box revenues, impact fees, permits and charges for services rendered. 
(Ord. 03-02 § 1 (part), 2003)  
13.25.040 - Area of applicability. 
The transit and transportation utility shall be effective everywhere within the boundaries of the town. 
(Ord. 03-02 § 1 (part), 2003)  
13.25.050 - Powers and duties. 
The following powers and duties are assigned to the transit and transportation utility: 
A.  The transit and transportation utility shall be operated under the direction of the town's director of public works or director of airport and transportation, who shall organize, direct and manage the utility in accordance with this chapter, the directives of the town manager and town council, and the provisions of applicable local, state and federal laws. This shall include the setting of fares for use of the transit and transportation system. 
B.  The utility shall have the responsibility for the financing, operation, implementation and maintenance of a transit and transportation system as set forth in the town's transit and transportation plan, as amended from time to time. 
C.  To effect the duties inherent in the above responsibilities, the utility may establish rules, regulations and standards for the design, use, financing and operation of the utility. The rules, regulations and standards shall include those to be used in providing, allowing, permitting or contracting for the provision of transit and transportation services within the town. 
(Ord. 03-02 § 1 (part), 2003)  
13.25.060 - Transit and transportation service charges. 
The schedule of rates for services provided by the transit and transportation utility, including operation, maintenance, expansion and management shall be established by resolution passed by the town council. 
(Ord. 03-02 § 1 (part), 2003)  
13.25.070 - Impact fees. 
Each property or portion therof which applies for and receives a building permit following the effective date of this chapter shall pay a transit and transportation impact fee in an amount established by resolution of the town council. If not paid on or before occupancy, the impact fee shall become a lien against the property upon which a permit has been issued. The town clerk may record a lien against the property at the time the permit is issued. 
(Ord. 03-02 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION  
Chapter 15.04 - BUILDING REGULATIONS AND CODES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 7, 2016, amended Ch. 15.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.04, §§ 15.04.010—15.04.110, 15.04.030—15.04.170, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 15-10, § 2, adopted Nov. 4, 2015; Ord. No. 14-06, § 5, adopted June 4, 2014; and Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 4, 2013. 
 
15.04.010 - Purpose of chapter—Building code. 
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of adopting rules and regulations pursuant to the state housing law and the Health and Safety Code, for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare of the occupants and the public; governing the creation, construction, enlargement, conversion, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, occupancy, use, height, fire protection, sanitation, ventilation, and maintenance of any building used for human habitation. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), 12-7-2016)  
15.04.020 - Definitions—Building code. 
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in this chapter or in any of the codes adopted by reference, unless the context directs otherwise, such names or terms so used shall have the meaning ascribed thereto by this section. For definitions not contained within this text, reference shall be made to "Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged," as providing ordinarily accepted meanings. 
"Board of appeals," "housing advisory and appeals board" and any other reference to an appellate body in any of the California Building Codes adopted by reference by this chapter means the board of appeals/building advisory committee as established by the town council. 
"Building department," "electrical department," "plumbing department," "office of administrative authority," or "housing department" means the building division of the community and economic development department of the town. 
"Building official," "plumbing official," "chief electrical inspector," "administrative authority" and similar references to a chief administrative position means the building official of the town. 
1.  Where such terms are used in connection with those duties imposed by a statute or ordinance upon the state/county health officer, the terms shall refer to the county health officer. 
2.  Where enforcement of the provisions of this chapter has been delegated to a special district, the terms shall include the person or persons designated by the governing board of such special district to carry out the required inspections and enforcement. 
"City" or "town" means the town of Mammoth Lakes when referring to a political entity. 
"City clerk" or "town clerk" means the town clerk and ex officio clerk of the town council. 
"City council" or "mayor" or "town council" means the Mammoth Lakes Town Council. 
"Fire chief" means the chief of the fire protection district wherein a particular building is or is to be located. 
"Licensed contractor" means an individual licensed by the state to conduct activities within the construction industry. 
"Loft" means an intermediate floor within a residential occupancy. See Section 15.24.110 of this title. 
"Lot" means: 
1.  A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or other designation legally created under the provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act (Sections 66410 through 66499.58 of the Government Code) or created pursuant to local ordinance not in conflict with the map act. 
2.  A lot shall also have the following characteristics: 
a.  It shall abut at least one public street or right-of-way or easement determined by the planning and economic development commission to be adequate for the purpose of access. 
b.  The map or deed referred to in subsection (1) of this definition shall have been recorded in the office of the county recorder of Mono County. 
"Square footage" or "gross square footage" for the calculation of building permit fees shall be as determined by multiplying exterior dimensions. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), 12-7-2016)  
15.04.030 - Codes adopted. 
Subject to the modifications and amendments contained in this title, the following primary and secondary codes are adopted and incorporated into this code by reference and as having the legal effect as if their respective contents were set forth in this chapter. 
A.  The 2016 Edition of the California Building Code, together with Chapter 1 and the adopted appendices thereto, as developed by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference as the building code of the town. 
B.  The 2016 Edition of the California Plumbing Code, together with Chapter 1 and the adopted appendices thereto, as developed by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is adopted by reference as the plumbing code of the town. 
C.  The 2016 Edition of the California Electrical Code, together with Article 89 and all other adopted chapters and articles thereto, as promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, is adopted by reference as the electrical code of the town. 
D.  The 2016 Edition of the California Mechanical Code, together with Chapter 1 and all other adopted chapters and the appendices thereto, as developed by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is adopted by reference as the mechanical code of the town. 
E.  The 2016 Edition of the California Administrative Code, as developed by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference as the administrative code of the town. 
F.  The 2016 Edition of the California Historical Building Code, as adopted by the state of California, is adopted by reference as the historical building code of the town. 
G.  Reserved. 
H.  The 2016 Edition of the California Existing Building Code, as adopted by the state of California, is adopted by reference as the existing building code of the town. 
I.  The 2016 Edition of the California Energy Code, as adopted by the state of California, is adopted by reference as the energy code of the town. 
J.  The 2015 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, as developed by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference as the property maintenance code of the town. 
K.  The 2016 Edition of the California Residential Code, together with Chapter 1, as developed by the International Residential Code Council, is adopted by reference as the residential code of the town. 
L.  The 2016 Edition of the California Green Building Standards Code, as adopted by the state of California, is adopted by reference as the green building standards code of the town. 
M.  The 2016 Edition of the California Reference Standards Code, as adopted by the state of California, is adopted by reference as the reference standards code of the town. 
N.  The 2016 Edition of the California Fire Code, as adopted by the state of California, is adopted by reference as the fire code of the town. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), 12-7-2016)  
15.04.040 - Filing of copies of the California Codes. 
The building division of the town shall maintain on file copies of the codes referred to in Section 15.04.030 and the codes shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), 12-7-2016)  
15.04.050 - Plans and specifications—California Building Code. 
With each application for a building permit, and when required by the building official for enforcement of any provisions of this code, three sets of plans, engineering calculations (if required), specifications, diagrams and other necessary data shall be submitted. Plans shall properly identify the property on which the proposed project will be located and the name, phone number and address of the author(s) of the plans, specifications and other related documents. 
For projects that involve structural design, the building division shall require plans and specifications to be prepared, designed, wet stamped and signed by an engineer or architect licensed by the state to practice as such as required by the 2016 California Building Code, the 2016 California Residential Code and the California Business and Professions Code. Due to the town's ground snow load (P g ) being 230 to 300 pounds per square foot, conventional light framing provisions found in the 2016 California Building Code and the 2016 California Residential Code cannot be used. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), 12-7-2016)  
15.04.060 - Building permit expiration—California Building Code. 
A.  Commencement and abandonment. Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of the building code shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by the permit does not commence within one hundred eighty days from the issuance of the permit. Any abandonment of a project for a period of time in excess of one hundred eighty days shall also cause a building permit to become null and void. For the purpose of this section, November 1 through April 1, because of climatic constraints associated with the winter months, will not be considered as part of the one hundred eighty-day time schedule. 
B.  Active building permits shall remain valid for a period not to exceed three years from the date of issuance. The building official may extend an unexpired permit for a period not to exceed one year upon written request by the permittee. 
C.  To renew action on an expired permit, the permittee shall pay a fee equal to the original building permit fee multiplied by the percentage of construction remaining as determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), 12-7-2016)  
15.04.070 - Compliance with health and zoning and other regulations prerequisite to building permits—California Building Code. 
A.  No building permit shall be issued for any building for which an individual sewage disposal system, a connection to a public sewage collection system, an individual water supply system and/or a connection to a public water supply system must be installed, altered or added to until the building official is satisfied that all appropriate permits have been issued therefore. 
B.  No building permit shall be issued if the construction authorized by the permit will violate any existing ordinance or law. 
C.  No building or structure regulated by this code shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a permit has first been obtained from the building division. 
D.  Exempted work. A building permit shall not be required for that work exempted in the California Building Standards Code (Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), except platforms, decks, permanent roof, and similar structures affected by snow loads shall require a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), 12-7-2016)  
15.04.080 - Utility connection—California Plumbing Code and California Building Code. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, including utility companies, to connect electric power lines or liquefied petroleum gas to any building or structure for which a permit is required by this chapter until such structure complies with all applicable ordinances and codes and has been approved by the building division. This section shall not prohibit the erection and use of temporary power poles when approved by the building official, provided that such temporary electrical connections and facilities are removed prior to connection of permanent lines. 
B.  Electrical service may be connected to a building or structure prior to final inspection and approval, provided: 
1.  The applicant completes a temporary power agreement, on the form supplied by the building division, and executes a disconnect order which authorizes the town to disconnect, under the applicant's liability and expense, in the event of unauthorized usage and/or failure to meet a schedule of completion; 
2.  The building division finds that the early connection is not hazardous, and the completion time estimate is reasonable; 
3.  Electrical service is for construction use only and the building division has granted approval for such use. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), 12-7-2016)  
15.04.090 - Certificate of occupancy—California Building Code. 
No building, structure or leasehold improvement shall be used or occupied without a final inspection and approval of the building division. Occupying or using a structure without this approval shall, in addition to other civil violations, constitute an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), 12-7-2016)  
15.04.100 - Driveway encroachments. 
All driveway encroachments shall be installed in accordance with the town's driveway standards and approved prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), 12-7-2016)  
15.04.110 - Lot surveys. 
All building permits shall require a lot survey or evidence of the location of all lot lines. The evidence shall be in writing and shall be by a person authorized to practice land surveying in the state of California by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers. The permittee/property owner shall be responsible for lot line locations. 
A.  This section shall apply to the following type of building permits: 
1.  Initial building construction on vacant lots; 
2.  Any additions to existing structures that increase the building footprint or lot coverage of any occupancy as defined by the California Building Code; 
3.  Detached structures or accessory buildings including those structures exempted from permits in the California Building Code. 
B.  In lieu of a survey of corners and lot lines, the permittee, with prior approval of the building official, may have the surveyor verify the building location. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), 12-7-2016)  
15.04.130 - Woodstoves and similar appliances—California Mechanical Code. 
It is unlawful for anyone to install and use a woodstove, woodstove insert, or similar appliance without first obtaining a building permit and an inspection or approval from the building official or his/her designee authorizing its use. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), 12-7-2016)  
15.04.140 - Woodstove inserts—California Mechanical Code. 
A.  "Woodstove insert" shall mean a factory-built metal solid fuel burning device designed to be inserted into a fireplace constructed of masonry, metal, or other materials. 
B.  All newly installed and/or reconstructed woodstove inserts shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Dimensions to combustibles: A minimum of forty-eight inches vertically of non-combustible material shall be installed within the chase area measured from the top of the existing pre-fabricated metal firebox. A minimum of twenty-four inches horizontally of non-combustible material shall be installed within the chase area measured from the edge of the woodstove insert. Some construction exceptions may be permitted due to unforeseen circumstances. Further, should the manufacturer's minimum dimensions be greater than the above dimensions, the manufacturer's dimensions shall prevail. 
2.  Air channels around enclosure panel: Per NFPA 211, passive circulation shall be maintained in the void space around the woodstove insert and the pre-fabricated fireboxes. Passive circulation shall be installed in each corner of the panels installed with the woodstove insert. 
3.  Circulation of air in the pre-fabricated fireboxes: Passive circulation shall be maintained around the walls of the pre-fabricated firebox. 
4.  Lintel bar: All lintels and all supporting material for said lintels shall be of non-combustible material. 
5.  Flue pipe: Required spacing of not less than two inches shall be maintained for all installations. No exceptions shall be granted for existing non-conforming flue pipes, and all flue pipes shall meet the standards in this section prior to any final approval being issued. 
6.  Support of pre-fabricated fireboxes at the base of unit: Should the woodstove insert assembly weigh more than two hundred pounds then the base of the pre-fabricated firebox shall be supported by an approved method and means. Should the complete assembly of the woodstove insert exceed more than two stories in height then the base of pre-fabricated firebox shall be supported regardless of the weight of the woodstove insert. 
7.  Pre-fabricated firebox: Any modification to the pre-fabricated firebox shall be approved by the manufacturer of record. Town inspection and verification shall be required prior to installing decorative panels. 
8.  Approved manufacturers: Unless otherwise approved by the board of appeals, building official and fire marshal, all woodstove inserts shall be manufactured by the following manufacturers: Quadra Fire, Buck Stoves, Regency Fire, Lopi, Jotul, Sierra Stove, Avalon, Pacific Energy, Napoleon, Enviro, Country Stoves, Hampton, Drolet, and Flame XTD. 
C.  All woodstove inserts currently installed within the town shall be removed or be reconstructed to meet the requirements of this section upon the sale of the real property within which the woodstove insert is located (provided that for a property for which escrow is opened in conjunction with the sale, the requirements of this paragraph shall apply only to properties for which escrow is opened after June 30, 2013) or by October 31, 2022, if no sale has occurred prior to that date. If the buyer assumes responsibility, in writing on a form approved by the community and economic development director, for woodstove insert replacement or removal, the deadline for such action shall be extended to sixty calendar days from the date of completion of the sale or transfer. This requirement shall apply to all occupancy types, including single family homes, multifamily residential structures, and commercial structures in which woodstove inserts have been installed. 
D.  The building official and fire marshal may enforce the provisions of this section. Neither the building official nor fire marshal shall finally approve any building permit for a woodstove insert without determining that the insert complies with the provisions of this section. This subsection is not intended to and does not modify or abrogate any town immunities set forth in the Government Code. 
E.  Pursuant to Section 1102.6(a) of the California Civil Code, sellers of residential real property shall disclose to purchasers of such property the provisions of this section. This disclosure obligation shall be satisfied by providing to each purchaser a "Local Option Real Estate Transfer Disclosure Statement" specified by the town and by providing a copy of this section. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), 12-7-2016)  
15.04.150 - Work requiring licensed contractor—Business and Professions Code. 
A.  Any person or firm who alters or installs any mechanical, electrical or plumbing facilities, or installs, alters, or reconstructs any permanent structural framework shall be a licensed contractor or work under the direct supervision of a contractor licensed in the state of California by the registrar of contractors. 
B.  Exceptions: 
1.  An owner-builder working on or within an individual dwelling unit may act as his own contractor under the provisions of the California Contractor's License Law. 
2.  All exceptions granted under the California Contractor's License Law shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), 12-7-2016)  
15.04.160 - Violations. 
Section 114 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
"Section 114 Violations 
114.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code. 
114.2 Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition, or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
114.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
114.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in section 1.12.010 of the Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code." 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3(Exh. A), 12-7-2016)  
Chapter 15.08 - CONSTRUCTION SITE REGULATIONS 
 
15.08.010 - Scope. 
All construction or grading and any work related thereto within the town shall comply with this code and the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.08.020 - Hours of working. 
Operations permitted under a building permit shall be limited to the hours between seven a.m. and eight p.m., Monday through Saturday. Work hours on Sundays and town recognized holidays shall be limited to the hours between nine a.m. and five p.m. and permitted only with the approval of the building official or designee. 
Exception: Operations on residential projects of four units or less and located a minimum of five hundred feet from any transient occupancy may work on Sundays and town recognized holidays within the hours permitted. The use of heavy equipment (excavation equipment, loaders, compaction equipment, forklifts and similar equipment) is prohibited. 
Exception: Interior work within enclosed structures is permitted on Sundays and Holidays provided that a nuisance is not created by such operations. 
Deviations from any provision of this regulation are subject to the approval of the building official or designee. Requests for such approval shall be submitted in writing to the building official a minimum of one working day in advance of the scheduled work. 
All work authorized under a building permit shall comply with the town's noise regulation. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.08.030 - Sanitation facilities. 
Unless adequate sanitation facilities are otherwise provided, a water closet shall be provided at all construction sites when the number of workers on a job site is three or more. Sanitation facilities may consist of a patented chemical-type privy approved by the local health department. All other requirements shall be according to the provisions of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.08.040 - Removal of construction debris. 
The permittee shall provide for the adequate removal and disposal of all construction debris. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.08.050 - Encroachment. 
Placement of construction materials on a public right-of-way without an appropriate permit from the town is prohibited. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.08.060 - Construction site nuisances. 
Operations on construction sites shall maintain preventive controls of blowing dust from construction work, protection of drainage diversion from site development, and control of erosion from removal of natural vegetation. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.08.070 - Safety standards. 
Working conditions on construction sites shall follow the procedures and standards established by the California Occupational Safety and Health Program standards (CAL-OSHA). 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
Chapter 15.12 - CONSTRUCTION FEES 
 
15.12.020 - Building permit fees—California Building Code. 
A fee for each building permit shall be paid to the building division as set forth in the master fee schedule. The building official shall make the determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this code. The valuation to be used in computing the permit fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems and any other permanent work or permanent equipment. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.12.040 - Plan review deposit. 
When plans or other data are required to be submitted, an adequate plan review deposit shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. The amount of the plan check deposit shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.12.050 - Plumbing and gas fees—California Plumbing Code. 
Plumbing and gas fees shall be as established in the master fee schedule. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.12.060 - Mechanical fees—California Mechanical Code. 
Mechanical fees shall be as established in the master fee schedule. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.12.070 - Electrical permit fees—California Electrical Code. 
Electrical permit fees shall be as established in the master fee schedule. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.12.080 - Inspection permits. 
The building division, at its option, may issue a permit based upon the number of anticipated inspections. Fees for said permit shall be per the master fee schedule. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.12.090 - Time of payment. 
All fees shall be due and payable prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
Chapter 15.16 - SPECIAL FEES  
ARTICLE I. - MISCELLANEOUS FEES 
 
15.16.020 - Strong motion indicator program fee. 
Fees are collected per the master fee schedule under a participation program with the state for seismic studies. Inspection permits and minor plumbing, mechanical and electrical permits are exempt. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.16.030 - New construction fees. 
In addition to any other fees prescribed by the town, every person developing land as defined in this section, within the town limits, shall pay to the town a sum appropriately computed as follows: 
A.  For all new residential, commercial and industrial construction, thirty-six cents per square foot of gross building area, exclusive of parking and open walkway and deck areas. 
Said fees shall be adjusted automatically on July 1st of each fiscal year, beginning on July 1, 2008, by a percentage equal to the Consumer Price Index, for twelve-month period. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.16.050 - Major thoroughfare fees. 
The major thoroughfare fund fee shall be collected on all new construction per the following schedule: 
A.  For each new residential unit: two hundred fifty dollars per required parking space; 
B.  For all new commercial and industrial development: three hundred fifty dollars per required parking space. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.16.060 - Special district fees. 
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, permits may be required by other agencies for impacts on their special districts. These agencies include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Mono County health department; 
B.  Mammoth Lakes fire protection district; 
C.  Mammoth unified school district; 
D.  Mammoth County water district. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.16.070 - Time for payment. 
Such fees shall be due and payable prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of any such dwelling unit or building or addition. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT MITIGATION FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Apr. 3, 2019, repealed the former Art. II., §§ 15.16.080—15.16.095, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 98-01 § 1(part), adopted 1998; Ord. 02-06 § 1(part), adopted 2002; and Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 1, 2008. 
 
15.16.080 - Purpose. 
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the Town of Mammoth Lakes General Plan, to maintain existing levels of service, and to mitigate the impacts on town streets and multimodal facilities, parkland and recreation, police facilities, general government facilities and equipment, and storm drainage facilities caused by anticipated new development within the town, certain public improvements must be constructed as development occurs. The town council has determined that a development impact fee is needed to finance these necessary public improvements and to pay a fair share of the acquisition and improvement costs necessary to implement the goals and objectives of the Town of Mammoth Lakes General Plan and to maintain levels of service consistent with levels of service now enjoyed by citizens of the town. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.081 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words, phrases and terms used in this chapter shall have the meaning assigned to them by this chapter. 
"Commercial use" means any development that involves retailing of merchandise, retail food services, and rendering services incidental to the sale of merchandise at a fixed point of sale. 
"Community and economic development director" means the community and economic development director of the Town of Mammoth Lakes or his/her duly authorized designee. 
"Development project" shall have the same meaning as provided in Government Code Section 66000(a), as may be amended from time to time and includes, but is not limited to, a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction, remodeling, or any work requiring any permit under the municipal code of the Town of Mammoth Lakes, as the same presently exists or may be amended from time to time hereafter. The term "development project" shall also include permits for erection of manufactured housing or structures, and structures moved into the town. 
"Estimate" means the estimated cost provided for each project and described in the adopted master facilities plan. 
"Fee" means a monetary exaction, other than a tax or special assessment, which is charged by the Town of Mammoth Lakes to an applicant in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of providing public facilities and services related to the development project, but does not include fees specified in Section 66477 of the California Government Code, fees for processing applications for governmental regulatory actions or approvals, or fees collected under development agreements adopted pursuant to Article 2.5 (commencing with Section 65864) of Chapter 4, or fees collected pursuant to agreements with redevelopment agencies which provide for the redevelopment of property in furtherance or for the benefit of a redevelopment project for which a redevelopment plan has been adopted pursuant to the Community Redevelopment Law, Part 1 (commencing with Section 33000) of Division 24 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Industrial use" means any development that involves manufacturing, transportation, logistics, or similar uses. 
"Institutional use" means certain state, federal, or local government uses, and institutional land uses. Government uses include city halls and government building complexes, police and fire stations, libraries, prisons, post offices, schools, military installations, etc. Examples of institutional land uses include colleges, churches, cemeteries, and hospitals. Facilities that are publicly owned, but would be classified more accurately in another land use category, are not included in this category. 
"Multi-family residential unit" means any development that uses a single parcel for two or more dwelling units within one or more buildings, including duplexes, condominiums, apartments, and second dwelling units. 
"Office and other services use" means any development that involves business activities, associated with professional or administrative services, and typically consists of corporate offices, financial institutions, legal and medical offices, personal services, or similar uses. 
"Public facilities" means public improvements, public services, and community amenities. 
"Room, lodging room" means each separately lockable lodging room or portion of a lodging room, also known as a "key." 
"Single family residential unit" means any development that uses a single parcel for only one residential dwelling unit. "Single family residential unit" also includes a development that involves one primary dwelling and one second dwelling unit on a single lot. 
"Square footage/gross square footage" means the sum of all areas on all floors of a building included within the outside faces of its exterior walls. For those projects in an industrial zone as defined in Chapter 17.28, square footage for the calculation of fees shall also include outdoor use areas, not including required parking. 
"Unit, dwelling unit" means one individual residence, whether in a single-family or multiple-family development that has sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation facilities but not more than one kitchen. A studio or one-bedroom unit shall be considered one-half unit but one household. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.082 - Establishment of development impact fees. 
The following development impact fees are established and imposed on the issuance of building permits for development within the town, except those identified in Section 15.16.092, to finance the cost of the following categories of public facilities and improvements required by new development. 
The following development impact fees are established: 
A.  General Facilities and Equipment. A development impact fee is established for general facilities, vehicles, equipment, and new town administrative offices. 
B.  Police. A development impact fee is hereby established for police facilities, vehicles, and equipment. 
C.  Storm Drainage. A development impact fee is established for storm drainage facilities. 
D.  Parkland and Recreation. A development impact fee is established for park land, parks, and recreation facilities. 
E.  Vehicle Circulation. A development impact fee is established for streets, circulation and interchange improvements. 
F.  Multi-Modal Circulation. A development impact fee is established for multi-modal improvements that includes municipal parking facilities, transit stops and related facilities, signage and wayfinding and capacity improvements. 
G.  Mono County Office of Education Facilities. A development impact fee is established by Mono County for library and childcare facilities on behalf of the Mono County Office of Education. The Mono County Office of Education has requested that the town collect the fee on their behalf. 
H.  Fire Suppression Facilities, Vehicles, and Equipment. A development impact fee is established for fire facilities, vehicles and equipment on behalf of the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District. The Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District has requested that the town collect the fee on their behalf. 
I.  Administrative Overhead. A development impact fee is established for administrative overhead to cover the cost of general administration of this article and any resolution adopted pursuant hereto. Administrative overhead includes, but is not limited to, performance of accounting tasks associated herewith, supervision and handling of funds, preparation and/or updating of master facilities plans, capital financing plans, justification reports and special studies related to development impact fee funded projects. This fee shall be set as four percent of the fees set forth in subsections A through H, above, and is included in of each fee amount. This fee does not relate to and is not designed to cover administrative costs incurred by the town in the case of any specific public facility constructed with the fees referenced in subsections A through H, since such project specific administrative costs are included in and shall be recovered from such fees. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.083 - Imposition of development impact fee. 
A.  Any person who seeks to develop land within the town by applying for a building permit is required to pay the appropriate development impact fees, prior to the issuance of a building permit unless the town approves a different fee payment schedule in writing for a specific project. 
B.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in subsection (A) of this section, or in any other provision of this chapter, the development impact fees as established pursuant to Section 15.16.082, and based on analysis and study, shall apply to any development project which has heretofore received a tentative map approval or other approval from the town. 
C.  Development impact fees shall also be applicable when the use of a building or parcel changes to a different use category. In these circumstances, the applicable development impact fee shall be calculated by subtracting the development impact fee for the proposed use(s) from the development impact fee previously paid for the existing use(s). If the difference is zero or a negative number, no development impact fee is applicable and no refund is required. Fee credits are discussed further in Section 15.16.093. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.084 - Annual adjustment. 
Each fee imposed by this chapter can be adjusted on July 1st of each fiscal year, beginning on July 1, 2019, by a percentage equal to the change in the California Construction Cost Index as published by Engineering News-Record for the preceding twelve months, or retroactively to the last date of adjustment. The adjusted fee will be based on the cost index factor multiplied by the estimated inflation factor. For example, a development fee that is currently assessed at one thousand dollars, with an Engineering News-Record inflation adjustment of two and one-half percent would be increased to one thousand twenty-five dollars. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.085 - Modification of fees by resolution. 
The amount of each fee established pursuant to this article shall be more specifically set and revised periodically by resolution of the town council following a public hearing, with this article being considered as enabling and directive in this regard, including any annual adjustments described in Section 15.16.084. The town council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fees, describe the benefit and impact area on which the fees are imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, and describe the estimated cost of these facilities. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.086 - Creation of special funds. 
Each fee collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited in a separate fund created to hold the revenue generated by each such fee in a manner to avoid any co-mingling of the fees with other funds or revenues. Moneys within each such fund may be expended only by appropriation by the town council for specific projects, which are of the same category as that for which the money was collected. In this regard, the following special funds are created and established for the purposes indicated: 
A.  A General Facilities and Equipment Fund is Established. The general facilities, and equipment fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of general facilities improvements, including public meeting facilities, any required acquisition of land, and for the actual or estimated costs of acquiring vehicles or equipment. 
B.  A Police Fund is Established. The police fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of police facilities improvements, including any required acquisition of land, and for the actual or estimated costs of acquiring vehicles or equipment. 
C.  A Storm Drainage Fund is Established. The storm drainage fund is a fund for the costs associated with the construction of storm drainage conveyance structures. 
D.  A Parkland and Recreation Fund is Established. The parkland and recreation fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving parks and recreation facilities, including any required acquisition of land, as well as grading, irrigation and landscaping costs associated therewith. 
E.  A Vehicle Circulation Fund is Established. The vehicle circulation fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of the design, upgrading or improvement of the vehicular circulation improvements and intersection improvements, including any required acquisition of land. 
F.  A Multi-Modal Circulation Fund is Established. The multi-modal circulation fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of the construction of municipal parking structures and spaces, transit-related facilities and improvements, as well as pedestrian and bike connections, including any required acquisition of land. 
G.  Mono County Office of Education Library and Childcare Funds are Established on Behalf of the Mono County Office of Education. The Mono County Office of Education facilities fund is a fund for the payment of the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving library facilities, acquiring books, and providing child care facilities, including any required acquisition of land. 
H.  A Fire Suppression Facilities, Vehicle, and Equipment Fund is Established on Behalf of the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District. The fire facilities, vehicle, and equipment fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of fire facilities improvements, including any required acquisition of land, and for the actual or estimated costs of acquiring vehicles or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.087 - Land use to be utilized to compute fee. 
The "use" of the property to be developed shall be used in the computation of the fees required to be paid with respect to any property. If a parcel contains more than one "use", then the applicable fees shall be prorated by acreage, square footage, rooms, or units, as appropriate, attributable to each "use". Properties shall be classified into a category of use between single-family, mobile home, multi-unit, lodging, commercial, office and other services, industrial, and institutional, and shall pay fees pursuant to that classification, as determined by the community and economic development director. All fees due hereunder shall be determined and calculated by the community and economic development director. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.088 - Payment of fee. 
A.  Payment of one hundred percent of development impact fees shall be due in one installment prior to the issuance of a building permit for all or any portion of the development project associated with the building permit, unless a the town approves a different fee payment schedule in writing for a specific project. Provided however, that fees imposed on residential development shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 66007, as the same presently exists or may hereafter be amended from time to time. 
B.  The term "building permit" as used herein includes any permits required under Section 105 of the California Building Code, excepting those identified in Section 15.16.092. 
C.  The fees created pursuant to this article shall be calculated on the basis set forth in the resolution referenced in Section 15.16.085. All fees collected shall be promptly transferred for deposit in the appropriate fund referenced in Section 15.16.086. 
D.  The fee to be paid pursuant to this article shall be those fees in effect at the time a complete building permit application has been submitted. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.089 - Fee reduction, adjustment or waiver. 
A.  A developer of any project subject to the fees described herein may apply to the town council for a reduction, adjustment, or waiver of any one or more of such fees, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee(s) charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application for fee reduction, adjustment or waiver shall be made in writing and filed with the town clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment. The town council shall consider the request at a public meeting held within sixty days after the filing of the fee reduction application. The decision of the town council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee if such change in use would render the same inappropriate. The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same fashion and manner as prescribed by the laws of the town for hearing on development permits. 
B.  The town council may, from time to time, and as the need may arise, set forth by council resolution, specific limitations which will apply to reductions, adjustments or waivers of development impact fees which may be made pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.090 - Use of funds. 
A.  Funds collected from development impact fees shall be used for the purpose of paying (1) the actual or estimated costs of constructing and/or improving the public facilities within the town to which such specific fee or fees related, including any required acquisition of land or rights-of-way therefore; (2) reimbursing the town for the development's share of those public facilities already constructed by the town or to reimburse the town for costs advanced, including without limitation, administrative costs incurred with respect to a specific public facility project; or (3) to reimburse other developers who have constructed public facilities described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.16.085, where those facilities were beyond that needed to mitigate the impact of such developer's project or projects and where reimbursement agreements between the developer and the town have been executed. 
B.  In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of public facilities for which development impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service and principal on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type to which the fees involved relate. 
C.  At least once each fiscal period, the town manager of the Town of Mammoth Lakes (herein "town manager"), or his/her duly authorized designee shall present to the town council a proposed five-year capital improvement program for the various public facilities referenced in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.16.085 assigning moneys (including any accrued interest) from the funds referenced in Section 15.16.086 to specific improvement projects and related expenses. Moneys, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall be retained in the same fund until the next fiscal period except as provided by the refund provisions of Section 15.16.091. 
D.  Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in Section 15.16.091. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.091 - Refund of fees paid. 
A.  If a building permit expires without commencement of construction, then the fee payer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest of the impact fees paid as a condition for its issuance. The fee payer must submit a written request for such a refund to the community and economic development director within thirty calendar days of the expiration of the permit. Failure to timely submit the required application for refund shall constitute a waiver of any right to the refund. 
B.  For the fifth fiscal year following the first deposit into any fund established pursuant to Section 15.16.086, the town shall make all of the findings found in California Government Code Section 66001(d) with respect to that portion of the fund remaining unexpended, whether committed or uncommitted. 
C.  The unexpended or uncommitted portion of the fee, and any interest accrued thereon, for which need cannot be demonstrated pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, shall be refunded to the then-current record owner or owners of lots or units of the development project or projects on a prorated basis. 
D.  The provisions of California Government Code Section 66001(d), (e) and (f) shall apply fully to any refund of fees remaining unexpended or uncommitted in any such town fund for five or more years after deposit, and the provisions of subsections (B) and (C) of this section, shall be subordinate to such Government Code section and shall be applied consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.092 - Exemptions. 
Any claim of exemption with respect to any one or more of the fees referenced in Section 15.16.082 must be made no later than the time of application for a building permit. The following shall be exempted from payment of the development impact fees referenced in Section 15.16.082: 
A.  Alterations, renovations, or expansion of an existing building or structure where no additional units are created for residential uses or square footage added for commercial or industrial uses and the use is not changed. 
B.  Construction of accessory buildings or structures that do not create additional dwelling units. 
C.  The reconstruction of any residential, commercial or industrial development project that is damaged or destroyed as a result of a natural disaster, fire, flood, earthquake, mudslide or act of God. Any reconstruction of real property, or portion thereof, which is not substantially equivalent to the damaged or destroyed property, shall be deemed new construction and only that portion which exceeds substantially equivalent construction shall be assessed a fee. The term substantially equivalent, as used in this section, shall have the same meaning as the term in subdivision (c) of Section 70 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.093 - Credits. 
A.  All fee credits described in this article are calculated and applied as units, rooms, or square footage. For example, a five thousand square foot building that is demolished will receive five thousand square feet of development impact fee credit, not the monetary amount. The intent of calculating credits in this manner is to eliminate a situation in which there is a disparity in the amount of development impact fees due to an increase or reduction in fees over time. 
B.  Parcels that have previously paid a development impact fee shall receive a permanent credit for the use (as calculated by units, rooms, or square feet). For parcels upon which land uses were legally established prior to the imposition of the development impact fee program, the use shall be "grandfathered" for the purpose of calculating development impact fees. The grandfathered credit shall be based on the last legally established use within the building or parcel. For applicants requesting fee credits, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide documentation proving prior payment of fees or grandfathered status. 
C.  Fee credits shall be applied for changes in land use as follows: No fee reimbursement will be issued for changes in land use that generate less demand than the current condition. If the land use changes to a more intensive land use (e.g., greater employment, more persons, greater vehicle trips), the fee will be the difference between the less intense and more intense development impact fee pursuant to the adopted fee schedule in place at the time of building permit issuance. 
D.  Credit for development that was demolished and/or partially or totally destroyed (as above specified) shall be calculated by the community and economic development director as a total number of units, rooms, or square footage. Applicants that voluntarily demolish a building shall prepare plans showing the existing use, number of units, rooms, and/or square footage which shall be verified by the building division with an inspection. 
E.  Any credits shall be applied to new development on the same site and cannot be transferred off site. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.094 - Credits for developer construction of facilities. 
A.  In-Lieu Credits for Construction of Improvements. 
1.  A developer that has been required by the town to construct any facilities or improvements (or a portion thereof) described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.16.085 as a condition of approval of a development permit may request an in-lieu credit for the portion of the specific development impact fee(s) attributable to the specific project described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.16.085 involved for the same development. Upon request, an in-lieu credit of fees shall be granted for that portion of the facilities or improvements that are constructed coincidental with and mitigate all or a portion of the need therefore that is attributable to and reasonably related to the given development. 
2.  In-lieu credit shall only be granted against the special fund to which the facility or improvement relates. 
3.  Fees required under this article shall be reduced by a maximum of the estimated construction costs of the facilities or improvements that relate to such fees, as described in the resolution required pursuant to Section 15.16.085 and demonstrated by the applicant and reviewed and approved by the community and economic development director, all consistent with the provisions of subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section, subject to the applicable provisions of subsection (B) of this section. If the cost of the facilities or improvements is greater than required relevant fees, this article does not create an obligation on the town to pay the applicant the excess amount. 
4.  An amount of in-lieu credit that is greater than the specific fee(s) of an identified project required under this article may be reserved and credited toward the fee of any subsequent phases of the same development, if determined appropriate by the community and economic development director. The community and economic development director may set a time limit for reservation of the credit. 
5.  Credits shall be calculated by the community and economic development director in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in the resolution to be adopted pursuant to Section 15.16.085. 
B.  Developer Construction of Facilities Exceeding Needs Related to Development Project. Whenever an applicant is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit or by contract approved by the town council, to construct any facility or improvement (or a portion thereof) described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.16.085, which facility or improvement is determined by the town to exceed the need therefore attributable to and reasonably related to the given development project, a reimbursement agreement with the applicant and a credit against the special fund which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this article on the development project, shall be permitted if the applicant requests a reimbursement agreement or credit in writing. The credit shall be applied with respect to the special fund and administered and processed in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 15.16.093. The amount to be reimbursed or credit shall be that portion of the estimated cost of the improvement or facility as described in the master facilities plan which exceeds the need therefore attributable to and reasonably related to the given development. The reimbursement agreement or credit shall contain terms and conditions mutually agreeable to the developer and the town, and shall be approved by the town council. Reimbursements may not exceed the development impact fees to be collected by this chapter. The town's general fund will not be liable or responsible for any reimbursement payment. 
C.  Project-Related Improvements. Credit shall not be given for project-related improvements, including, but not limited to, traffic signals, right-of-way dedications or providing paved access to the property, which are specifically required by the project in order to serve it and do not constitute facilities or improvements specified in the resolution referenced in Section 15.16.085 hereof. 
D.  Determination of Credit. The developer seeking credit and/or reimbursement for construction of improvements or facilities, or dedication of land or rights-of-way, shall submit such documentation, including without limitation, engineering drawings, specifications and construction cost estimates, and utilize such methods as may be appropriate and acceptable to the community and economic development director to support the request for credit or reimbursement. The community and economic development director shall determine credit for construction of improvements or facilities based upon developer supplied cost estimates. If the community and economic development director determines that such estimates submitted by the developer are either unreliable or inaccurate, the community and economic development director may rely on alternate engineering criteria and construction cost estimates. The community and economic development director shall determine whether facilities or improvements are eligible for credit or reimbursement. 
E.  Time for Making Claim for Credit. Any claim for credit must be made no later than the application for a building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
F.  Transferability of Credit—Council Approval. Credits shall not be transferable from one project or development to another without the approval of the town council. 
G.  Appeal of Determinations of Community and Economic Development Director. Determinations made by the community and economic development director pursuant to the provisions of this section may be appealed to the town council by filing a written request with the town clerk within ten calendar days of the determination of the community and economic development director. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.095 - Review. 
A.  No earlier than six months prior to the end of each fiscal year, the town manager shall prepare a report for the town council identifying the balance of fees in the various funds established pursuant to Section 15.16.086, the facilities constructed, and the facilities to be constructed. In preparing the report, the town manager shall adjust the estimated costs of the public improvements in accordance with the California Construction Cost Index as published by Engineering News-Record for the elapsed time period from the previous July 1st or the date that the cost estimate was developed. The annual report shall also include a review of the administrative overhead charge. 
B.  At a noticed public hearing, the town council shall review the report and the development impact fees to determine whether the fee amounts continue to be reasonably related to the impact of development and whether the described public facilities are still needed. The council may revise the resolution establishing a development impact mitigation fee schedule for all development to include additional projects not previously foreseen as being needed. 
C.  The report prepared by the town manager and its review by the town council, as well as any findings thereon, shall be subject to the provisions of California Government Code Section 66001(d), to the extent applicable (which shall be controlling in the event of any conflict). 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
15.16.096 - Controlling state law. 
The provisions of this article and any resolution adopted pursuant hereto, shall at all times be subject and subordinate to the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 66000), Division 1, of Title 7 of the California Government Code, as the same presently exist or may hereafter be amended from time to time, to the extent the same are applicable. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this article and such state law, the latter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-2019)  
Chapter 15.18 - PUBLIC ARTS FEE AND PROGRAM 
 
15.18.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of the TOML public art program is to develop and maintain a visual arts program for the residents and visitors of Mammoth Lakes to add to the economic viability of the community; and to enhance the environment and unique character of Mammoth Lakes by providing for the acquisition and maintenance of quality works of public art. 
B.  The town council finds and declares as follows: 
1.  Cultural and artistic resources enhance the quality of life for individuals living in, working in and visiting the TOML; 
2.  Balanced development that includes cultural and artistic resources, preserves and improves the quality of the urban environment and increases real property values; 
3.  As development and revitalization of the real property within the TOML continues, the opportunity to connect to the natural environment, history and culture through cultural and artistic resources must be maintained; 
4.  As this development and revitalization continues as a result of market forces, urbanization of the community results and creates an impact on available arts which requires mitigation; 
5.  As urbanization occurs, the need to develop alternative sources for cultural assets of the community is increased; 
6.  Development of artistic assets should be financed by those who are developing and revitalizing the community to ensure a continued high quality of life and lasting economic viability in Mammoth Lakes; 
7.  Establishment of this public art program will promote the general welfare through balancing the community's physical growth and revitalization and its cultural and artistic resources. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1(part), 2008: Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.18.020 - Program execution. 
The TOML public art commission shall carry out the duties established by this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.18.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter: 
"Commission" means the TOML public art commission. 
"Public art fund" means a separate fund and account, which is established to receive monies collected for the designated purposes of the public art program. 
"Public art program" means the program adopted by the town council of the TOML. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.18.040 - Public art fund. 
A.  Creation. There is established a "public art fund" into which shall be deposited all funds collected under this chapter of the TOML municipal code and such other funds as may be appropriated by the town council or donated to the TOML for expenditures in conjunction with the public art program. 
B.  Accounting. This fund shall be managed by the TOML finance director, with accounting records established to sufficiently identify and control these funds. 
C.  Use of Fund. The funds shall be used solely for the acquisition, installation, improvement, maintenance and insurance of artwork to be displayed in the town and the administration of the public art program. 
D.  Permissible Expenditures. 
1.  The cost of artwork and its installation; 
2.  The cost of purchase or lease of art sites; 
3.  Waterworks, landscaping, lighting, infrastructure and other objects which are commissioned from an artist as an integral aspect of a structure or site or which are necessary for the property, aesthetic presentation and structural placement of the artwork; 
4.  Frames, mats, pedestals, and other objects, which are necessary for the proper presentation of the artwork; 
5.  Expenditures for maintenance and repair of artworks; 
6.  Administrative expenses, including legal, to otherwise implement uphold or carry out any provision of this chapter; 
7.  Works that are decorative, ornamental or functional landscape or architectural elements; 
8.  Architectural rehabilitation or historical preservation of buildings. 
E.  Ineligible Expenditures. 
1.  Reproductions of original work except limited editions; 
2.  Unlimited editions of original work; 
3.  Mass-produced art objects; 
4.  Private art pieces. 
F.  Endowments. The public art fund shall also be used as a depository for endowments, bequests, grants or donations. 
G.  Replacement. For those artworks that have been purchased with monies from the public art fund or donated to the TOML, the town council may determine to sell or exchange existing artworks for replacement artworks. Any funds obtained from the sale of artwork shall be credited to the public art fund. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1(part), 2008: Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.18.050 - Projects subject to public art program requirements. 
A.  Requirements. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the requirements of this chapter shall apply to all works of construction and rehabilitation for which a building permit is required, including, but not limited to: 
1.  New construction in the commercial, resort, specific plan and industrial zoning districts; 
2.  Remodeling or reconstruction of existing buildings in the commercial, resort, specific plan or industrial zoning districts that results in the addition of habitable square footage or a change in use; 
3.  New construction within a residential zoning district that results in two or more units, whether by detached single-family residential structures, condominiums, apartments, duplexes, townhouses or other dwelling units being built in the same tract by the same owner or developer. 
B.  Exceptions. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following entities or activities: 
1.  Public projects undertaken by any agency of the TOML, the state, county, school district or any other governmental entity (including hospitals); 
2.  Remodeling, repair or reconstruction of structures to comply with earthquake seismic safety code standards or which have been damaged by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity; 
3.  Single-family dwellings and remodeling, repair or reconstruction of units in a residential zoning district; 
4.  Nonprofit social service, religious institutions or cultural institution projects; 
5.  Low and moderate income and restricted housing projects as defined by state law and Mammoth Lakes housing LLC; 
6.  Workforce housing developments receiving TOML, state or federal assistance; 
7.  Private educational institutions that provide general education equivalent to the public school system (kindergarten through college or any part thereof); 
8.  Architectural rehabilitation or historical preservation of properties that are designated as class 1 historic sites by the town council. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1(part), 2008: Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.18.060 - Certificates of occupancy. 
A.  No final TOML approval, such as final inspection or a certificate of occupancy, for any project subject to this chapter shall be granted or issued unless and until full compliance with the public art program is achieved, in one or more of the following ways: 
1.  The artwork has been approved in a manner satisfactory to the public art commission; 
2.  In-lieu fees have been paid; 
3.  Financial security in an amount equal to the acquisition and installation costs of an approved artwork, in a form approved by the TOML finance director, as been posted; 
4.  An approved artwork has been donated and accepted by the public art commission. 
B.  Full compliance with the public art program shall not be deemed to exist until the entire program allocation for the project, as defined in Section 15.18.070 of this chapter has been provided. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1(part), 2008: Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.18.070 - Requirement to provide artwork or pay in-lieu lee. 
A.  The applicant shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligations under this chapter through the placement of artwork in a manner consistent with this chapter, valued at an amount equal to the program allocation. 
B.  In-lieu of placement of an approved artwork, the applicant may, at his or her discretion, pay to the TOML for deposit into the public art fund an amount equal to the program allocation set forth in subsection D of this section. 
C.  Fees are to be collected with respect to all projects prior to or at time of issuance of a building permit. 
D.  The program allocation, as used in this chapter, is the percentage of the building valuation, which is set-aside for the TOML's public art program. The total building valuation shall be computed using the latest building valuation data as set forth by the International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO) unless, in the opinion of the community development director, a different valuation measure more accurately represents the value of the building. Excluding land acquisition and off-site improvement costs, the program allocation shall be an amount equal to the percentage of the total building valuation for an applicable project, as listed in this chapter: 
1.  One percent for new commercial, office and industrial construction as those land use categories are defined in Resolution 07-26, as amended from time to time, known as the Development Impact Mitigation Fee Schedule; 
2.  One percent for remodel or reconstruction of existing commercial, office or industrial property that results in the addition of habitable square feet or a change in use; 
3.  One-half of one percent for new construction of two or more units of single-family nontransient, single-family transient, mobilehomes, multi-unit nontransient and multi-unit transient as those land use categories are defined in Resolution 07-26, as amended from time to time, known as the Development Impact Mitigation Fee Schedule. 
E.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the applicant from placing an approved artwork with acquisition and installation costs in an amount less than the program allocation; provided, that the applicant shall also pay to the public art fund the costs of acquisition and installation of such artwork. In other words, the public art fund shall be reimbursed for all expenditures associated with acquiring and installing a piece of art. 
F.  Nothing in this section shall restrict the town council from waiving the requirements of this chapter, in whole or in part, with respect to any project otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter, provided that the town council determines that the project applicant has entered into an agreement with the TOML providing for the applicant's acquisition and installation of artwork in connection with the development of the project which addresses the goals and aims of this chapter in a manner equally or more favorable to the TOML than would be achieved by strict compliance with this chapter. In such an event, the town council shall make findings to this effect on the basis of substantial evidence. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1(part), 2008: Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.18.080 - Art site acceptability. 
A.  Placement of Art by Applicant. The applicant shall place artwork in outdoor areas of the private property that are visible by the public a minimum of twelve hours per day. Interior spaces, including lobbies, courtyards, malls, and similar interior areas, may be eligible if they are accessible to the public a minimum of eight hours per day. 
B.  Art Purchased Through Public Art Fund. When selecting the location for art purchased through the public art fund, preference shall be given to publicly accessible public places. This would include libraries, parks, office buildings, sidewalks, traffic islands, and similar locations. Lobbies, plaza, adjacent open spaces or exterior treatment of publicly owned buildings shall be potential sites, but the offices themselves of publicly owned buildings shall not be considered acceptable sites. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.18.090 - Criteria for artwork selection. 
A.  Eligibility requirements for each project will be established by the public art commission. Specifically excluded are artworks done by students under the supervision of art instructors to satisfy course requirements and artists who are members of the public art commission. The following criteria shall be considered in the selection of artwork: 
1.  Quality of the artwork; 
2.  Media. All visual art forms may be considered, subject to limitations set by the selection jury or the public art commission; 
3.  Style. Artworks of all schools, styles, and tastes should be considered for the TOML collection; 
4.  Environment. Artworks and art places should be appropriate in scale, material, form and content for the immediate, general, social and physical environments with which they relate; 
5.  Permanence. Consideration should be given to structural and surface integrity, permanence, and protection against theft, vandalism, weathering, excessive maintenance, and repair costs; 
6.  Elements of Design. Consideration should take into account that public art, in addition to meeting aesthetic requirements, also may serve to establish focal points, terminate areas, modify, enhance, or define specific spaces, or establish identity; 
7.  Diversity. The public art program should strive for diversity of style, scale, media, artists—including ethnicity and gender and equitable distribution of artworks and art places throughout the TOML. 
B.  The following methods may be used to select artwork: 
1.  Direct Purchase. A completed work of art may be purchased for a specific project or location; 
2.  Direct Commission. An artist may be chosen directly by the PAC and/or paid to submit a proposal. Artists will be selected on the basis of their qualifications for a particular project and its probability; 
3.  Limited Competition. A small number of artists may be invited and/or paid by the PAC to submit proposals; 
4.  Open Competition. Any artist may apply subject to limitations established by the PAC. No proposal fee is paid to artists; however, a small number of finalists may be selected to submit details, models or plans for which a fee is paid. 
C.  In selecting an artwork, the public art commission may appoint a selection jury of qualified persons. The jury shall be subject to the provisions of the Brown Act. 
D.  Review by Department of Community Development. A Department of Community Development representative shall review the artwork and its placement and landscaping elements and may refer the artwork to the planning commission for approval, pursuant to the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.18.100 - Maintenance of artwork on public and private property. 
A.  Public Artwork on Public Property. A maintenance program shall be established as part of the public art program fund. Procedures for custody, maintenance and conservation of artworks shall be established by the public art commission as well as a maintenance schedule. Specific instructions for care of each work shall be kept on file as part of the collection management. The public art commission will strive to include maintenance provisions in the artwork contracts stipulating the length of time (typically one year) the artist will be responsible for repairs, that urge artists to provide a maintenance manual, and that if otherwise allowed by law allow the artist first-refusal on repair contracts within a fair market rate of remuneration. Regular inspection-for-condition reporting shall be conducted so that the collection is maintained in the best possible condition as supervised by designated TOML personnel. When necessary, a conservation plan will be established prioritizing the work that is to be done. 
B.  Private Artwork on Private Property. The obligation to provide all maintenance necessary to preserve the artwork in good condition shall remain with the owner of the site. Art installed on or integrated into a construction project pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be removed or altered without the approval of the public art commission. Artwork installed pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained as specified in the written agreement between the TOML and the private property owner with regard to that artwork. Maintenance of artwork, as used in this chapter, shall include without limitation, preservation of the artwork in good condition to the satisfaction of the TOML, protection of the artwork against physical defacement, mutilation or alteration, and securing and maintaining fire and extended coverage insurance and vandalism and other similar acts in an approved artwork, applicant and owner of the site shall execute and record a covenant in a form approved by the TOML for maintenance of the artwork. Failure to maintain the artwork as provided in this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance. If the artwork is not maintained in the manner prescribed, or is removed or altered without approval of the public art commission, in addition to all other remedies provided by law, the TOML may, upon reasonable notice, perform all necessary repairs, maintenance, secure insurance, or take such legal or other action deemed necessary to have the artwork maintained and if necessary, restored, and the costs therefore shall become a debt owed to the TOML by the owner of the site. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.18.110 - Application procedures for placement of artwork on private property. 
Any artwork being placed on private property as part of the TOML's public art program shall be a one-of-a-kind piece. The TOML encourages applicants to submit an application prior to the development of the architect's schematic design. The requirements and procedures for the processing of a public art program proposal application (an "arts application") shall be as follows: 
A.  Upon submission of a development project application for a project subject to the requirements of this chapter, the community development department shall provide to the project applicant a copy of this chapter and an arts application form; 
B.  The project applicant shall submit to the community development department the completed arts application form, describing the manner in which the project applicant intends to comply with this chapter; 
C.  The arts application shall include: 
1.  Preliminary sketches, photographs, or other documentation of sufficient descriptive clarity to indicate the nature of the proposed artwork, 
2.  An appraisal or other evidence of the value of the proposed artwork, including acquisition and installation costs, 
3.  Preliminary plans containing such detailed information as may be required by the public art commission to adequately evaluate the location of the artwork in relation to the proposed development, and its compatibility with the proposed development (the artwork shall be an integral part of the landscaping and/or architecture of the building), including compatibility with the character of adjacent conforming developed parcels and existing neighborhoods if necessary to evaluate the proposal, 
4.  A narrative statement to demonstrate that the artwork will be displayed in an area open and freely available to the general public, or otherwise provide public accessibility in an equivalent manner based on the characteristics of the artwork or its placement on the site, and 
5.  Maintenance factors required to insure its permanence. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.18.120 - Approval procedures for placement of artwork on private property. 
A.  The application for the proposed artwork and its placement will be considered at a monthly public meeting of the TOML's public art commission. A department of community development representative will also review the artwork and its placement and landscaping elements, and may refer the application to the planning commission for approval pursuant to the zoning ordinance. Any changes, questions or recommendations shall be conveyed in writing to the applicant. The commission will determine when all issues have been addressed and accept or reject the artwork. The applicant will be notified in writing of the public art commission's decision. 
B.  If the applicant proposes or the planning commission or town council recommends significant revisions to the architecture or physical design and layout of the proposed project subsequent to the receipt of the public art commission's approval, the application shall, if legally permitted, be returned to the public art commission for further review and recommendation concerning the revised proposal prior to final approval unless the town council otherwise directs. 
C.  A contract between the TOML and the applicant spelling out all requirements, including insurance and maintenance, shall be executed prior to the TOML's formal acceptance of the applicant's art-in-lieu proposal. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.18.130 - Ownership of artwork on private property. 
Artwork placed on the applicant's property by the applicant in satisfaction of the applicant's program requirement shall remain the property of the applicant. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.18.140 - Application procedure for donation of artwork to the TOML. 
The prospective donor shall submit to the PAC: 
A.  Sketches, photographs, or other documentation of sufficient descriptive clarity to indicate the nature of the proposed artwork to be donated; 
B.  Additional samples of artist's work other than the proposed donation; 
C.  Background information on artist who created the proposed donation; 
D.  Installation costs, if available; 
E.  Maintenance factors required to insure its permanence. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.18.150 - Review and acceptance of artwork donated to the TOML. 
The proposed donation will be considered at a monthly public meeting of the public arts commission. All details of the proposed donation, including the feasibility and expense of placing and caring for the work of art that will be considered. The commission will review and discuss the donation and will direct staff as to any questions to be asked of the donor or artist. A personal appearance by artist may be requested. The commission will determine when all issues have been addressed and accept or reject the artwork. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
Chapter 15.20 - BUILDING MOVING AND DEMOLITION 
 
15.20.010 - Permits required—Limitations. 
A.  No person shall move any building or structure without first obtaining from the building division a relocation permit and a building permit, if applicable. No person shall effect any demolition of any building or structure, or any part thereof, without first obtaining from the building division a demolition permit. 
B.  A demolition permit shall be required for the demolition of any structure or any portion of a building exceeding one hundred twenty square feet. 
C.  Building official may waive the requirement to obtain a demolition permit if it has been determined that the scope of the work is not contained within the intent of this section and does not affect the structural ability of any remaining buildings. 
D.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, there shall not be issued a relocation permit for any building or structure which is included within any one or more of the following categories: 
1.  So constructed or in such condition as to constitute a danger of injury or death through collapse of the building, fire, defects in electrical wiring or any other substantial hazard, to the persons who will occupy or enter the building after relocation; 
2.  Infested with rats or other vermin or the wood members of the building are infested with rot, decay or termites; 
3.  So unsanitary or filthy that it would constitute a hazard to the health of the persons who will occupy the building after relocation or, if not intended for occupancy by human beings, would make it unsuitable for its intended use; 
4.  In such condition or a type, character, size or value and is so inharmonious with other buildings in the neighborhood of the relocation site, that placing the building at the proposed relocation site would substantially diminish the value of other property or improvements in the district into which the building is to be relocated; 
5.  The proposed use of the building is prohibited at the proposed relocation site under any zoning ordinance or other land use ordinance of the town; 
6.  The building, structure or relocation site does not conform to all applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.20.020 - Application for relocation and demolition permits. 
Every application for a relocation or demolition permit shall be in writing upon a form furnished by the building division and shall set forth such information as may reasonably be required in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Such information includes: 
A.  Photographs of the building or structure to be moved or demolished and photographs of the buildings on the properties contiguous with the premises onto which the building or structure is to be moved; 
B.  A report from a licensed pest control contractor stating the condition as to decay and pest infestation of the building or structure to be moved; 
C.  A report from a registered engineer or architect stating the structural condition of the building to be moved and clearly indicating steps to be taken to preserve/enhance the condition; 
D.  A plot plan, foundation plan and any required details or specifications of the new building site; 
E.  A map of the proposed traffic route of the relocation. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.20.030 - Correction of defects before issuance. 
A.  If the building or structure to be moved fails to meet any of the standards set forth in Section 15.20.010, but it appears to the building official that the deficiencies can be corrected, the permits shall be issued only on the condition that all deficiencies will be corrected. 
B.  In order to determine any matter regarding relocation or demolition of a building or structure, the building official may cause any investigation to be made, which he believes necessary. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.20.040 - Terms and conditions of issuance. 
In granting a relocation permit, there may be imposed such terms and conditions as are reasonable, including but not limited to, changes, alterations, additions, or repairs to the building or structure so that its relocation will not be materially detrimental or injurious to the public safety or welfare, or to the property or improvements in the district to which it is to be moved. The terms and conditions upon which each permit is granted shall be in writing upon the permit or appended thereto. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.20.050 - Debris and excavations. 
It shall be the duty of any person to whom any permit is issued for the demolition or for the removal of any building, or any section or portion of any building pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and of any person leasing, owning, or occupying or controlling any lot or parcel of ground from which a building is removed or demolished, to remove all weeds, concrete or stone foundations, flat concrete, concrete patios, masonry walls, garage floors, driveways, and similar structures and all loose, miscellaneous, and useless material from such lot or parcel of ground, and to properly secure the sanitary sewer connection, and to properly fill or otherwise protect all basements, cellars, septic tanks, wells, and other excavations. The site shall be returned to a presentable condition as determined by the building division. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.20.060 - Denial of permit. 
If the unlawful, dangerous or defective condition of the building or structure proposed to be relocated is such that remedy or correction cannot practicably and effectively be made, the relocation permit shall be denied. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.20.070 - Expiration. 
A relocation or demolition permit shall expire and become null and void if the moving of the building or structure is not completed within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.20.080 - Relocation and demolition bond or other security. 
The building official may require a bond or security be posted to insure compliance with the requirements of the relocation or demolition permit. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
Chapter 15.24 - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 4, 2013, amended Ch. 13.24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 13.24, §§ 13.24.010—13.24.130, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 08-02, § 1(Exh. A), adopted 2008; and Ord. No. 12-03, § 6(Exh. C), adopted June 6, 2012. 
 
15.24.010 - Wind design—California Building Code. 
The minimum basic wind speeds are established for the following regions: 
A.  Town of Mammoth Lakes—Eighty-five miles per hour. 
B.  Mammoth Lakes Airport—Ninety-five miles per hour. 
The wind design shall comply with exposure C requirements unless the architect or structural engineer in general charge can justify that the building site and surrounding terrain conform to other criteria. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), 12-4-2013)  
15.24.020 - Seismic design—California Building Code. 
All structures within the boundaries of the town shall be designed to seismic ground accelerations of Ss = 1.68 and S1 = 0.68 as defined in the California Building Code. One-third of the design snow load (Pf) shall be added to the dead load for seismic design. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), 12-4-2013)  
15.24.030 - Energy design standards. 
The following shall be considered minimum design standards for calculations within the guidelines established by the California Energy Commission, Title 24, state of California: 
A.  The town shall be considered within climatic zone 16 as defined by the California Energy Commission; 
B.  Winter design temperature shall be minus two degrees Fahrenheit; 
C.  Summer design temperatures shall be seventy-four degrees Fahrenheit; 
D.  Heating degree-days shall be eight thousand. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), 12-4-2013)  
15.24.040 - Snow loads/snow design—California Building Code. 
A.  The town shall be considered a snow area. All structures within the town shall be designed to withstand snow loads and any additional effects created by snow. 
B.  [1.]  Basic ground snow load (Pg) is established as follows: 
a.  One hundred pounds per square foot for Mammoth Lakes Airport; 
b.  Two hundred thirty pounds for elevations eight thousand five hundred feet or less; 
c.  Three hundred pounds for elevations greater than eight thousand five hundred feet. 
2.  Roof snow load (Pf) shall be established as follows: 
Pf = .7(Ce)(Ct)(I)(Pg) 
Ce 	= 	Snow exposure coefficient 
I 	= 	Snow design importance factor 
Pg 	= 	Basic ground snow load 
Ct 	= 	Thermal factor 
 
3.  The snow exposure coefficient (Ce) shall be determined as follows or as per ASCE 7: 
Ce 	= 	1.0 Partially exposed roofs 
Ce 	= 	0.9 Fully exposed roofs on all sides with no shelter from terrain, trees or higher structures 
Ce 	= 	1.2 Tightly forested 
 
4.  The snow design importance factor (I) shall be determined as follows: 
I 	= 	1.2 Essential facilities. 
I 	= 	1.1 Assembly areas with occupancy greater than three hundred and daycare facilities with occupancy greater than one hundred fifty agricultural buildings and similar structures. 
I 	= 	0.8 Agricultural buildings and similar structures. 
I 	= 	1.0 All other structures. 
 
5.  The thermal factor (Ct) shall be determined as follows or as per ASCE 7. 
Ct 	= 	1.1 for structures with ventilated roofs and insulation values of R-25 or greater. 
Ct 	= 	1.2 for unheated structures. 
Ct 	= 	1.1 for all other structures. 
 
C.  Snow load reductions for roof pitch will be permitted pr ASCE 7, provided the roof design does not allow snow to accumulate from ground level to the roof eave. This shall be assumed to be a minimum ten feet from eave to grade level. Design consideration shall be given to drifting snow and other accumulations on the roof, exposure, impact, effects on adjacent property, and other dynamic loading due to snow avalanching onto lower structural elements, against projections such as vents, and onto targets on the around. 
D.  Setbacks to Property Lines (For Snowshed Impact Zones). 
1.  All eaves of sloped roofs (>:12) shall maintain setbacks so that snowshed impact areas will occur on the property of the subject structure. The minimum impact area setback shall be ten feet measured horizontally from a vertical line projecting from the roof eave to the property line. 
2.  The eave of a structure may encroach into the impact area setback a maximum three feet provided an engineered snowslide restraint device, designed in accordance with the provisions of this code, is incorporated into the roof design. 
3.  Property owners shall maintain snowshed impact areas to prevent snow from encroaching onto adjacent properties. 
E.  Protection of Required Entries/Exits, Parking, and Driveways. 
1.  The roof and eaves of all structures shall be designed so that snowshed impact areas will not occur in or on entries/exits (required exits only for R-3 occupancies), vehicle parking areas, driveways, LPG storage tanks, walkways, and public ways. The minimum snowshed impact area shall have a setback of ten feet measured horizontally from a vertical line projecting from the roof eave to the aforementioned improvement. 
2.  The snowshed impact area may be eliminated provided an engineered snow restraint system, designed in accordance with this code, is incorporated into the roof design and, in other than R-3 occupancies, an approved roof drainage system (e.g., heated gutter and downspout) is installed to prevent ice formation/accumulation at the grade or access level. 
3.  Property owners shall maintain snowshed impact areas to prevent snow from encroaching beyond the impact area boundaries. 
4.  Existing structures may use engineered snowslide restraint devices without an approved roof drainage system to reduce hazards associated with the existing roof design. 
F.  Projections such as plumbing vents, equipment vents, and similar elements, which penetrate the roof, shall terminate within thirty-six inches of the ridge or uppermost portion of the roof area. Mechanical vents and air intakes installed on vertical surfaces shall terminate at least two feet above the anticipated snow depth (ten feet). Vertical terminations subjected to shedding roof snow shall increase the height of the termination by fifty percent. 
G.  Overhead electrical service weatherheads and similar utility connections shall not be located in any area subject to damage from sliding snow or ice. Weatherheads may project through the roof with a riser constructed of two-inch minimum diameter rigid galvanized steel conduit, provided no alternative locations are available and the building official and servicing utility have approved the location. 
H.  A roof projection such as a fireplace chase, parapet or similar structure, which could be subjected to sliding snow or ice, shall be designed for these horizontal forces (Fs). 
The resultant moment produced from Fs shall be applied to the mid-height of the projection. 
  
Fv (for roof projections) 	= 	L (0.5L + B) Pf 
Fv (for snow retention devices) 	= 	L (B) Pf 
 
  
Fs 	= 	Horizontal load against roof projection, pounds. 
Fv 	= 	Snow weight against projection, pounds. 
X 	= 	Vertical component of roof slope (rise), feet. 
Y 	= 	Horizontal component of roof slope (run), feet. 
L 	= 	Horizontal distance between projection and ridge, feet. 
B 	= 	Width of projection, feet. Not to exceed six feet. 
Pf 	= 	Minimum roof snow load, pounds per square foot (PSF). 
 
I.  Projections shall be protected with an ice splitter or cricket. All ice splitters shall be constructed the full width of the projection base and shall terminate not lower than the midpoint height of the projection. 
J.  Snow rails, roof cleats, and similar snowslide restricting devices shall be designed using the formula set forth in subsection H above, except calculations for Fv need only consider the tributary load area of the device. Snowslide restraint devices shall be installed within the first three feet of the roof eave and spaced per the design of the system. 
K.  Warm roofs that drain water over the eaves shall be capable of supporting 2.0 × Pf at the overhang when the roof is unventilated with insulation R-value of less than thirty or ventilated roofs with R-values less than twenty. 
L.  All roof systems shall consider the effects of ice dams and shall be designed to prevent water infiltration at the eaves. As a minimum, the underlayment at the eaves shall consist of two layers of Type 15 felt solid cemented together with an approved cementing material or other approved equivalent material. The ice dam protection shall extend from the eave to a line six feet inside the exterior wall line of the building. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), 12-4-2013)  
15.24.045 - Roof materials—California Building Code. 
Every new structure, and every existing structure when fifty percent or more of the total roof area is re-roofed within any one-year period, shall have a fire retardant roof covering that is at least Class A as defined in the California Building Code, as adopted and amended by the State Building Standards Commission. The installer of the roof covering shall provide certification of the roof covering classification to the building owner and, when requested, to the Mammoth Lakes Building Division. The installer shall also install the roof covering in accordance with the manufacturer's listing. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), 12-4-2013)  
15.24.060 - Concrete placement during cold weather—California Building Code. 
It shall be the responsibility of the contractor/installer to protect concrete installed in cold weather (below forty degrees Fahrenheit). The building division may monitor foundation site temperatures during cold months. When foundation temperatures are below freezing within the first seven days of curing, special engineers' reports may be required. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), 12-4-2013)  
15.24.070 - Retaining wall design—California Building Code. 
A building permit shall be required for retaining walls exceeding four feet in height or retaining walls supporting any surcharge or special loads. A professional engineer licensed in the state shall design such walls. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), 12-4-2013)  
15.24.085 - Installation of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) appliances—California Plumbing Code and California Mechanical Code. 
A.  Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) burning appliances shall not be installed in an above-grade, under-floor space, attic area, or basement unless the location is provided with an approved method for the removal of unburned gases. Approved ventilation methods shall extend to the outside and terminate at an unobstructed area (an area not subject to snow accumulation). Other methods are subject to the approval of the building official. 
B.  LPG appliance vents, which extend through the roof shall terminate within three feet of the ridge or uppermost portion of the roof. Vents, which extend through a wall or other vertical surface shall terminate two feet above the anticipated snow depth (ten feet). Horizontal vent terminations subject to shedding roof snow accumulations shall increase the height of the termination by fifty percent. 
C.  Exceptions. 
1.  New LPG appliance vents which extend through the roof of existing structures shall terminate within three feet or as close as practical to the ridge or uppermost portion of the roof. Terminations greater than three feet below the ridge shall be protected by an approved means. 
2.  New LPG appliance vents which extend through a wall or other vertical surface of an existing structure shall terminate as high as practical above-grade. The installer shall furnish the owner or post in a conspicuous location instructions to maintain vent clearances. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), 12-4-2013)  
15.24.086 - Installation of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) sensors and alarms. 
A.  All R Occupancies containing liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) appliances and/or LPG facilities shall be equipped with a listed LPG sensing device (sensor) attached to an audible alarm. Sensors shall be installed on the lowest floor of the dwelling unit and in the lowest portion of any crawlspace area. Sensors shall be connected to an alarm audible throughout the living area(s). Sensor/alarms in new construction and where practical in existing construction shall be hardwired and interconnected. In accessible units alarms shall be audible and visual. 
Exception: Centrally located LPG appliances and facilities serving multiple units need not provide alarms to all living areas provided, if in the opinion of the building official, adequate notification can be relayed to all occupants. 
Exception: Sensors located in individual units within a multi-family structure equipped with a fire-warning system may have alarms independent of the main alarm system. Required sensors located in crawlspace areas, equipment rooms, and similar areas shall be connected to alarms that are audible and visual, and continuously monitored. 
B.  Sensors and alarms shall be installed when the valuation of new construction, addition, alteration or repair of a Group R Occupancy exceeds one thousand dollars and a permit is required. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), 12-4-2013)  
15.24.090 - Water service piping—California Plumbing Code. 
Potable water supply and drainage systems outside buildings or structures shall be installed per the standards established by the Mammoth Community Water District. The minimum depth of water supply piping shall be four feet below grade. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), 12-4-2013)  
15.24.095 - Under-floor and perimeter insulation—California Plumbing Code—Adding 312.13. 
To protect under-floor plumbing, the perimeter of the crawlspace area shall be insulated. Concrete or masonry stem walls shall be insulated with a material having a minimum R-Value of seven (R-7). Framed walls shall be insulated with a material having a minimum R-Value of twenty-one (R-21). 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), 12-4-2013)  
15.24.100 - Loft requirements—California Building Code. 
A.  Floor Area. 
1.  All lofts shall be considered habitable space and shall have an area of not less than seventy square feet. 
2.  Lofts in residential occupancies shall be considered as sleeping areas. 
3.  All lofts below the fourth story shall be provided with an escape/rescue window as specified in the California Building Code. 
Exception: All lofts in existing construction where installation of an escape/rescue window is not feasible shall have at least one common wall to the room below. The wall area shall be open and unobstructed (except for open guardrails, columns and posts) by at least fifty percent or twenty-five square feet, whichever is greater. The minimum opening above the guardrail shall be at least twenty-four inches. 
4.  Every loft within residential occupancies shall be provided with stairs complying with California Building Code. 
5.  Partitions may be installed, provided the aggregate floor area of the enclosed space does not exceed twenty-five percent of the loft area. Enclosed areas shall be included in computations for the total aggregate area of the loft. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), 12-4-2013)  
15.24.110 - Frost line—California Building Code. 
Footings and foundations shall extend below the frost line. The frost line shall be considered a minimum of twenty-four inches below grade. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), 12-4-2013)  
15.24.120 - Flood hazard areas—California Building Code. 
Design for structures within flood hazard areas shall be per the requirements established in the most recently adopted floodplain management ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), 12-4-2013)  
15.24.130 - Temporary structures—California Building Code. 
The building official may approve temporary structures associated with current or future development projects. Use and/or occupancy of such structures shall be limited to the time established by the permit, but not to exceed three years. The building official may consider reduced snow load design standards for such temporary structures provided an alternate means to mitigate snow loads has been provided. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 3(Exh. A), 12-4-2013)  
Chapter 15.40 - LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS FACILITIES 
 
15.40.010 - Definitions. 
"Hazardous conditions" means any conditions/installations, which present an apparent risk of explosion and/or fire. The hazard may be "imminent" or "seasonal." 
"Installation" means a storage tank designed for the containment of liquefied petroleum gas or liquefied petroleum gas distribution system for use by a customer for residential, commercial, or industrial purposes, together with appurtenant pipes, risers, gauges and related equipment. 
"Interruption of service" means change in vendor or any stoppage of gas, for whatever period of time, due to hazardous conditions, or to make modifications to the system. Temporary shut-off of gas to affect minor repairs shall not constitute interruption of service. 
"LNG" means liquefied natural gas. 
"LPG" means liquefied petroleum gas. 
"LPG facilities" means all supply piping (above or below the ground), risers, fittings, gauges, regulators, and related equipment used for the conveyance of LPG on the property. 
"Nonconforming installation" means any residential, commercial, or industrial installation, which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
"Safety inspection" means visual inspection, performed by the gas vendor, of exterior portions of LPG system, for purposes of observing, reporting and correcting obvious hazardous conditions, including danger of failure under snow load. 
"Vendor" means any person or business, which sells, at retail, liquefied petroleum gas for residential, commercial or industrial use. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.40.020 - Applicability of provisions. 
LPG installations within the town limits shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, though no provision herein shall be interpreted to require the upgrading of existing installations, which are in good repair, nonhazardous and comply with the intent of these regulations. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.40.030 - General installation requirements. 
LPG systems for single or multiple users shall be installed in accordance with the relevant provisions of the California Fire Code, Department of Transportation, Part 192, relevant portions of the California Plumbing and Mechanical Codes, and applicable portions of the California Administrative Code, Title 6 (Industrial Relations). These requirements shall apply to all new LPG installations, existing installations that experience an interruption of service, and any installation that in the opinion of the building official or fire marshal is hazardous. 
A.  Two Stage Regulators Required. Two stage regulator systems shall be installed on all LPG installations. Combination regulators (two stage combination regulators) or other methods of installation meeting the intent of these regulations are subject to the approval of the Mammoth Lakes building division and/or Mammoth Lakes fire protection district. 
B.  First Stage. The first stage regulator shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. The first stage regulator shall be plumbed from the tank with an approved looped soft-copper pigtail or other approved means to allow flexibility should tank shifting occur. The riser from the yard piping shall be located not more than three feet, horizontally from the walls of the tank. The transition from underground piping to above ground piping shall be accomplished via an approved sweep/riser or other approved method. 
C.  Second Stage. The second stage regulator and riser pipe shall be installed on the non-shed side of the building and directly attached to the building wall. The riser and exposed piping shall be installed in a manner to allow flexibility and movement. The transition from underground piping to above-ground piping shall be accomplished via an approved sweep/riser or other approved method. The riser, including the regulator and gas shut-off, shall be securely attached to the building and shall extend to a point so that the gas shut-off is located at least five feet, but not more than seven feet above finish grade. Buildings or structures served by LPG facilities containing multiple meters of three or more shall be equipped with an emergency shut-off valve located at the building or structure and capable of disconnecting the entire service to the structure. A two-inch diameter or equivalent reflector shall be secured to the structure directly above the shut-off within three feet of the roof overhang or other approved location. The gas shut-off shall be readily accessible. 
Exception 1: Existing facilities located on the snowshed side of structures need not be relocated if protected by an approved enclosure and the installation complies with all other provisions of this code. 
Exception 2: The Mammoth Lakes building division and/or the Mammoth Lakes fire protection district may approve other locations, installations and riser heights provided accessibility to the shut-off valve is provided under all conditions and all other provisions of this chapter are in compliance. 
D.  Protection of LPG Facilities. The LPG regulator, meter and gas piping installed at or attached to any structure shall be protected from physical damage by an enclosure or other structure approved by the Mammoth Lakes Building Division. 
Exception: LPG meters and regulators located above the anticipated ground snow level and not subject to impact loads need not be protected by an enclosure. 
E.  No Gas Piping Embedded in Concrete. Gas piping shall not be embedded in concrete, asphalt or similar materials. Gas piping passing through these materials shall maintain a one-inch clearance or be sleeved with an approved material. 
F.  Underground Gas Piping. Gas pipe installed below grade shall be approved for such use. All gas piping shall be installed a minimum of eighteen inches below grade. Nonmetallic gas piping shall be installed with a listed tracer tape, tracer wire or other approved material. 
G.  Exposed Exterior Gas Piping. Gas piping and fittings installed in exposed exterior locations and transition gas piping and fittings installed in the exterior wall of a building or structure shall have a minimum wall thickness of Schedule 40. Piping shall be supported by metal clamps or other approved methods at intervals not to exceed two feet and within six inches of either side of a fitting. Piping shall be installed in a manner to allow for adequate movement. 
H.  Exposed Gas Piping Installed on Roofs. Exposed gas piping and fittings installed on roofs or other horizontal surfaces shall have a minimum wall thickness of Schedule 80. The gas piping shall be supported its entire length. The installation shall employ methods to provide adequate flexibility and movement. 
I.  Inspection and Testing. All new or modified installations shall require an inspection and approval by the Mammoth Lakes building division. All gas piping shall be air tested by the installer and the test of all gas piping shall be visually inspected by the Mammoth Lakes building division. Rough gas piping test shall be a minimum fifteen PSI of air for fifteen minutes. Other testing methods are subject to the approval of the Mammoth Lakes building division. 
1.  The approval for connection of LPG to the structure will be indicated by the attachment of a tag on the building LPG piping at the point it exits the structure. 
2.  Any connection of LPG to any structure without approval of the Mammoth Lakes Building Division is in violation of this chapter and applicable sections of the California Mechanical Code and California Plumbing Code. 
J.  Plot Plan. Prior to connection of service the vendor shall submit to the Mammoth Lakes fire protection district a plot plan identifying the LPG system. The plot plan shall be drawn on an approved form. A verification of approval must be provided to the Mammoth Lakes building division prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final letter. 
The plot plan shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  The tank location and distance from structure; 
2.  Number of tank(s) and capacity in U.S. gallons; 
3.  Location of the riser pipe and shut-off at the building; 
4.  Property boundaries; 
5.  An outline of all buildings on the lot and a depiction of the ridgeline of any building to be supplied with LPG; 
6.  Location of the Property. Street address, lot number, subdivision, assessor's parcel number, and condominium project name if applicable; 
7.  LPG supplier and phone number; 
8.  Building permit number and final date. 
K.  Snow States. The location of the center of LPG tanks shall be permanently marked by a snow stake of sufficient height to rise above the anticipated depth of snow. The upper twelve inches of the stake shall be painted bright orange with the top three inches of the stake painted the color assigned the individual vendor. The stake shall be located near the riser pipe and may be attached directly to, provided the installation will not apply additional stress to the riser pipe. The installation and maintenance of the snow stake is the responsibility of the LPG vendor. The building division shall assign colors to each vendor. 
L.  Tank Installation. Tanks shall be securely fastened on a four-inch thick concrete pad reinforced with a minimum of #4 rebar at the perimeter. Pad shall be set below grade, with horizontal dimensions twelve inches greater than the tank's leg spacing, and shall be located so as to be safe from disturbance by snow removal operations. In lieu of a concrete slab, prefabricated reinforced blocks may be used (design subject to approval of the Mammoth Lakes building division and the Mammoth Lakes fire protection district). Use of prefabricated blocks shall be limited to existing residential installations and shall be limited to LPG tanks with capacities of five hundred gallons or less. 
M.  Temporary Tank Installations. Temporary LPG tank installations shall be limited to emergency installations only. The placement and design of the system shall be subject to the approval of the Mammoth Lakes fire protection district and the Mammoth Lakes building division. 
N.  Property Line Setback Variance. To accommodate multiple users, a LPG tank may be located on or closer to property lines than the required setback specifications of the California Fire Code. The encroachment shall require the mutual approvals of all property owners involved. Setback requirements to building and/or structures shall maintain the minimum distances specified in the California Fire Code. 
O.  Excessive Flow Valves. Excessive flow valves shall be installed on all residential systems with a LPG storage capacity in excess of two thousand gallons. 
Exception: Residential occupancies equipped with an approved, monitored fire detection and suppression system may omit the excessive flow valve on the system. 
P.  Alternate Methods and Materials. The building official and fire marshal may approve alternate designs, methods and materials provided the alternate methods and materials meet or exceed the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.40.040 - Additional requirements for existing installations. 
A.  A vendor shall file with the Mammoth Lakes building division a report of any uncorrected hazardous conditions affecting any LPG installation served by such vendor within five working days of discovery. 
The report shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, street address, and telephone number of the LPG customer; 
2.  A description, in words, picture, or both, of the hazard(s); 
3.  Any proposal by the property owner or vendor to eliminate the hazard(s); 
B.  It is unlawful for any vendor to provide service to a hazardous installation. Hazardous installations shall be disconnected and repaired immediately. 
C.  The LPG vendor shall inspect each served installation for safety, including outside regulators, valves, meters and exposed piping at least once every five years. 
D.  When service is terminated by one vendor and assumed by another, all applicable requirements of Section 15.40.030 of this chapter will apply. The vendor assuming service shall obtain a permit from the Mammoth Lakes building division prior to change. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
15.40.050 - Violation. 
A.  It is unlawful for a vendor to provide service to a hazardous installation. 
B.  It is a violation for any serving gas supplier to connect and turn on the gas supply to any structure without first obtaining an inspection and the approval of the Mammoth Lakes building division. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 16.32 - STREET NAME AND ADDRESS REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.32.000 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Street Name and Address Ordinance of the Town of Mammoth Lakes, California", and may be referred to as "Addressing Ordinance", and the map referred to be identified by the title "Town of Mammoth Lakes Address Map", and may be know as the "Address Map". 
Is adopted for the purpose of providing a uniform street name and addressing system. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.010 - Purposes. 
This chapter is to enhance the effective and rapid location of properties by public safety personnel, including law enforcement, fire, rescue, and emergency medical services personnel within the geographical area of the Town of Mammoth Lakes. This chapter is further designed to eliminate duplicate or phonetically similar street names, to provide for the uniform marking of streets and roadways, and to provide for the assignment of numbers for all properties and buildings throughout the town. The current inconsistent residential building and street numbering process inhibits these efficient and effective public safety operations. The existing address map was adopted January 1974 with sheets added in August of 1986. Otherwise, the map has been only been updated as needed and all new/changed streets and address penciled in. 
The following are major objectives of this chapter: 
A.  To provide property owners and the town with a convenient, accurate, and systematic means of identifying Property. 
B.  To name new streets and rename old streets with conflicting or duplicate names in order to provide for efficient emergency services. 
C.  To provide a means for expedient emergency response by fire, police, rescue, medical and all other emergency services. 
D.  To establish a property location that will serve as an Emergency 911 address. 
E.  To assist in the proper delivery of utility and other services. 
F.  To support the town's move to Enhanced 911. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.020 - Area affected. 
This chapter, the regulations, and the procedures contained herein shall apply to and govern each and every lot, parcel, or tract of land and improvement thereof, within the Town of Mammoth Lakes limits. All residential, multi-family and commercial buildings existing as of the time of adopting this chapter, or existing at any future time, will be assigned a primary structure number. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.030 - Administration. 
The Town of Mammoth Lakes Public Works Director shall administer this chapter. The Public Works Director shall be responsible for the administration of these standards and the maintenance of all maps and data relating to street naming and address assignments. The Public Works Director will also determine if the assignment of names and numbers conforms to this chapter. The Director may consult with Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District, Mammoth Lakes Police Department, and Mono County Sheriff's Department to help resolve addressing issues. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.031 - Appeal. 
In the event a person is not satisfied with the decision for an assigned address it may be appealed to the town manager. The Public Works Director will prepare a brief outlining the methodology used for the address assignment to be used in the appeal review and determination. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.040 - Definition of terms. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
"Address" means a combination of a number, a street name and, when necessary, a unit number that is assigned to a parcel, structure, or unit within a structure, and is unique to it, to indicate its location. 
"Adjoining" means having a common boundary for at least twenty-five feet. 
"Building" means any structure used or intended for sheltering or supporting any use or occupancy. 
"Principal building" means a building that's large enough or used in such a way that, in the public works department's judgment, it requires a separate address. Mobile homes are principal buildings. 
"Contrast" means two contrasting colors that when viewed, one is distinctly opposes to the other, allowing it to be visible to the naked eye. Stands out against the prevailing background, strong dissimilarity. 
"Driveway" means a vehicle way that provides access, primarily for the occupants, from a street into a lot and that: 
a.  Has a ramp for its entrance from the street; or 
b.  Is small enough or of such character that addresses along it would be clearer if they used the name of the street from which provides access. 
"High Rise" means a multi-story building greater than three stories. 
"Lot" means a parcel of real property. 
"Property owner" means the person, firm, corporation or partnership that the latest county tax assessment rolls shows as the owner or long-term lessee of a particular lot. 
"Street" means a right-of-way or street easement, whether public or private, that provides vehicular access to abutting property. 
"Structure" means anything assembled or constructed on the ground, or attached to anything with a foundation on the ground. This includes mobile homes and manufactured housing regardless of their method of attachment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.050 - Street naming standards and procedures. 
The following standards and procedures shall be utilized when naming streets: 
All streets that serve three or more properties under different ownership will be named regardless of whether the ownership is public or private. 
Driveways may not be named. 
A street name assigned by the town shall not constitute or imply acceptance of the street into the town's road system. 
There shall be no duplication of names by sound or spelling (e.g. Pine Road and Pine Lane, or Beach Street and Peach Street). 
When a proposed street or private road is in general alignment with an existing street or private road, and the proposed street or private road is or is planned to be a continuation of the existing street or private road, the existing name and designation should be maintained. 
Each street will have the same name throughout its entire length, 
No street name shall be over sixteen characters in length. In counting characters, spaces between words shall be included, but street name suffixes (e.g. road, drive, lane, circle) shall not be included, 
Address plans shall be submitted with the Tentative Map and before submittal of a Final Map; the sub-divider shall submit a Street Naming and Addressing Plan to the Public Works Department. In addition, if a property owner proposes to locate or construct a new road (private or public), the property owner shall submit a Street Naming and Numbering Plan to the public works department. Address plans must be approved prior to Map Recordation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.060 - Addressing standards for lots with one principal building. 
The following standards and procedures shall be used in assigning numbers to buildings, dwellings, or other structures when only one principal building is on the property: 
Official property numbers shall proceed from a logical point of origin. Each street will have a point of origin as a zero starting point for address numbers. 
All dead end streets and cul-de-sacs shall begin with ascending numbers at the open end that connects to another street. 
Allowances shall be made for vacant properties in order that numbers may be properly assigned for future development. 
Numbers will be assigned along both sides of a road. Odd-numbered addresses will be assigned on the North side of East-West streets and on the West side of North-South streets. Even-numbered addresses will be assigned on the South side and East side, respectively. 
Numbers shall be established based on the front entrance from the street as designated by the town. 
The number shall be displayed upon the front of the building and/or on the side facing the street through out the year in summer and winter. The number shall be plainly visible from the street. Houses that are set back out of view from the road shall place a sign at the driveway entrance upon which shall be affixed the herein specified numbers. 
For parcels that are accessed by multiple driveways, the town shall designate a primary access point, which will be used for address assignment. Such access points are subject to review and approval of the town to ensure that they are accessible to emergency service providers. 
The assignment of a building number/address is required prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.070 - Addressing standards for complexes & developments without internal street networks. 
The following standards and procedures apply to high rises, condominium and apartment complexes, commercial and mixed-use developments that are serviced by a common driveway and parking area: 
Each multi-family development or complex must have a town approved name designating it, which shall be made known at the time of permit application. This name shall be preserved, utilized, and prominently displayed at the complex. The address for the complex shall be displayed on the sign as well. For parcels that are accessed by multiple driveways, the town shall designate a primary access point associated with the driveway that most directly accesses the manager's unit or main office; this building will be used for address assignments. Such access points are subject to review and approval of the town. 
A multi-family dwelling structure such as an apartment building will be assigned one street address and the building will be designating individual numbers for each unit by the town. 
If more than one building is present in a complex, each building must be assigned a building letter per the standards set forth in Section [16.32.090]. 
Each entrance serving a separate occupant, shall be assigned a unique unit number, however, it will maintain the parent address of the property it is built on and the letter of the building it is in. (Example: 24 Public Road, Building A, Unit 103). 
Unit designators shall be as follows: Ground level floor numbers - #101, #102, #103, Second floor numbers-#201, #202, #203. 
All floor levels are to follow this scheme. Underground floor designator shall follow the same scheme with the exception of having "U" for a prefix, for example #U101, #U102, etc. 
Unit numbers shall be at least [four] inches in height, of a contrasting color to the background, and placed next to the door. 
Mobile home parks shall be assigned one address based on the location of the primary driveway. Individual numbering of each mobile home space must be determined and provided to the town before an address will be issued to the park. (Example: 24 Public Road, Lot 1). 
In the case of mall or a shopping center, the owner of any business that is located within such mall or shopping center shall display the legally assigned space or unit number at the main entrance to the business. Additionally, the owner of each business shall display the legally assigned number on the rear door to the building in numbers that are not less than four inches in height. 
The assignment of a building number/address is required prior to the issuance of a building permit. The town will approve each address and building letters and unit numbers. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.080 - Addressing standards for multi-family residence developments with internal street networks. 
The development shall use the parent address assigned to the property during the construction phase of the project only. All structures, dwellings, common-area facilities, alarms, and other infrastructure must comply with the following items in this section of this chapter. 
Whenever a network of named streets exists within a development or resort area, whether the streets are public or private, said street names shall be utilized in the addressing of the structures they service. All said street names must be approved by the town as set forth in Section [16.32.060] of this chapter. 
The address shall be displayed upon the front of the building and/or on the side facing the street. The number shall be plainly visible from the street. All number[s] shall meet the town standards. 
Each entrance serving a separate occupant within each building shall be assigned a unique address based on the location of the driveway or garage that services said unit. Address shall be displayed according to this chapter. 
The assignment of a building number/address is required prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.090 - Specifications for address numbers. 
Address numbers shall comply with the following specifications: 
Address numbers shall be depicted in Arabic numerals or shall be the English words for such numbers. 
Address numbers shall be made of durable material. 
Address numbers shall be clearly visible from the roadway during both summer and winter months where each digit or letter shall be at least four inches in height when affixed to the building. 
Structures located more than fifty feet from the roadway and/or not clearly visible from the roadway shall comply with the above standard and maintain a post at the intersection of the driveway and street. Said post shall be six feet in height of durable material with address numerals posted on it. Said numerals shall be at least four inches four in height. In all cases, a larger number than the minimum size may be required where the minimum size does not provide adequate identification. 
The color of the address numbers shall be in contrast with the immediate background so as to be easily readable. 
It shall be unlawful to cover or conceal, or to permit the site obstruction of the address numbers. All numerical identifications must be easily identifiable without obstruction of view. 
It shall be unlawful to post numbers other than the primary address that may be confusing. 
All old numbers shall be removed when a new address number has been assigned in accordance with this chapter; and, the property owner shall maintain numbers in such a manner that they continue to comply with the foregoing specifications. Structure numbers and unit designators, as viewed from the road, shall not be obstructed from view. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.100 - Specifications for building letters. 
Building letters shall conform with the following specifications: 
Each building in multi-building development shall receive a unique letter, beginning with A. Alternatively, buildings may be named, and however, the first letter of the name shall not be used in the name of any other building in that complex or development. (Ex. A, B, C, ... or Aspen, Birch, Cherry,); 
Buildings shall be lettered according to the natural sequence and progression as you drive within the complex. Building letters are to be at least one foot in height of contrasting color, and shall be conspicuously located and placed on the side of the building facing the driveway/street at least ten feet off the ground so as to clearly identify the building they relate to year around. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.110 - Street signage standards, procedure, and specification. 
Installation and maintenance of street name signs. 
In subdivisions the property owners association (or other similar entity) representing the property owners in the subdivision, or the property owners in said subdivision (if there is no property owners association or similar entity) shall be responsible for installing and maintaining street name signs with the approved name of the street and the intersecting street. No occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be erected shall be issued until such time as the street name signs are installed. 
In all other cases, the property owners adjoining the street shall be responsible for installing signs with the approved name of the street and the intersecting street. 
The town will only be responsible to install street name signs for town maintained roads. 
All street signs shall meet the town standards. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.120 - How and when to affix numbers. 
Within sixty days after in accordance with this chapter, or as directed by the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.130 - Implementation 
This chapter will take effect immediately for all new construction that takes place after its date of acceptance. 
Properties and structures that are not in compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter will be changed per resolution, adopted with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.140 - When director authorized to affix numbers; costs deemed a lien. 
In the event that any number assigned to any house under the provisions of this chapter is not affixed thereto in accordance with the terms hereof after notice given as herein provided, the director is hereby authorized and directed to remove from such house or from the entrance thereof or elsewhere any different number which may be affixed thereto and which may be mistaken for or confused with the house number assigned to said house; and further said Director shall cause the number regularly assigned to such house as provided herein to be affixed thereto in accordance with the terms of his ordinance; and all necessary costs of said work shall constitute a lien against the house or building and the land on which the same is located, and shall be paid and collected in the same manner. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
16.32.150 - Penalties. 
Any person who, after being notified by the code enforcement officer or any officer from the Town of Mammoth Lakes, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter within the time limit of not less than thirty days specified in such notice shall pay a fine of one hundred dollars, per violation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-2008)  
Title 17 - ZONING[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-02, § 4(Exh. A), adopted Mar. 19, 2014, repealed the former Title 17, §§ 17.04.010—17.84.010, and enacted a new Title 17 as set out herein. The former Title 17 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List for a complete history of former Title 17. The ordinance has been printed as adopted, except that obviously misspelled words and typographical errors have been corrected without notation. 
 
Article I. - Zoning Code Enactment and Applicability  
Chapter 17.04 - Purpose and Effect of Zoning Code 
 
17.04.010 - Title. 
This Title is and may be cited as the Town of Mammoth Lakes Zoning Code, Title 17 of the Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code, hereafter referred to as "this Zoning Code." 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.04.020 - Purposes of Zoning Code. 
This Zoning Code carries out the policies of the Mammoth Lakes General Plan by classifying and regulating the uses of land and structures within the Town of Mammoth Lakes. This title is a "permissive title" whereby any use not listed as a permitted use within the various zone classifications is deemed to be prohibited. This Zoning Code is adopted to protect and to promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of residents, and businesses in the Town. Additional purposes of this Zoning Code are to: 
A.  Implement the General Plan by encouraging the uses of land as designated by the General Plan; 
B.  Provide standards for the orderly growth and development of the Town; 
C.  Require high quality planning and design for development, that enhances the visual character of the Town, avoids conflicts between land uses, enhances functionality and safety, and preserves the scenic qualities of the Town by maintaining adequate open space; 
D.  Conserve and protect the natural resources of the Town, its natural beauty and significant environmental amenities; 
E.  Encourage a range of transportation options with a strong pedestrian emphasis and emphasize connectivity, convenience, and alternatives to use of personal vehicles. 
F.  Assist in reducing dependence on the automobile by fostering development that is compact in form, and pedestrian-oriented; and 
G.  Create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses upon which to plan transportation, water supply, sewerage and other public facilities and utilities. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.04.030 - Agreements. 
The provisions of this Zoning Code are not intended to abrogate any easements, covenants, or other existing agreements which are more restrictive than the provisions of this Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.04.040 - Authority, Relationship to General Plan. 
A.  This Zoning Code is enacted based on the authority vested in the Town of Mammoth Lakes by the State of California, including but not limited to the State Constitution; Sections 65800 and subsequent sections of the California Government Code; the California Environmental Quality Act; Subdivision Map Act; and the Health and Safety Code. 
B.  This Zoning Code is the primary tool used by the Town of Mammoth Lakes to carry out the goals, objectives, and policies of the Mammoth Lakes General Plan. The Mammoth Lakes Town Council intends that this Zoning Code be consistent with the Mammoth Lakes General Plan, and that any land use, or development approved in compliance with this Zoning Code will also be consistent with the Mammoth Lakes General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.04.050 - Applicability of the Zoning Code. 
This Zoning Code applies to all land uses, buildings and structures, the size of yards abutting buildings and structures, the height and bulk of buildings, the density of population, the number of dwelling units per acre, standards of performance and other provisions are declared to be in effect upon all land included within the boundaries of each and every zone established by this Code, as follows. 
A.  New land uses or structures, changes to land uses or structures. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this Zoning Code, for any person to establish, construct, reconstruct, alter, or replace any use of land or structure, except in compliance with the requirements of Section 17.08.020 (Requirements for Development and New Land Uses), and Chapter 17.100 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels). 
B.  Issuance of construction permits. No building, grading, or other construction permit, temporary or final certificate of occupancy, or final building inspection may be issued or granted by the Department unless: 
1.  The proposed land use and/or structure satisfy the requirements of Subsection A. above; 
2.  The Director determines that the parcel was legally created in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and the Town's Subdivision Ordinance, as applicable at the time the parcel was created; and 
3.  All conditions and requirements of any applicable land use permit have been met or guaranteed by security approved by the Town. 
C.  Occupancy of a site, structure, or vehicle for dwelling purposes. No land, structure, or vehicle shall be used for living or dwelling purposes for more than two weeks in any calendar year unless the land, structure, or vehicle is approved for occupancy for dwelling purposes in compliance with this Zoning Code. 
D.  Continuation of an existing land use. An existing land use is lawful and not in violation of the Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code only when operated and maintained in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Zoning Code or, where applicable, Chapter 17.100 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels). However, the requirements of this Zoning Code do not invalidate a land use that was legally established before the effective date of this Zoning Code or any applicable amendment. 
E.  Other requirements may still apply. Nothing in this Zoning Code eliminates the need for obtaining any other permits required by the Town, or any permit, approval or entitlement required by other provisions of the Municipal Code or the regulations of any Town department, or any County, regional, State, or Federal agency. 
F.  Conflicting permits and licenses to be void. All permits or licenses shall be issued by the Town in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Code. Any permit or license issued in conflict with this Zoning Code shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.04.060 - Responsibility for Administration. 
This Zoning Code shall be administered by the Mammoth Lakes Town Council, Planning and Economic Development Commission, Community and Economic Development Director, and the Mammoth Lakes Community and Economic Development Department, in compliance with Chapter 17.96 (Administrative Responsibility). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.04.070 - Partial Invalidation of Zoning Code. 
If any portion of this Zoning Code is for any reason held to be invalid, unconstitutional or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, these decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Zoning Code. The Mammoth Lakes Town Council hereby declares that this Zoning Code and each article, chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase and portion thereof would have been adopted irrespective of the fact that one or more portions of this Zoning Code may be declared invalid, unconstitutional or unenforceable. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.08 - Development and Land Use Approval Requirements 
 
17.08.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This Chapter describes the general requirements of this Zoning Code for the approval of proposed development and new land uses by the Town. Land use permit requirements for specific land uses are established by Articles II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and III (Site Planning and General Development Standards). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.08.020 - Requirements for Development and New Land Uses. 
No use of land or structures shall be established, constructed, reconstructed, altered, allowed or replaced unless the use of land or structures complies with the following requirements. 
A.  Allowable use. The land use shall be identified by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) as being allowable in the zoning district applied to the site. 
B.  Permit requirements. Any land use permit required by this Zoning Code shall be obtained before the proposed use is constructed, otherwise established or put into operation, unless the proposed use is listed in Section 17.08.030 (Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements). The land use permit requirements of this Zoning Code are established by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and Article III (Site Planning and General Development Standards). 
C.  Development standards. The use and/or structures shall comply with all other applicable requirements of this Zoning Code, including the development standards of Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), and the provisions of Article III (Site Planning and General Development Standards). 
D.  Legal parcel. The use and/or structures shall only be established on a parcel of land which has been legally created in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act, and the Town's Subdivision Ordinance, as applicable at the time the parcel was created. 
E.  Previous approvals and agreements. The use and/or structures shall comply with applicable provisions and requirements of any of the following permits, entitlements or agreements: 
1.  Conditions of approval. Any conditions of approval imposed by any land use permit previously granted by the County or Town and still in effect; 
2.  Development Agreements. Any Development Agreement approved by the Town in compliance with Chapter 17.108 (Development Agreements) and still in effect; 
3.  Master Plans. Any conditions of approval or other provisions imposed by a Master Plan previously approved by the County or Town and still in effect; and 
4.  Subdivisions. Any conditions of approval, restrictions, or other provisions imposed by a subdivision map previously approved by the County or Town and recorded in the Mono County Recorder's Office. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.08.030 - Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements. 
The land use permit requirements of this Zoning Code do not apply to the activities, uses of land and/or structures identified by this section, which are allowed in all zoning districts subject to compliance with this section. 
A.  General requirements for exemption. The activities, uses of land and/or structures identified by following Subsection B. are exempt from the land use permit requirements of this Zoning Code only when: 
1.  The activity or use is established and operated in compliance with all applicable development standards of Articles II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and III (Site Planning and General Development Standards); and 
2.  Any permit or approval required by regulations other than this Zoning Code is obtained in compliance with Section 17.08.050 (Additional Permits or Approvals May Be Required). 
B.  Exempt activities and uses. The following activities, uses of land and/or structures are exempt from the land use permit requirements of this Zoning Code when in compliance with Subsection A. above. 
1.  Governmental activities. Activities of the State or an agency of the State, or the Federal Government on land owned or leased by a governmental agency. 
2.  Interior remodeling. Interior alterations that do not increase the number of rooms or the gross floor area (i.e. habitable space) within the structure, change the permitted use of the structure, or otherwise intensify the use. 
3.  Non-residential repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance for uses and structures other than residential uses and structures, if: 
a.  The work does not result in any change in the approved land use of the site or structure, or the addition to, enlargement or expansion of the structure; 
b.  Any exterior repairs employ the same or similar materials and design as the original; 
c.  Any exterior repairs comply with any previous design approval; and 
d.  All repairs and maintenance comply with applicable provisions of Chapter 17.100 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels). 
4.  Residential activities, uses and structures. 
a.  Decks, paths and driveways. Residential decks, platforms, on-site paths, and driveways that are not required to have a Building Permit or Grading Permit by Title 15 (Building and Construction) of the Municipal Code, provided that they are not over 18 inches above natural grade and not over any basement or story below. Driveways are required to obtain appropriate permits from the Public Works Department (Driveway Modification Permit and/or Encroachment Permit). 
b.  Fences and walls. Residential fences and walls are exempt from land use permit requirements as provided by Section 17.36.040 (Fences and Walls). 
c.  Multi-family residential repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance for residential uses and structures other than single-family uses and structures, if: 
i.  The work does not result in any change in the approved land use of the site or structure, or the addition to, enlargement or expansion of the structure; 
ii.  Any exterior repairs employ the same or similar materials and design as the original; 
iii.  Any exterior repairs comply with any previous design approval; and 
iv.  All repairs and maintenance comply with applicable provisions of Chapter 17.100 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels). 
d.  Single-family residential repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance for single-family residential uses and structures, if: 
i.  The work does not result in any change in the approved land use of the site or structure; 
ii.  The work does not result in an addition, enlargement or expansion of the structure; and 
iii.  All repairs and maintenance comply with applicable provisions of Chapter 17.100 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels). 
e.  Small residential accessory structures. Portable storage sheds and other small structures in residential zoning districts that are: 
i.  Exempt from building and grading permit requirements in compliance with Title 15 (Building and Construction) of the Municipal Code; 
ii.  120 square feet or less; and 
iii.  In compliance with the setback requirements of Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), and with any applicable setback requirements in Section 17.52.040 (Accessory Uses and Structures - Residential). 
f.  Spas, hot tubs, and fish ponds. Portable spas, hot tubs, and fish ponds, etc., that do not exceed: 120 square feet in total area, including related equipment; contain more than 2,000 gallons of water; and exceed three feet in depth. These facilities shall comply with the side and rear setback requirements established by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) for the applicable zoning district, or Section 17.52.040 (Accessory Uses and Structures - Residential), where applicable. 
5.  Utility infrastructure. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by a public utility or public agency of underground or overhead utilities (i.e., water, gas, electric, telecommunication, supply or disposal systems, including wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire-alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, etc.), but not including structures, electrical substations which receive electricity at 100,000 volts or greater, and electrical distribution lines of 100,000 volts or greater, shall be permitted in any zoning district. Satellite, cellular telephone, wireless communications, and other antennas are subject to Section 17.52.280 (Telecommunications Facilities). 
6.  Water facilities. The location or construction of facilities for the production, generation, storage, or transmission of water, in compliance with Government Code Section 53091. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 1), 1-21-2015)  
17.08.040 - Temporary Uses. 
Requirements for establishing a temporary use (e.g., construction yards, seasonal sales lots, special events, temporary office trailers, etc.) are in Chapter 17.56 (Temporary Uses and Events) and Chapter 17.52 (Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.08.050 - Additional Permits or Approvals May Be Required. 
An allowed land use that is exempt from a land use permit, or has been granted a land use permit, may still be required to obtain other issued permits before the use is constructed, or otherwise established and put into operation. Nothing in this chapter shall eliminate the need to obtain any permits or approvals required by: Other provisions of the Municipal Code, including: Building Permits, Grading Permits, or other construction permits if they are required by Title 15; any Encroachment Permit required by Title 12; or subdivision approval if required by the Town's Subdivision Ordinance; Mono County, any special district, or any regional, State or Federal agency. The applicant shall obtain all necessary permits before starting work or establishing new uses. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.12 - Interpretation of Code Provisions 
 
17.12.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This Chapter provides rules for resolving questions about the meaning or applicability of any part of this Zoning Code. The provisions of this chapter are intended to ensure the consistent interpretation and application of the provisions of this Zoning Code and the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.12.020 - Rules of Interpretation. 
A.  Authority. The Community and Economic Development Director is assigned the responsibility and authority to interpret the requirements of this Zoning Code. 
B.  Language. 
1.  Abbreviated titles and phrases. For the purpose of brevity, the following phrases, personnel and document titles are shortened hereafter in this Zoning Code. The Town of Mammoth Lakes is referred to hereafter as the "Town." The Town of Mammoth Lakes Zoning Code is referred to hereafter as "this Zoning Code." The Community and Economic Development Director is referred to hereafter as "Director," the Town Council is referred to as the "Council," the Planning and Economic Development Commission is referred to as the "Commission." "Buildings and structures" are referred to hereafter as "Structures." 
2.  Terminology. When used in this Zoning Code, the words "shall," "must," "will," "is to," and "are to" are always mandatory. "Should" is not mandatory but is strongly recommended; and "may" is permissive. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future tense includes the present. The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise. The words "includes" and "including" shall mean "including but not limited to...." When used to describe the applicability of two or more requirements of this Zoning Code, the word "or" shall mean that compliance with any of the series is sufficient, and the words "and," and "and/or" shall mean that compliance with all of the series is required. 
3.  Number of days. Whenever a number of days is specified in this Zoning Code, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as provided in this Zoning Code, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days. Time limits will extend to the following working day where the last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend or holiday. 
4.  State law requirements. Where this Zoning Code references applicable provisions of State law (for example, the California Government Code, Subdivision Map Act, Public Resources Code, etc.), the reference shall be construed to be to the applicable State law provisions as they may be amended from time to time. 
C.  Zoning Map boundaries. If there is uncertainty about the location of any zoning district boundary shown on the official Zoning Map, the following rules are to be used in resolving the uncertainty. (See also 17.16.040, Zoning District Regulations). 
1.  Where district boundaries approximately follow lot or street lines, the lot lines and street centerline shall be construed as the district boundaries. 
2.  If a district boundary divides a parcel and the boundary line location is not specified by distances printed on the zoning map, the location of the boundary will be determined by using the scale appearing on the zoning map. 
3.  Where a public street is officially vacated or abandoned, the property that was formerly in the street will be included within the zoning district of the adjoining property on either side of the centerline of the vacated or abandoned street. 
D.  Allowable uses of land. If a proposed use of land is not specifically listed in Article II, the use shall not be allowed, except as follows. 
1.  Allowed by other section. The proposed use of land is specifically allowed by another section of this Zoning Code, e.g., home occupations allowed as an accessory use in all residential zoning districts by Chapter 17.52 (Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities). 
2.  Similar uses allowed. 
a.  Similar use determination. The Director may determine that a proposed use not listed in Article II is allowable for the purpose of accepting a land use permit application for processing, and the review authority may approve an application for an unlisted use, if all of the following findings are made: 
i.  The characteristics of, and activities associated with, the proposed use are similar to those of one or more of the uses listed in the zoning district as allowable, and will not involve a higher level of activity or population density than the uses listed in the district; 
ii.  The proposed use will meet the purpose/intent of the zoning district that is applied to the site; and 
iii.  The proposed use will be consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the General Plan and any Specific Plan. 
b.  Applicable standards and permit requirements. When the review authority determines that a proposed, but unlisted, use is similar to a listed use, the proposed use will be treated in the same manner as the listed use in determining where it is allowed, what permits are required and what other standards and requirements of this Zoning Code apply. 
c.  Commission determination. The Director may forward questions about similar uses directly to the Commission for a determination at a public meeting. 
E.  Minimum requirements. When the regulations of this Zoning Code are being interpreted and applied, all provisions shall be considered to be minimum requirements, unless stated otherwise (e.g., height limits and site coverage requirements for structures, and the numbers and size of signs allowed are maximums, not minimums). 
F.  Conflicting requirements: 
1.  Zoning Code and Municipal Code provisions. If conflicts occur between requirements of this Zoning Code, or between this Zoning Code and other regulations of the Town, the most restrictive shall control, unless otherwise specified. 
2.  Development Agreements, Specific Plans, Planned Developments. If conflicts occur between the requirements of this Zoning Code and standards adopted as part of any Development Agreement, Specific Plan, or Master Plan, the requirements of the Development Agreement, Specific Plan, or Master Plan shall control. 
3.  Zoning Code and Subdivisions. If conflicts occur between the requirements of this Zoning Code and any conditions of approval, restrictions, or other provisions imposed by a subdivision map, the conditions of approval, restrictions, and provisions of the subdivision map shall control unless the Director finds (a) the conditions of approval, restrictions, or other provisions of the subdivision map would be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of the Town or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity; or (b) the characteristics and circumstances of the property and surrounding area and/or the project have substantially changed and clearly demonstrate that the conditions of approval, restrictions, or other provisions of the subdivision map are no longer necessary. In these cases, the requirements of the Zoning Code shall prevail. 
4.  Private agreements. This Zoning Code applies to all land uses and development regardless of whether it imposes a greater or lesser restriction on the development or use of structures or land than a private agreement or restriction, without affecting the applicability of any agreement or restriction. The Town shall not enforce any private covenant or agreement unless it is a party to the covenant or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), 1-21-2015)  
17.12.030 - Procedures for Interpretations. 
If the Director determines that the meaning or applicability of any of the requirements of this Zoning Code are subject to interpretation generally or as applied to a specific case, the Director may issue an official interpretation. Interpretations may also be requested in compliance with this section. 
A.  Request for interpretation. A request shall be written, specifically state the provision(s) in question, and provide any information to assist in their review. 
B.  Record of interpretations. Official interpretations shall be in writing, and shall quote the provisions of this Zoning Code being interpreted, and explain their meaning or applicability in the particular or general circumstances that caused the need for interpretation. 
Any provisions of this Zoning Code that are determined by the Director to need refinement or revision should be corrected by amending this Zoning Code as soon as is practical. Until amendments can occur, the Director will maintain a complete record of all official interpretations, available for public review, and indexed by the number of the Section that is the subject of the interpretation. 
C.  Appeals and referral. Any interpretations of this Zoning Code by the Director may be appealed to the Commission as provided by Chapter 17.104 (Appeals). The Director may also refer any interpretation to the Commission for a determination. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Article II. - Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses  
Chapter 17.16 - Establishment of Zoning Districts, Adoption of Zoning Map 
 
17.16.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This Chapter establishes the zoning districts applied to property within the Town, determines how the zoning districts are applied on the Zoning Map, and provides general permit requirements for development and new land uses. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.16.020 - Zoning Districts Established. 
The Town of Mammoth Lakes shall be divided into zoning districts which implement the General Plan. The zoning districts shown in Table 17.16.030 are hereby established, and shall be shown on the official Zoning Map (Section 17.16.030). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.16.030 - Zoning Map Adopted. 
The Council hereby adopts the Town of Mammoth Lakes Zoning Map (hereafter referred to as the "Zoning Map"), which is on file with the Department. 
A.  Inclusion by reference. The Zoning Map, together with all legends, symbols, notations, references, zoning district boundaries, and other information on the maps, has been adopted by the Council in compliance with Government Code Sections 65800 et seq., and is hereby incorporated into this Zoning Code by reference as though it were fully included here. 
B.  Zoning district boundaries. The boundaries of the zoning districts established by Section 17.16.020 (Zoning Districts Established) shall be shown upon the Zoning Map. 
C.  Relationship to General Plan. The Zoning Map shall implement the General Plan, specifically including the Land Use Diagram. 
D.  Map amendments. Amendments to the Zoning Map shall follow the process established in Chapter 17.112 (General Plan, Zoning Map, and Zoning Code Amendments). 
TABLE 17.16.030: ZONING DISTRICTS 
Zoning Map 
Symbol 	Zoning District Name 	General Plan Land Use Classification Implemented by Zoning District 
A 	Airport 	Airport (A) 
CSP 	Clearwater Specific Plan 	Clearwater Specific Plan (CSP) 
D 	Downtown 	Commercial 2 (C-2) 
I 	Industrial 	Industrial (I) 
MHP 	Mobile Home Park 	High Density Residential 1 (HDR-1)/High Density Residential 2 (HDR-2) 
MLR 	Mixed Lodging/Residential 	Commercial 1 (C-1) 
NVSP 	North Village Specific Plan 	North Village Specific Plan (NVSP) 
OMR 	Old Mammoth Road 	Commercial 2 (C-2) 
OS 	Open Space 	Open Space (OS) 
OSSC 	Open Space/Stream Corridor Protection (Zoning Overlay) 	Multiple Land Use Designations 
PRD 	Planned Residential Development 	N/A 
P-QP 	Public and Quasi Public 	Institutional Public (IP) 
R 	Resort 	Resort (R) 
RMF-1 	Residential Multi Family 1 	High Density Residential 1 (HDR-1) 
RMF-1 (AH) 	Residential Multi Family 1 - Affordable Housing Overlay 	High Density Residential 1 (HDR-1) 
RMF-2 	Residential Multi Family 2 	High Density Residential 2 (HDR-2) 
RR 	Rural Residential 	Low Density Residential 1 (LDR-1) 
RR-E 	Rural Residential - Equestrian Overlay 	Low Density Residential 1 (LDR-1) 
RSF 	Residential Single-family 	Low Density Residential 2 (LDR-2) 
SDD 	Snow Deposition Design (Zoning Overlay) 	N/A 
 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.16.040 - Zoning District Regulations. 
A.  Purpose. Chapter 17.20 (Residential Zoning Districts) through Chapter 17.32 (Special Purpose Zoning Districts) determine which land uses are allowed in each zoning district, what steps are required to establish each use, and the basic development standards that apply. 
B.  Determination of Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements. 
1.  The land uses allowed by this Code in each zoning district are identified in use regulation tables as being: 
a.  Permitted subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code, subject to obtaining a building permit or other permit required by the Zoning Code. These are shown as "P" uses in the tables; 
b.  Allowed subject to the approval of an Administrative Permit (Chapter 17.84), and shown as "A" uses in the tables; and 
c.  Allowed subject to the approval of a Use Permit (Chapter 17.68), and shown as "U" uses in the tables. 
d.  Uses not allowed and shown as "-" uses in the tables. 
2.  The designations listed above apply strictly to the permissibility of land uses. Applications for site development may require Design Review pursuant to Chapter 17.88 (Design Review). 
3.  Pursuant to Chapter 17.12 (Interpretation of Code Provisions) the Director is assigned the responsibility and authority to interpret the requirements of this Code. Land uses that are not listed in the tables or are not shown in a particular zoning district are not allowed, except where otherwise provided by Section 17.08.030 (Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements). 
C.  Indoor Uses Only. All commercial and industrial activities, other than off-street parking, shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure(s), except as may otherwise be allowed in compliance with this Code. 
D.  Site Divided by Zoning District Boundary. Where a site is divided by one or more district boundaries, each portion of the site in a separate district shall be developed and used in compliance with the requirements of the applicable district.  
Chapter 17.20 - Residential Zoning Districts 
 
17.20.010 - Purpose. 
In addition to the objectives outline in Section 17.04.020, the specific purposes of the Residential Zoning Districts are to: 
A.  To reserve appropriately located areas for residential use at various ranges of dwelling unit densities and types consistent with the general plan and with sound standards of public health, safety and welfare; 
B.  To ensure adequate light, air, privacy and open space for each dwelling; 
C.  To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive bulk or number in relation to the land area around them and the ability of the local infrastructure to support them; 
D.  To protect residential properties from incompatible noise, illumination, unsightliness, odors, smoke and other objectionable influences; and 
E.  To facilitate the provision of utility services and other public facilities commensurate with anticipated population, dwelling unit densities and service requirements. 
Additional purposes of the individual Residential Zoning Districts are as follows. 
RR (Rural Residential) District. This zoning district is intended as an area for single-family rural residential development with larger lots and lower density than the residential single-family zone. Transient occupancy or rental, hotels and motels, and group living quarters uses are not permitted in this zone. Bed and breakfast uses are permitted only with a use permit. Uses permitted are those that are complementary to, and can exist in harmony with, a rural residential neighborhood. 
RSF (Residential Single-Family) District. This zone is intended as an area for single-family residential development. Transient occupancy or rental, hotels and motels, bed and breakfast, and group living quarters uses are not permitted in this zone. Only those uses are permitted that are complementary to, and can exist in harmony with, a residential neighborhood. 
RMF-1 (Residential Multiple-Family) District. This zone is intended as an ar.ea for the development of mixed residential uses (single-family dwelh gs, apartments, and other multiple family developments). Transient occupancy or rental and hotel and motel uses are not permitted in this zone. Group Living quarters uses a re permitted only with a use permit. Bed and breakfast uses are permitted. Only those uses are permitted that are complementary to, and can exist in harmony with, such residential developments. 
RMF-2 (Residential Multiple-Family) District. This zone is intended as an ara for the development of primarily multiple-family developments. Transient occupancy shall be permissible in this zone subject to the issuance of a use permit. Only those uses are permitted that are complementary to, and can exist in harmony with, such residential developments. 
As used in the descriptions of the RR, RSF, and RMF-1 zoning d1stncts above, the terms "Transient Occupancy or Rental," "Hotels and Motels," "Bed and Breakfast," and "Group Living Quarters" shall have the definitions set forth in the town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code (Town Code) as of December 31, 2014, in sections 17.148.020, 17.144.050, and 17.144.020, respectively. 
The limitations on transient occupancy or rental, hotels and motels, bed and breakfast, and group living quarters in the RR, RSF, and RMF-1 zoning districts set forth above (Transient use limits) together with this and the immediately preceding paragraph were adopted by the initiative to reguire voter approval to alter transient rental zoning in residential neighborhoods (Initiative). Voter approval (as defined below) is reguired for any amendment or repeal of (i) the transient use limits, (ii) this or the immediately preceding paragraph, or (iii) the changing of the zoning of land zoned as RR, RSF or RMF-1 as of December 31, 2014 unless the new zoning maintains the Transient Use Limits applicable to the land being rezoned. Voter approval is not reguired for amendments to the Town Code that would not affect the transient use limits. Voter approval is not reguired for amendments to the Town Code definitions referenced above, provided, however, that the definitions in place as of December 31, 2014, shall apply to the transient use limits. No use permit, modification to use a permit, or other entitlement shall be granted, extended, or enforced, though action or inaction, that is inconsistent with the provisions of the Initiative. "Voter approval" for purposes of this code section means a majority of the voters voting on a proposed amendment or repeal, voting in favor of the proposed amendment or repeal. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-02, § 4(Exh. A), 3-4-2015; Ord. No. 15-08, § 2, 10-6-2015)  
17.20.020 - Residential Zone Land Uses and Permit Requirements. 
A.  General permit requirements. Table 17.20.020 identifies the uses of land allowed by this Zoning Code in the Residential Zoning Districts, and the permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 17.08.020 (Requirements for Development and New Land Uses). 
B.  Requirements for certain specific land uses. Where the last column in Table 17.20.020 ("Specific Use Regulations") includes a section number, the referenced section may establish other requirements and standards applicable to the use. 
TABLE 17.20.020: ALLOWED USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
P: Permitted Use; U: Use Permit Required; A: Administrative Permit Required; 
- : Use Not Allowed; (#) Limitation Applies, See Footnote 
Land Use 	RR 	RSF 	RMF-1 	RMF-2 	See Specific Use
Regulations: 
Residential Use Classifications 
Single-family Dwelling 	See subclassifications below 
 Detached 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 Attached 	- 	- 	P 	P 	
Multi-Family Residential 	- 	- 	P 	P 	See 17.52.210 (Multi-Family Residential Projects) 
Assisted Living Facility 	- 	- 	U 	U 	See 17.52.260 (Residential Care and Assisted Living Facilities) 
Family Day Care Home 	See subclassifications below 	
 Large 	P 	P 	P 	P 	See 17.52.100 (Child Day Care Facilities) 
 Small 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Group Living Quarters 	- 	- 	U 	U 	
Residential Care Facility 	See subclassifications below 	
 General 	- 	- 	U 	U 	See 17.52.260 (Residential Care and Assisted Living Facilities) 
 Limited 	P 	P 	P 	P 	See 17.52.260 (Residential Care and Assisted Living Facilities) 
Second Dwelling Unit 	P 	P 	P 	P 	See 17.52.270 (Second Dwelling Units) 
Supportive Housing 	See 17.52.290 (Transitional and Supportive Housing) 
Transitional Housing 	See 17.52.290 (Transitional and Supportive Housing) 
Recreation, Education, & Public Assembly Use Classifications 
Community Assembly 	- 	- 	U 	U 	
Parks and Playgrounds, Public 	A 	A 	A 	A 	
Private Residential Recreational Facility 	A 	A 	A 	A 	
Public Recreational and Cultural Facility 	U 	U 	A 	A 	
Service Use Classifications 
Animal Care and Boarding 	See subclassifications below 
 Animal Raising and 
 Keeping 	P 	P 	P 	P 	See 17.52.070 (Animal Care and Boarding) 
 Kennel 	U 	- 	- 	- 	
 Pet Day Care 	U 	- 	- 	- 	
Day Care Centers 	- 	- 	A 	A 	See 17.52.100 (Child Day Care Facilities) 
Lodging 	See subclassifications below 
 Hotels and Motels 	- 	- 	- 	U 	See 17.52.120 (Fractional/Timeshare Developments) 
 Bed and Breakfast 	U 	- 	P 	P 	See 17.52.080 (Bed and Breakfast Inns) 
 Transient Rental 	- 	- 	- 	P 	
 Transient Rental of Apartments 	- 	- 	- 	U 	
Transportation, Communications, Infrastructure Use Classifications 
Transportation Passenger Facilities 	U 	U 	U 	U 	
Other Applicable Types 
Accessory Use 	P 	P 	P 	P 	See 17.52.030 (Accessory Uses) 
Condominium Conversions 	See 17.52.110 (Condominium Conversions) 
Fractional or Timeshare Development 	See 17.52.120 (Fractional/Timeshare Development) 
Home Occupations 	P 	P 	P 	P 	See 17.52.140 (Home Occupations) 
Model Homes and Subdivision Sales Offices 	A 	A 	A 	A 	
Mobile Businesses 	A 	A 	A 	A 	See 17.52.180 (Mobile Businesses) 
Temporary Uses and Events 	See Chapter 17.56 (Temporary Uses and Events) 
Telecommunication Facilities 	See 17.52.280 (Telecommunication Facilities) 
Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) 	See 17.52.300 (Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)) 
 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-02, § 4(Exh. A), 3-4-2015; Ord. No. 17-10, § 4(Exh. A), 11-1-2017)  
17.20.030 - Residential Zoning Districts Development Standards. 
Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and established in compliance with the requirements in Table 17.20.030, in addition to the applicable standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Article III (Site Planning and General Development Standards). Additional regulations are denoted in the right hand column. Section numbers refer to other sections of the Code while individual letters refer to subsections that directly follow the table. 
TABLE 17.20.030: RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Standard RR 	RSF 	RMF-1 	RMF-2 	
 Lot area 	15,000 sf 	7,500 sf 	10,000 sf 	40,000 sf 	
 Lot area, corner lots 	15,000 sf 	8,500 sf 	11,000 sf 	40,000 sf
Maximum density 	2 units/acre 4 units/acre 12 units/acre 	
 Lot width 	80 feet 	75 feet 	80 feet 	150 feet 	
 Lot width corner lots 	80 feet 	85 feet 	150 feet 		
 Lot depth 	120 feet 	90 feet 	150 feet 	
 Minimum width for 
  access 	50 feet 	
 Minimum buildable 
 site area 	2,000 sf 	5,000 sf 	24,000 sf 	
 Minimum width/ 
 depth for a 
 building site 	40 feet 	
 Maximum slope for 
 a building site 	30% 		
 Hotel, motel, frac- 
 tional use density 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	36 rooms/acre (A) 	
 Group living 
 quarters 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	27 rooms/acre (A) 	
Setbacks 	See 17.36.100 (Setbacks Requirements and Exceptions) 
 Front yard 	25 feet (B) 	20 feet (B) 	25 feet (B) 	
 Side yard 	10 feet 	
 Side yard, street side 	20 feet 	
 Rear yard 	20 feet 	10 feet 	20 feet 	
 Bluffs Slope Setback 	30 feet (C) 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	
Maximum Lot Coverage 	30% 	40% 	50% 	60% 	
Maximum height 	35 feet 	See 17.36.060 (Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions) 
Grading and Clearing 	See 17.36.050 (Grading and clearing) 	
Required snow storage area 	75% of the area all parking and driveways; see 17.36.110 (Snow storage) 	
Propane Tanks 	See 17.36.080 (Propane Tanks) 	
Dumpsters 	See 17.36.130 (Solid Waste/Recyclable Materials Storage) 	
Fences and Walls 	See 17.36.040 (Fences and walls) 	
Exterior Lighting 	See 17.36.030 (Exterior lighting) 	
Design Review 	See Chapter 17.88 (Design review) 	
Outdoor Storage and Work Areas 	See 17.52.240 (Outdoor storage and work areas) 	
Signs 	See Chapter 17.48 (Signs) 	
Parking 	See Chapter 17.44 (Parking and Loading Standards) 	
Landscaping 	See Chapter 17.40 (Water-Efficient Landscape Regulations) 	
 
A.  Density Requirements. 
1.  RMF-1 and RMF-2 Zones. When the density calculation results in a fraction or decimal (acreage multiplied by allowed density does not equal a whole number) in the RMF-1 and RMF-2 zones and the fraction or decimal exceeds 66 percent of a unit, it shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number. When the fraction or decimal is 66 percent or less it shall be rounded down to the next lower whole number. 
2.  RR Zone. Any new subdivision within the RR zone is required to meet all of the development standards (i.e., lot size, area, and density). When the density calculation results in a fraction or decimal (acreage multiplied by density does not equal a whole number) in the RR zone, it shall be rounded down to the next lower whole number. (e.g., 1.75 acre parcel multiplied by 2 units per acre = 3.5 which is rounded down to 3 units). 
3.  RSF Zoning District. When the density calculation results in a fraction or decimal (acreage multiplied by density does not equal a whole number) within the RSF zoning district, it may be rounded to the next higher whole number only when all of the following criteria are met: 
a.  The proposed subdivision does not exceed a density of five lots per acre; 
b.  The proposed subdivision qualifies for a 40-foot private street right-of-way; 
c.  The proposed subdivision is 10 lots or fewer; 
d.  The proposed subdivision meets all development standards for the RSF zone including lot area, lot width and depth, frontage, access and minimum buildable area; and 
e.  The proposed subdivision is within a previously subdivided neighborhood where existing lot sizes are comparable to those proposed. 
4.  Managers Unit. One manager's unit for hotels, motels, fractional-use projects and multiple-family developments of 20 or more units or defined portions, whichever is greater, or where required by state law, may be excluded from the density calculations. These units may not be sold separately and, in a condominium development, must remain a part of the common area. 
B.  Residential Front Yard Setbacks on Steep Upsloping Lots. A minimum five-foot front or street-side setback shall be allowed for the construction of an attached or unattached private garage and associated entries (not including rooms), provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  The elevation of the lot, at all points measured 20 feet from the property line adjacent to the street from which access will be taken, shall be at least 7 feet above the elevation at the centerline of the street. 
2.  No portion of the garage shall exceed 15 feet in overall height as measured from all points along the centerline of the street perpendicular to the garage; 
3.  Main entry shall not exceed 15 feet above natural grade; 
4.  All required snow storage shall be provided. Snow storage areas shall meet the requirements of 17.36.010. 
5.  No portion of the garage shall be located closer than 30 feet to the centerline of the street; and 
6.  All required parking must be provided. The required exterior space may be parallel to the street within a driveway leading to a garage provided that parking space meets the minimum dimensions and is located entirely outside of the public right-of-way. Alternatively, the required exterior parking space may be located within the front setback area adjacent to the garage, provided that the space is covered. The location of unenclosed parking areas and the garage and entry encroachments must conform to requirements of the adopted residential driveway standards and California Building Standards Code provisions for snow shed from roofs. (Section 15.24.040). 
  
C.  Bluffs Slope Setback. The distance between any construction above 8,250 feet and a 30 percent or greater slope which occupies more than one-quarter of the parcel shall be 30 feet except as provided below. 
1.  Reduction of the 30-foot setback may be permitted when a design is provided that better meets the intent of this regulation to mitigate visual impact from off-site pursuant to the Bluffs EIR. All other mitigation measures must be satisfied, including avalanche hazard impacts, when such a reduction is approved by the Commission through approval of a use permit. Factors to be considered by the Commission in granting a setback reduction include, but are not limited to, location of existing vegetation, lowered building profile, and fit of structure into natural terrain. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), 1-21-2015)  
Chapter 17.24 - Commercial Zoning Districts 
 
17.24.010 - Purpose. 
In addition to the objectives outlined in [Chapter] 17.24 of this Title, the commercial zones are included in the zoning regulations to achieve the purposes outlined in the Neighborhood and District Character Element of the 2007 General Plan, specific to the Main Street and Old Mammoth Road districts. Additional purposes of the individual commercial zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows. 
Downtown District (D). Downtown (D) District is intended to provide a thriving mix of residential, non-residential, and lodging uses and a distinctive gateway entry into town, with a focus on ground-level commercial uses and active frontages. The development standards are intended to concentrate development along Main Street with a focus on shop front buildings that frame the street and provide an animated, pedestrian-friendly environment with high visual quality. The maximum FAR is 2.0. The D zoning district is consistent with the Commercial 2 (C-2) land use designation of the General Plan. 
Old Mammoth Road (OMR). The Old Mammoth Road (OMR) District is intended as an arts and culture district oriented toward medium scale commercial development along Old Mammoth Road, emphasizing community serving retail, artist galleries, office and service uses. It is intended to encourage a mix and intensity of uses in a pedestrian-scaled environment at a scale and form that is appropriate to its neighborhood context and adjacent residential uses and forms. The maximum FAR is 2.0. The OMR zoning district is consistent with the Commercial 2 (C-2) land use designation of the General Plan. 
Mixed Lodging/Residential (MLR) District. The Mixed Lodging/Residential (MLR) District is intended to allow one or more of a variety of lodging, residential, and non-residential uses to encourage a mix of uses and emphasize transient occupancy. The maximum FAR is 2.0. The MLR zoning district is consistent with the Commercial 1 (C-1) land use designation of the General Plan. 
The permissible floor area ratio (FAR) for a particular project or parcel will be affected by applicable design requirements; height, setback, snow storage, parking, and stepback requirements; and other development and dimensional standards. Accordingly, the maximum theoretically possible FAR is not achievable in some instances. Nothing in this Zoning Code or in the town's General Plan waives any design requirement or excuses compliance therewith, or entitles any applicant, project, or parcel to receive the maximum theoretically possible FAR. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 4(Exh. 1), 12-21-2016; Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.24.020 - Commercial District Land Uses and Permit Requirements. 
A.  General permit requirements. Table 17.24.020 identifies the uses of land allowed by this Zoning Code in each commercial zone and on Designated Active Frontages (Figure 17.24.020), and the planning permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 17.08 (Development and Land Use Approval Requirements). 
1.  Other uses may be allowed as determined by the Director to be similar to and not more detrimental to uses listed in Table 17.24.020. 
2.  In multitenant centers, wherever there is a change in building occupancy and the new use is similar to or no more intrusive than the previous use and meets all development standards applicable to the previous use, a use permit or administrative permit, if specified for the use, shall not be required. 
3.  Design Review is required for proposed projects based on specified criteria as identified in Chapter 17.88, Design Review. 
B.  Requirements for certain specific land uses. Where the last column in Table 17.24.020 ("See Specific Use Regulations") includes a section number, the referenced section may establish other requirements and standards applicable to the use. 
FIGURE 17.24.020: DESIGNATED ACTIVE FRONTAGES 
  
TABLE 17.24.020: ALLOWED USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
P: Permitted Use; U: Use Permit Required; A: Administrative Permit Required; 
- : Use Not Allowed; (#) Limitation Applies, See Footnote 
Land Use 	D 	OMR 	MLR 	See Specific Use
Regulations: 
Residential Use Classifications 
Single Family Dwelling 	- 	- 	- 	
Multi-family Residential 	P (1) 	P (1) 	P 	See 17.52.210 (Multi-Family Residential Projects) See 17.52.110 (Condominium Conversions) 
Assisted Living Facility 	- 	P (1) 	P 	See 17.52.260 (Residential Care and Assisted Living Facilities) 
Convalescent Home 	- 	U (1) 	- 	
Emergency Housing/Shelter 	- 	P (1) 	- 	
Family Day Care Home, Small 	P (1) 	P (1) 	P 	
Live/Work Unit 	P (1) 	P (1) 	P (1) 	See 17.52.110 (Condominium Conversions) See 17.52.150 (Live Work Units) 
Residential Care Facility 	See subclassifications below 	
 General 	- 	A (1) 	A 	See 17.52.260 (Residential Care and Assisted Living Facilities) 
 Limited 	P (1) 	P (1) 	P 	
Single Room Occupancy 	- 	U (1) 	U 	
Supportive Housing 	See 17.52.290 (Transitional and Supportive Housing) 
Transitional Housing 	See 17.52.290 (Transitional and Supportive Housing) 
Recreation, Education, & Public Assembly Use Classifications 
Commercial Recreation Facility 	P (2) 	P (2) 	P (2) 	
Community Assembly 	P (1) 	P (1) 	P 	
Conference/Convention Facility 	P (6) 	P (6) 	P (6) 	
Fitness/Health Facility 	P (6) 	P (6) 	P (6) 	
Instructional Services 	P (3) 	P 	P 	
Parks and Playgrounds, Public 	P 	P 	P 	
Private Residential Recreational Facility 	P (1) 	P (1) 	P (1) 	
Public Recreational and Cultural Facility 	P (2) 	P (2) 	P (2) 	
Schools, Public or Private 	U (1) 	U (1) 	- 	
Theater, Cinema or Performing Arts 	P 	P 	P 	
Retail Use Classifications 
Artisan Shop 	P 	P 	P 	
Auto and Vehicle Sales and Rental 	U (9) 	U (9) 	- 	
Bars/Taverns/Nightclubs 	A 	A 	U 	
Commercial Cannabis Activity 	See subclassifications below 
 Adult-Use Cannabis Retailer 	U 	U 	- 	See 17.52.085 (Cannabis—Commercial Businesses) 
 Medicinal Cannabis Retailer 	U 	U 	- 	See 17.52.085 (Cannabis—Commercial Businesses) 
 Cannabis Delivery 	- 	- 	- 	
General Retail 	P 	P 	P 	
Nurseries and Garden Centers 	P (9) 	P (9) 	P (9) 	
Restaurant, Café, Coffee Shop 	P 	P 	P 	See 17.52.220 (Outdoor Dining) 
Tasting Room 	P 	P 	P 	
Service Use Classification 
Animal Care and Boarding 	See subclassifications below 	See 17.52.070 (Animal Care and Boarding) 
 Pet Day Care 	P (10) 	P/A (10) 	P/A (10) 	
 Pet Grooming 	P (3) 	P 	P 	
 Veterinary Services 	P (1) 	P (1) 	P 	
Banks and Financial Services 	P/A (2) 	P 	P 	
Day Care Centers 	P 	P 	A 	See 17.52.100 (Child Daycare Facilities) 
Food Preparation 	P (1) 	P (1) 	- 	
Government Offices 	P (1) 	P 	- 	
Lodging 	See subclassification below 	
 Hotels and Motels 	P 	P 	P 	See 17.52.120 (Fractional/Timeshare Developments) 
 Bed and Breakfast 	P 	P 	P 	See 17.52.080 (Bed and Breakfast Inns) 
 Transient Rental 	P 	P 	P 	
Medical Services 	See subclassifications below 	
 Hospital 	- 	U (1) 	- 	
 Clinics and Laboratories 	A (1) 	P (1) 	A (9) 	
Offices 	P (7) 	P (7) 	P (7) 	
Personal Services 	P 	P 	P 	
Public Safety Facilities 	A (1) 	A (1) 	A 	
Vehicle Services 	See subclassifications below 	
 Fueling Stations 	(4) 	U (1) 	(4) 	
 Repair, Major 	- 	U (1,5) 	- 	
 Services and Repair, Minor 	A (1,5) 	A (1,5) 	- 	
 Washing 	- 	A (1) 	- 	
Warehousing, Storage, and Distribution 	See subclassification below 	
 Personal Storage 	A (1) 	A (1) 	- 	
Industry, Manufacturing, & Processing Use Classifications 
Commercial Cannabis Cultivation, Manufacturing, Distribution, and/or Testing 	- 	- 	- 	
Handicraft/Custom Manufacturing 	- 	A (1) 	- 	
Transportation, Communications, Infrastructure Use Classifications 
Parking, Public or Private 	P (8) 	P (8) 	P (8) 	
Transportation Passenger Facilities 	U 	U 	U 	
Other Applicable Types 
Accessory Use 	P 	P 	P 	See 17.52.030 (Accessory Uses) 
Automated Teller Machine (ATM) 	P 	P 	P 	
Fractional or Timeshare Development 	P 	P 	P 	See 17.52.120 (Fractional/Timeshare Development) 
Home Occupations 	P 	P 	P 	See 17.52.140 (Home Occupations) 
Mixed-Use 	P 	P 	P 	See 17.52.170 (Mixed-Use Development) 
Outdoor Display and Sales 	A 	A 	A 	See 17.52.230 (Outdoor Display and Sales) 
Temporary Uses and Events 	See Chapter 17.56, Temporary Uses and Events 
Mobile Businesses 	A 	A 	A 	See 17.52.180 (Mobile Businesses) 
Telecommunication Facilities 	See 17.52.280 (Telecommunication Facilities) 
Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) 	See 17.52.300 (Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)) 
Specific Limitations: 
1. Limited to no more than 75% of the ground floor area when located along Primary and Secondary Active Frontages. A minimum of 25% of the ground floor area shall be occupied by uses permitted by right or by Administrative Permit (i.e. active uses) and shall occupy the building or structure's frontage for a minimum depth of 20 feet (Administrative Permit required for depths less than 20 feet). 
2. Limited to establishments with a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet or less when located on the ground floor along Designated Active Frontages. Administrative Permit required if greater than 5,000 square feet. 
3. Limited to establishments with a gross floor area of 1,200 square feet or less when located on the ground floor along Designated Active Frontages. 
4. Permitted if existing, no new fueling stations allowed. 
5. Use shall be completely enclosed in a building of soundproof construction. 
6. At least 50 percent of the ground floor Designated Active Frontages shall be occupied by retail or food service uses. 
7. Limited to walk-in clientele when located on the ground floor along Designated Active Frontages. 
8. Shall be located behind buildings or in structures where other uses are located in the portion of the structure along Designated Active Frontages. 
9. Limited to establishments with a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet or less. 
10. Allowed only as accessory to a hotel or motel or other lodging use. Administrative Permit required if primary use in OMR and MLR districts. 
 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, §§ 2, 3), 1-21-2015; Ord. No. 15-02, § 4(Exh. A), 3-4-2015; Ord. No. 16-04, § 2a(Exh. A), 5-18-2016; Ord. No. 16-09, § 4(Exh. 1), 12-21-2016; Ord. No. 18-02, § 5(Exh. A, a.), 3-13-2018; Ord. No. 18-05, § 4(Exh. A, a.), 11-19-2018)  
17.24.030 - Commercial District Development Standards. 
Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Tables 17.24.030-1 through 17.24.030-5 in addition to the applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Article III (Site Planning and General Development Standards). Additional regulations are denoted in a right hand column. Section numbers in this column refer to other sections of the Code, while individual letters refer to subsections that directly follow the table. The numbers in each illustration below refer to corresponding regulations in the "#" column in the associated table. 
TABLE 17.24.030-1: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS - LOT DENSITY AND INTENSITY STANDARDS 
Development 
Feature 	Requirement by Zone 	Additional 
Regulations 	# 
	D 	OMR 	MLR 		
Lot Size 		
 Lot area 	10,000 square feet 		
 Lot area, corner lot 	11,000 square feet 		
 Lot width 	75 feet 		
 Lot width, corner lot 	90 feet 		
 Lot depth 	100 feet 		
 Width for access 	50 feet 		
 Minimum buildable site area 	5,000 square feet 		
 Minimum width/depth for a 
 building site 	50 feet 		
 Maximum slope for a building 
 site 	20% 		
Density and Intensity 		
 Floor area ratio (FAR) 	Maximum 2.0, applicable to entire development 	(A) 	
 
  
TABLE 17.24.030-2: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS - BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS 
  
Development Feature 	Requirement by Zone 	Additional 
Regulations 	# 
	D 	OMR 	MLR 		
Minimum Setbacks (measured from property line unless otherwise stated) 
 Main Street and Frontage Road 	0 feet (B) 	17.36.090 (Screening and Buffer); 17.36.100 (Setback Requirements and Exceptions); 17.52.170 (Mixed-Use Development) 	  
 Other Designated Active Frontage Areas 	Property line or 15 feet from back of curb, whichever is greater. (B) 	n/a 		  
 All Other Streets 	10 feet; (B) 		  
 Interior Side and Rear 	0 feet, 15 feet adjacent to a residential district 		  
Projections into Setbacks 	Awnings, overhangs and other elements of a covered walkway, public plaza, or outdoor eating area may project up to 8 feet into the required setback. 		  
Build-to Requirement 
 Primary Active Frontage 	Min: 60% of linear street frontage (C) 		  
 Secondary Active Frontage 	Min: 40% of linear street frontage (C) 		  
 Corner Build Area 	30 feet (C) 		  
 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Frontage Improvements. New development shall provide street frontage improvements in accordance with adopted Town Plans (i.e. Pedestrian Master Plan, Bikeway Master Plan, etc.) as determined by the Director and Public Works Director including but not limited to sidewalks, bike lanes, paths, bus stops, and other typical frontage improvements. 
1.  Except where occupied by a building or used for building access, the property frontage, for a depth of 10 feet from the property line, shall be improved so that it functions as a wider public sidewalk; utilized for active outdoor uses such as outdoor dining, or improved with landscaping, public art, and/or pedestrian amenities such as outdoor seating. 
C.  Required Building Areas, Active Frontage Areas. The following building placement requirements apply in Designated Active Frontage Areas (See Figure 17.24.020, Designated Active Frontages): 
1.  Build-to Requirement. Building facades shall be located within five feet of the required setback line along Designated Active Frontages for the percent of linear street frontage identified in Table 17.24.030-2 (Commercial Districts-Building Placement Standards). 
2.  Corner Build Area. Buildings on corner lots along Designated Active Frontages shall be located at or within five feet of the required setbacks on each street frontage within 30 feet of the corner. 
3.  Exception. The requirements above may be modified or waived by the Director upon finding that: 
a.  Plazas, courtyards or outdoor eating areas that function as publicly accessible open space with amenities such as seating, landscaping, lighting, and trash/recycle bins are located between the build-to line and building, provided that the buildings are built to the edge of the plaza; 
b.  The building incorporates an alternative entrance design that creates a welcoming entry feature facing the street; or 
c.  A larger setback is required to preserve existing mature trees or landscape. 
TABLE 17.24.030-3: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS - HEIGHT STANDARDS 
  
Development Feature 	Requirement by Zone 	Additional
Regulations 	# 
	D 	OMR 	MLR 		
Maximum Overall Building Height 	55 feet 	45 feet 	45 feet for lots with slopes of less than 10%; 55 feet for lots with slopes of 10% of greater 	See 17.36.060 (Height Measurement and Exceptions) 	  
Minimum Building Face Height 	20 feet, applicable only to Primary Active Frontages 		  
Maximum Building Face Height Along All Streets and Adjacent to Residential Districts 	25 feet for 60% of the building face; 35 for 20% of the building face; 45 for 20% of the building face (D) 		  
Stepback 	Min. 10 feet from the building face below (D) 		  
Ground Floor, Nonresidential Uses 	Min. 14 feet clear from floor to ceiling 		  
Ground Floor, Residential Uses 	Min. 8 feet clear from floor to ceiling 		
Upper Floors 	Min. 8 feet clear from floor to ceiling 		  
Parking Podium 	The maximum height of a parking podium visible from the street is 4 feet from finished grade. 		  
 
D.  Building Face Height. Along street frontages and adjacent to residential districts, the building face shall have a maximum wall height as identified in Table 17.24.030-3 (Commercial Districts-Height Standards) with a minimum stepback of ten feet from that building face to the next higher story, except as provided below. 
1.  A maximum of 20 percent of the length of the building face may exceed the maximum building face height by up to 10 feet without a stepback; and 
2.  An additional 20 percent of the length of the building face may exceed the maximum building face height by up to 20 feet without a stepback. 
TABLE 17.24.030-4: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS - PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS 
  
Development Feature 	Requirement by Zone 	Additional
Standards 	# 
	D 	OMR 	MLR 		
Setback from Street Property Line 	20 (E) 	20 (E) 	20 (E) 	See Chapter 17.44 (Parking and Loading Standards) 	  
Setback from Buildings and Public Plazas 	8 feet; 5 feet walkway plus 3 feet landscaping; Applicable only to above ground parking. 		  
Access Location 	Side street, alley, or rear of property wherever possible. (F) 		  
Shared Access 	See additional regulations (G) 		  
Curb Cuts 	Minimized and in areas least likely to impede pedestrian circulation 		
Loading/Service Areas 	Side or rear of lot; must be screened from public ROW 		  
 
E.  Limitations on Location of Parking. Buildings shall be placed as close to the street as possible, with parking underground, behind a building, or on the interior side or rear of the site. Parking may be located within the required setback, subject to the following requirements. 
1.  Underground and Partially Submerged Parking. Parking completely or partially underground, may match the setbacks of the main structure. 
2.  Surface Parking. Above ground surface parking may be located within 20 feet of a street facing property line when the Director makes the following findings: 
a.  Buildings are built close to the public sidewalk to the maximum extent feasible; 
b.  The parking area is screened along the public right-of-way with a wall, hedge, trellis, and/or landscaping; and 
c.  The site is small and constrained such that underground, partially submerged, or surface parking located more than 20 feet from the street frontage is not feasible. 
F.  Access for Main Street Properties. Properties fronting onto Main Street that redevelop to claim an existing frontage road shall incorporate a re-routed access road to the rear of the property. The re-routed access road shall be designed to be continuous with those of adjacent properties, and to provide adequate circulation and emergency access. 
G.  Shared Access. To encourage shared parking and shared access points on public streets, new parking facilities shall be designed to accommodate cross-access to/from adjacent properties to allow parking areas to become joint use facilities even if initially serving only one development. When cross-access for vehicles is deemed impractical by the Director, the requirement for cross-access may be waived if bicycle and pedestrian connections are provided between adjacent properties. 
TABLE 17.24.030-5: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS - ADDITIONAL STANDARDS 
Development Feature 	Requirement by Zone 
	D 	OMR 	MLR 
Required snow storage area 	An area equal to 60% of all parking and driveways on the site; See 17.36.110 (Snow Storage) 
Propane Tanks & Dumpsters 	See 17.36.080 (Propane Tanks) & 17.36.130 (Solid Waste/Recyclable Materials Storage) 
Fences and Walls 	See 17.36.040 (Fences and walls) 
Exterior Lighting 	See 17.36.030 (Exterior lighting) 
Design Review 	See Chapter 17.88 (Design review) 
Outdoor Storage and Work Areas 	See 17.52.240 (Outdoor storage and work areas) 
Signs 	See Chapter 17.48 (Signs) 
Landscaping 	See Chapter 17.40 (Water-Efficient Landscape Regulations) 
 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 4(Exh. 1), 12-21-2016; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 4), 1-21-2015; Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.24.040 - Commercial District Supplemental Standards. 
A.  Maximum Block Length. Block length is limited to 350 feet measured from curb edge to curb edge. A block length up to 600 feet shall only be allowed when a mid-block pedestrian connection is provided or the Director finds that: 
1.  It is not feasible or practical to provide a mid-block pedestrian connection due to the location and configuration of the lot; and 
2.  Safe and convenient pedestrian connections are provided throughout the site and provisions are made to accommodate cross-access to/from pedestrian areas that may be developed on adjacent properties. 
B.  Building Orientation and Entrances. 
1.  All buildings located on a public street shall be oriented toward, and have their primary entrances facing the public street. 
2.  Building entrances shall be emphasized with special architectural, modulation of roof lines or landscape treatments. 
3.  Building entrances shall be designed so that snow does not shed freely into entrances and the buildup of ice and snow within pedestrian areas is minimized. 
  
C.  Building Transparency and Openings for Non-Residential Uses. Exterior walls facing and within 20 feet of a street, park, plaza, pedestrian walkway, or other public outdoor space shall include windows, doors, or other openings for at least 60 percent of the building wall area located between 2.5 and 8 feet above the level of the sidewalk. No wall may run in a continuous horizontal plane for more than 15 feet without an opening. 
  
1.  Design of Required Openings. 
a.  Openings fulfilling this requirement shall have transparent glazing and provide views 10 feet in depth into work areas, display areas, sales areas, lobbies, or similar active spaces or into window displays that are at least three feet deep. 
b.  Windows on the ground level building facade facing a street shall not be opaque. Shades or blinds, which block the view of a pedestrian into a building for more than five hours a day during daylight hours in the summer, or more than four hours a day during daylight hours when it is not summer, are defined as opaque for purposes of this Chapter. 
2.  Exceptions for Parking Garages. A parking garage that does not incorporate ground-floor non-residential or residential use or is not otherwise screened or concealed at street frontages on the ground level, must provide a landscaped area at least ten feet wide between the parking garage and public street. 
3.  Alternatives. Alternatives to the building transparency requirement may be approved if the Director finds that the street-facing building walls exhibit architectural relief and detail, and are enhanced with landscaping in such a way as to create visual interest at the pedestrian level. 
D.  Building Design. Buildings shall be well designed to create a pedestrian-friendly environment and support a vital and active public realm. Buildings shall appear integrated with the natural features and existing buildings in the districts; complement the Eastern Sierra Nevada Mountain setting; and contribute to the Town of Mammoth Lakes' "village in the trees" identity. 
1.  Wall Plane Modulation. Buildings should exhibit substantial reveals or offsets in the wall plane. Any building face over 50 feet wide shall be broken down to read as a series of buildings or storefronts no wider than 50 feet each to avoid a monotonous flat wall plane. Offsets shall be a minimum of two feet. 
  
2.  Roof Modulation. The roof line of all facades visible from a public right-of-way shall not exceed 50 feet wide without modulation. 
a.  Roof modulation shall consist of or be a combination of: 
i.  A change in height by a minimum of 10 feet; or 
ii.  A change in form through changes in pitch, plane, and orientation. A pitched roof line segment shall have a minimum slope of 3:12. Acceptable pitched roof types include gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. 
b.  Roof modulation shall be incorporated to reflect the interior uses of multi-tenant buildings and emphasize key building entrances. 
c.  Roof designs and modulation should take into account snow and ice storage and shedding and should ensure that pedestrian areas are protected from shedding ice and snow. 
d.  Alternatives. Alternatives to the roof modulation requirement may be approved if the Director finds that the roof design is composed of a variety of roof forms that are appropriately scaled and proportioned. 
  
3.  Vertical Relationship. Buildings shall be designed to have a distinctive base (ground floor level), middle (intermediate upper floor levels), and top (either top floor or roof level). Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, parapets, towers, and balconies shall be used, as appropriate, to delineate the base, middle, and top, accentuate setbacks between stories, and terminate rooflines. 
4.  Architectural Articulation. Buildings shall include sufficient architectural design features to create visual interest. Different ways that this requirement may be met include but are not limited to those listed below; compliance with this requirement shall be evaluated by the Director in the review process. 
a.  Façade Incorporates Architectural Details. The building façades incorporate details such as window trim, window recesses, cornices, belt courses, columns, changes in material, or other design elements in an integrated composition. The use of materials, textures, and colors enhance architectural interest and emphasize details and changes in plane. Buildings shall be designed with four-sided architecture where each exterior wall is designed equivalent to the primary facade in the extent of building articulation and quality of exterior materials, and consistent with the color scheme of the primary facade. 
b.  Pedestrian-Friendly Design Features. Building frontages along designated active frontages shall be designed to enhance the storefront character of retail areas. Storefronts consist of detailed and composed facades with individual windows set in well-detailed frames. Frontages incorporate features that contribute to pedestrian comfort and interest, such as awnings, recessed entries, arcades, hanging lights, and bracket hung signs. Architectural and ornamental features shall not impede pedestrian routes. 
  
i.  Arcades. The minimum depth of an arcade shall be five feet clear, measured from the back face of the columns to the ground floor facade. 
  
c.  Projections and Recesses. All building faces shall exhibit modulation through projections with a significant depth, or a repeated pattern of offsets, recesses, or projections of smaller depth. Balconies, bay windows, or similar repeated elements are encouraged across the length of the façade. This method for achieving architectural articulation is most typically found in the building middle and on buildings that include residential or lodging uses. 
E.  Building Materials and Construction. 
1.  Building Materials. The building base shall be clad in durable high-grade materials from at least the floor slab of the second floor down to one inch of the finished sidewalk grade, and these materials shall wrap corners of exposed interior property line walls a minimum of five feet. 
2.  Construction Execution. All construction details and materials shall be of the highest standard and executed to minimize weathering, eliminate staining of the wall surface, and avoid deterioration of materials on adjacent properties or the public-right-of-way. 
F.  Pedestrian Access. On-site pedestrian circulation and access must be provided according to the following standards: 
1.  Internal Connections. A system of pedestrian walkways shall connect all buildings on a site to each other, to on-site automobile and bicycle parking areas, and to any on-site open space areas or pedestrian amenities. 
2.  To Street Network. Regular connections between on-site walkways and the public sidewalk shall be provided. An on-site walkway shall connect the primary building entry or entries to a public sidewalk on each street frontage. On sloping sites, the walkway between the building and the sidewalk or other public outdoor area shall be designed as usable open space with generously sized steps and landings, with features such as low risers and wide treads, and any planter boxes that include seating ledges. 
  
3.  To Neighbors. Direct and convenient access shall be provided from commercial and mixed-use projects to adjoining residential and commercial areas to the maximum extent feasible while still providing for safety and security. 
4.  To Transit. Safe and convenient pedestrian connections shall be provided from transit stops to building entrances. 
5.  Pedestrian Walkway Design. 
a.  Walkways shall be a minimum of six feet wide, shall be hard-surfaced, and paved with permeable materials. 
b.  Where a required walkway crosses driveways, parking areas, or loading areas, it must be clearly identifiable through the use of a raised crosswalk, a different paving material, or similar method. 
c.  Where a required walkway is parallel and adjacent to an auto travel lane, it shall be raised or separated from the auto travel lane by a raised curb at least four inches high, bollards, or other physical barrier. 
G.  Public Open Space. Development with 50,000 square feet or more of non-residential floor area on sites two acres or more in size shall provide public open space in accordance with the following: 
1.  Amount. 40 square feet of public open space for every 1,000 square feet of non-residential floor area for the first 100,000 square feet of non-residential floor area plus 20 square feet of public open space for every 1,000 square feet of non-residential floor area over 100,000 square feet. 
2.  Location and Accessibility. Such public space shall be visible and accessible from a public street, or from on-site areas normally frequented by customers, and shall be accessible during business hours. Areas within required setbacks may count toward the public space requirement. 
3.  Elevation. Such public space located adjacent to the street shall not be elevated or sunken more than two feet from the level of the adjacent sidewalk. Steps providing access to such public space shall have a maximum height of five inches and a minimum tread depth of 15 inches. The elevation requirement may be modified or waived by the Director for sites with steep slopes upon finding that an alternative design is visible and accessible from the street. 
4.  Minimum Dimensions. Such public space shall have a minimum dimension of 40 feet. 
5.  Obstructions. Obstructions that impair visibility within the space shall not be permitted unless it is a plaza design feature such as a water feature, public art, or landscaping. 
6.  Seating. A variety of well-designed and comfortable seating types shall be included in the public space. Seating types may include fixed seating, moveable seating, planter ledges, seat walls, and seating steps. A portion of the seating shall be located near the entrance of the public space. 
7.  Amenities. Amenities shall be included that enhance the comfort, aesthetics, or usability of the space, including but not limited to trees and other landscaping, shade structures, lighting, drinking fountains, water features, public art, signage or performance areas. 
8.  Usability. A surface shall be provided that allows convenient use for outdoor activity, recreation, and public gathering. Such surface may be any practical combination of high quality plant and hardscape materials such as bricks, stone, concrete, permeable paving, or tile. Surfaces shall be sloped for positive drainage and constructed to withstand snow removal and de-icing maintenance. The maximum slope shall not exceed 10 percent. Seating areas and plazas should be located in areas with good solar exposure. 
  
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), 1-21-2015)  
Chapter 17.28 - Industrial Zoning District 
 
17.28.010 - Purpose. 
In addition to the objectives outlined in Section 17.04.020, the specific purposes of the Industrial Zoning District are to: 
A.  To reserve appropriately located areas for viable industrial uses and protect these areas from intrusion by family dwellings or other incompatible uses. 
B.  To protect residential and commercial uses from noise, odor, dust, smoke, truck traffic and other objectionable influences incidental to certain industrial uses. 
C.  To protect industrial uses and structures from hazard and to minimize the impact of industrial uses on the environment. 
D.  To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities by restricting the construction of buildings of excessive size in relation to the amount of land around them. 
E.  Provide an area for light industrial and limited service type uses located so as to minimize impacts on adjacent land use patterns and the environment and with development standards to facilitate relocation of existing nonconforming industrial/service uses in commercial zones to designated industrial areas. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.28.020 - Industrial Zoning District Land Use and Permit Requirements. 
A.  General permit requirements. Table 17.28.020 identifies the uses of land allowed by this Zoning Code in the Industrial Zoning District, and the permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 17.08.020 (Requirements for Development and New Land Uses). 
B.  Requirements for certain specific land uses. Where the last column in Table 17.28.020 ("Specific Use Regulations") includes a section number, the referenced section may establish other requirements and standards applicable to the use. 
TABLE 17.28.020: ALLOWED USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR THE INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT 
P: Permitted Use; U: Use Permit Required; A: Administrative Permit Required 
Land Use 	Permit Requirements 	See Specific Use Regulations: 
Residential Use Classifications 
Caretaker Housing 	A 	See 17.52.090 (Caretaker Housing) 
Supportive Housing 	See 17.52.290 (Transitional and Supportive Housing) 
Transitional Housing 	See 17.52.290 (Transitional and Supportive Housing) 
Recreation, Education, & Public Assembly Use Classifications 
Parks and Playgrounds, Public 	A 	
Retail Use Classifications 
Artisan Shop 	P 	
Auto and Vehicle Sales and Rental 	P 	
Building Materials and Services 	A 	
Nurseries and Garden Centers 	P 	
Service Use Classifications 
Animal Care and Boarding 	See subclassifications below 
 Kennel 	U 	See 17.52.070 (Animal Care and Boarding) 
 Pet Day Care 	U 	
 Pet Grooming 	A 	
Food Preparation 	P 	
Maintenance and Repair Services 	P 	
Personal Services 	P 	
Research and Development 	P 	
Vehicle Services 	See subclassifications below 
 Large Vehicle and Equipment Sales, Service and Rental 	P 	
 Repair, Major 	A 	
 Services and Repair, Minor 	P 	
 Washing 	P 	
 Vehicle Storage 	A 	
Warehousing, Storage, and Distribution 	See subclassifications below 
 Construction and Material Yards 	A 	
 Indoor Warehousing and Storage 	P 	
 Outdoor Storage 	P 	
 Personal Storage 	P 	
 Wholesaling and Distribution 	A 	
Industry, Manufacturing, & Processing Use Classifications 
Commercial Cannabis Activity 	See subclassifications below 
 Commercial Cannabis Cultivation 	U 	See 17.52.085 (Cannabis— Commercial Businesses) 
 Commercial Cannabis Nonvolatile Manufacturing 	U 	See 17.52.085 (Cannabis—Commercial Businesses) 
 Commercial Cannabis Volatile Manufacturing 	- 	
 Commercial Cannabis Distribution 	U 	See 17.52.085 (Cannabis—Commercial Businesses) 
 Commercial Cannabis Testing 	U 	See 17.52.085 (Cannabis—Commercial Businesses) 
Handicraft/Custom Manufacturing 	P 	
Industry, General 	A 	
Industry, Heavy 	U 	
Recycling Facility 	See subclassifications below 
 Reverse Vending Machine 	P 	See 17.52.250 (Recycling Facilities) 
 Small Collection Facility 	P 	
 Large Collection Facility 	U 	
Transportation, Communications, Infrastructure Use Classifications 
Parking, Public or Private 	A 	
Transportation Passenger Facilities 	U 	
Utilities, Major 	U 	
Other Applicable Types 
Accessory Use 	P 	See 17.52.030 (Accessory Uses) 
Adult Businesses 	U 	See 17.52.050 (Adult Businesses) 
Condominium Conversions 	See 17.52.110 (Condominium Conversions) 
Fractional or Timeshare Development 	See 17.52.120 (Fractional/Timeshare Development) 
Outdoor Display and Sales 	A 	See 17.52.230 (Outdoor Display and Sales) 
Temporary Uses and Events 	See Chapter 17.56 (Temporary Uses and Events) 
Mobile Businesses 	A 	See Chapter 17.52 (Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities) 
Telecommunication Facilities 	See 17.52.280 (Telecommunication Facilities) 
Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) 	See 17.52.300 (Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)) 
 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 5), 1-21-2015; Ord. No. 16-04, § 2b(Exh. A), 5-18-2016; Ord. No. 18-02, § 5(Exh. A, b.), 3-13-2018) 
   
17.28.030 - Industrial Zoning District Development Standards. 
Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table 17.28.030, in addition to the applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Article III (Site Planning and General Development Standards). Additional regulations are denoted in the right hand column. Section numbers refer to other sections of the Code. 
TABLE 17.28.030: PLANNING AND BUILDING STANDARDS DEVELOPMENT FEATURE PLANNING 
Development Feature 	Requirement for Industrial Zone (I) 
Lot Size 
 Lot area 	8,000 square feet 
 Lot area, corner lots 	9,000 square feet 
 Lot width 	75 feet 
 Lot depth 	100 feet 
 Minimum width for access 	50 feet 
 Minimum buildable site area 	5,000 square feet 
 Minimum width/depth for a building site 	50 feet 
 Maximum slope for a building site 	30% 
Setbacks 
 Front yard, to structures 	20 feet 
 Front yard, to parking and fencing on Commerce Circle 	0 feet 
 Front yard, to parking and fencing on Commerce Drive 	10 feet 
 Side yard 	0 feet, or as required by building code 
 Side yard, street side 	10 feet 
 Rear yard 	10 feet, or as required by building code 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	100% (exclusive of snow storage easements) 
Maximum height 	35 feet 
Required snow storage area 	40% of all parking and driveways; 17.36.110 (Snow storage) 
Propane Tanks 	See 17.36.080 (Propane Tanks) 
Dumpsters 	See 17.36.130 (Solid Waste/Recyclable Materials Storage) 
Fences and Walls 	See 17.36.040 (Fences and walls) 
Exterior Lighting 	See 17.36.030 (Exterior lighting) 
Design Review 	See Chapter 17.88 (Design review) 
Outdoor Storage and Work Areas 	See 17.52.240 (Outdoor storage and work areas) 
Signs 	See Chapter 17.48 (Signs) 
Parking 	See Chapter 17.44 (Parking and Loading Standards) 
Landscaping 	See Chapter 17.40 (Water-Efficient Landscape Regulations) 
 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.32 - Special Purpose Zoning Districts 
 
17.32.010 - General Provisions. 
In addition to the purposes outlined in Section 17.04.020, the following special purpose zones are established because of the special or unique land use character characteristics with which they are associated and because of the need to implement specific sections of the General Plan. 
A.  Overlay Zones. The special purpose overlay zones are as follows: 
1.  Affordable Housing Overlay Zone (AH). 
2.  Equestrian Overlay Zone (E). 
3.  Open Space/Stream Corridor Protection Overlay Zone (OSSC). 
4.  Snow Deposition Design Overlay Zone (SDD). 
B.  Special Purpose Zones. The special purpose zones are as follows: 
1.  Airport Zone (A). 
2.  Mobile Home Park Zone (MHP). 
3.  Open Space Zone (OS). 
4.  Planned Residential Development Zone (PRD). 
5.  Public and Quasi-Public Zone (P-QP). 
6.  Resort Zone (R). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.32.020 - Affordable Housing Overlay Zone (AH). 
A.  Purpose. In addition to the purposes outlined in Section 17.04.020, the Affordable Housing Overlay Zone is intended to promote the development and provision of affordable housing within the community and thereby implement the policies of the Housing Element of the General Plan. Standards of development and performance shall be designed to make the provisions of affordable housing more attractive to private developers while retaining good design and compatibility with adjacent land uses. 
B.  Uses permitted. 
1.  Single-family and multi-family residential development developed and intended to be purchased or rented based on criteria and formulas established by the state Department of Housing and Community Development for very low, other low and moderate income household categories; 
2.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to permitted uses; 
3.  Temporary uses as prescribed in Chapter 17.56; and 
4.  Model homes or units and subdivision sales offices subject to the granting of a use permit. 
C.  Permits required. A development for property with an Affordable Housing overlay requires filing of a Master Plan in order to establish the zone and development standards. 
D.  Property development standards. The following development standards shall apply to an affordable housing project: 
1.  The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in an affordable housing project shall be that designated for the zone in which the project is located and as modified by the density adjustment provisions of Section 17.20.030; 
2.  Requirements calling for the provision of covered off-street parking spaces for residential units shall not be applied to affordable housing projects; 
3.  Infrastructure facilities normally required for residential development may be modified by the Commission for affordable housing projects if deemed necessary to ensure affordability of dwelling units. Examples of the modified facility requirements could include the use of private streets at reduced construction standards, and waiver of any required off-site improvements; 
4.  There shall be no minimum area requirement for individual lots or individual dwelling units in an affordable housing project; and 
5.  If deemed appropriate by the Council, any or all fees normally imposed by the Town on development projects may be waived or reduced. Included in this fee category are such fees as zoning or subdivision fees, plan check and building permit fees, major thoroughfare fees and master plan fees. Waiver of such fees shall be based upon the project proponent supplying the Council with evidence and assurances that savings realized from such waivers will be passed on to the future residents by way of reduced rent or purchase price for units. 
E.  Performance standards. For affordable housing projects, performance standards shall be as specified in the Master Plan and shall be incorporated into the conditions of approval of the project. 
F.  Pre-application procedure. Prior to submitting an application for an affordable housing project, the applicant or prospective developer should hold preliminary consultations with the Director to obtain information and guidance before entering into binding commitments incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys and other data. Such preliminary consultations should be relative to a Master Plan which outlines the concept and characteristics of the project. 
G.  Application. In addition to the information and materials required by Chapter 17.120 (Master Plans), the following shall also be required: 
1.  The boundaries of the subject property indicating the land area and sufficient contour information to clearly indicate the topography of the property and any significant features; 
2.  The approximate location of each existing and each proposed structure in the development area, the use or uses of the structures, the number of stories, the gross building and floor areas, and approximate location of all entrances; 
3.  All streets, driving lanes, parking areas, loading areas, public transportation points, and illumination facilities for the same; 
4.  All pedestrian walks, malls, fences and open areas for the use of the public; 
5.  Types of surfacing, such as paving, turfing, or gravel to be used at the various locations; 
6.  A preliminary grading plan of the area; 
7.  A preliminary landscaping plan of the project area; 
8.  Plans and elevations of buildings, structures and signs indicating the architectural style, colors, construction standards and lighting; 
9.  The proposed means for assuring continuing existence, maintenance and operation of the various common elements and facilities. If a community association or similar governing structure is to be established, a copy of the covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be made a part of the record; 
10.  A preliminary or draft contract to be executed between the Town and the applicant/developer, or such other document approved as to form by the Town Attorney, which contractor or document outlines the sales and rental prices for the various types of units to be established, provisions for the sale, resale, renting and restrictions that will be applicable to the project and which ensure the continued availability of units for purchase or occupancy by households of very low, other low and moderate incomes; 
11.  A preliminary report and overall plan describing proposed provisions for storm drainage, sewage disposal, water supply and such other public improvements and utilities as the town engineer may require; and 
12.  Such other information as may be required by the Director to permit a complete analysis and appraisal of the project. 
H.  Adoption of Master Plan. The Master Plan and accompanying maps, contracts and other documentation submitted with the application for an affordable housing project shall be approved and adopted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.120 (Master Plans) and shall be subject to such conditions, requirements and stipulations as are deemed appropriate and necessary to ensure compliance with the purposes of the Housing Ordinance and the Housing Element of the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 6), 1-21-2015)  
17.32.030 - Equestrian Overlay Zone (E). 
A.  Purpose. In addition to the purposes outlined in Section 17.04.020, the Equestrian Overlay Zone is intended to provide areas where the keeping of horses or pack stock is permitted subject to various standards of operation and maintenance which are designed to minimize the impacts of animals on adjacent properties and uses. 
B.  Permitted uses. The Equestrian Overlay Zone shall permit the keeping of horses or pack stock only as a use accessory or subordinate to an existing permitted use on the site; provided, however, that such horses or pack stock are maintained only for the personal use of the members of the family or household residing on the premises. No commercial operations shall be permitted on property that does not belong to members of the family or household residing thereon. 
C.  Property maintenance standards. The keeping of horses in the Equestrian Overlay Zone shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  The minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet; 
2.  A maximum of two horses may be kept on a lot having 20,000 square feet; one additional horse may be kept for each additional 10,000 square feet of lot area; 
3.  No horse may be kept, pastured or penned closer than 50 feet to a dwelling on an adjoining lot, but in no event closer than 25 feet to any property line; 
4.  All requirements of the Mono County Environmental Health Department and Town of Mammoth Lakes Police Department (Animal Control) shall be satisfied; 
5.  Barns, stables, or similar structures shall be subject to the setback requirements of the main building but in no case may be located closer than 10 feet to any side or rear lot line and shall not exceed 15 feet in height; 
6.  Animal confinement areas, including, but not limited to, pens and corrals, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner at all times. Accumulation of waste or other odor or insect producing material is not permitted; and 
7.  Animal confinement areas shall be located at least 50 feet away from any permanent lake or stream. Waste shall be controlled so that it does not wash directly or indirectly into any permanent lake or stream or neighboring properties. 
D.  Initiation of Equestrian Overlay Zone. 
1.  The minimum size for an equestrian overlay zone shall be five acres. Additions to existing (E) zones shall meet the minimum area requirements as stated in Section 17.32.030C.1. 
2.  All procedures for initiating an Equestrian Overlay Zone shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.112 (General Plan, Zoning Map, and Zoning Code Amendments). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.32.040 - Open Space/Stream Corridor Protection Overlay Zone (OSSC). 
A.  Purpose. In addition to the purposes outlined in Section 17.04.020, the Open Space Stream Corridor Protection Zone is intended to protect sensitive stream and drainage courses from development, to recognize and preserve these environmentally sensitive areas as a community resource, and, to protect water quality and preserve wetland habitat. 
B.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be identified by the underlying zone classification; however, in the Open Space Stream Corridor Protection Zone, a use permit shall be required for all uses except for a single-family dwelling on a single lot. Any development rights associated with private property contained within this zone classification may be transferred to other private land holdings subject to the granting of a use permit. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.32.050 - Snow Deposition Design Overlay Zone (SDD). 
A.  Purpose. In addition to the purposes outlined in Section 17.04.020, the Snow Deposition Design Zone is intended to: 
1.  To identify those areas in town where avalanche potential has been found to exist after specific investigation and study; 
2.  To minimize health and safety hazards related to avalanche potential; and 
3.  To promote the general public health, safety and welfare. 
B.  Applicability. The SDD Zone applies to all areas with potential avalanche hazard due to being located immediately above, adjacent or otherwise within 150 feet of the 30 degree point of an avalanche starting zone, known herein as "areas adjacent to avalanche starting zones" as shown on the Town of Mammoth Lakes Zoning Map. 
C.  Use Permit Required. No development (including building permits, subdivision of land, but not the construction of roads, driveways, and utilities) shall be permitted, without first obtaining a use permit. 
1.  In addition to the requirements of Chapter 17.68 (Use Permits), the use permit application shall contain certification by a recognized expert in the field of avalanche occurrence, force and behavior that there will be no greater snow deposition in the related avalanche starting zones and no overall increase in the avalanche hazard in the balance. 
2.  Town staff has the right to hire an expert to provide a second opinion, at the expense of the applicant, to review any of the calculations, studies, reports or certifications required under this section. 
D.  Warning and disclaimer of safety and liability. Avalanches occur naturally, suddenly and unpredictably based on many factors including slope, exposure, snow pack composition, snowfall rate, wind and temperature. The SDD Zone is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon and limited by the engineering and scientific methods of study. The Town does not represent, guarantee or warrant the ultimate safety of any construction, use or occupancy of structures situated in any avalanche area, whether designated or undesignated by this ordinance. Avalanches may occur with forces greater than those set forth in avalanche studies. This article does not represent or imply that areas outside the SDD Zone are free from avalanches or avalanche danger. The granting of any permit or approval for any structure or use, or the declaration or failure to declare the existence of an avalanche hazard shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind or nature by the Town, or any official or employee, of the practicality or safety of any construction, use or occupancy thereof, and shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public body, or its officials or employees for any injury, loss or damage that may result thereby. Persons who develop or occupy real property within an SDD Zone or other undesignated avalanche area do so at their own risk. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.32.060 - Airport Zone (A). 
A.  Purpose. In addition to the purposes outlined in Section 17.04.020 , the Airport Zone is intended to implement the Airport Layout Plan, and the goals and policies in the General Plan related to airport facilities. 
B.  Permitted and conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted where the symbol "P" appears and shall be permitted subject to a use permit where the symbol "U" appears opposite the use. All uses are subject to the Airport Layout Plan and Federal Aviation Administration approval. 
TABLE 17.32.060: ALLOWED USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR AIRPORT ZONING DISTRICT 
Land Use 	Permit 
Requirements 
Airports, terminals, hangars and other airport facilities and uses subject to all applicable regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and the Mammoth Yosemite Airport 	P 
Aircraft subject to rules and regulations of the Mammoth Yosemite Airport 	P 
Fixed base operator (FBO) providing support services under contract with the Town of Mammoth Lakes, including flight training 	P 
Accessory uses within the terminal buildings 	P 
Other uses determined by the Town Council to be necessary for the efficient operation and welfare of the Mammoth Yosemite Airport 	P 
Ancillary visitor facilities as shown on the Airport Layout Plan and as approved by the Federal Aviation Administration, including: 	U 
• Lodging for transient uses 	
• Retail and food operations not within the terminal building, including convenience markets 	
• Bars and restaurants 	
• Vehicle services not part of the FBO such as gas stations, rental operations and vehicle storage 	
• Recreational vehicle storage 	
• Meeting facilities 	
• Accessory storage 	
 
C.  Development standards. Development standards shall conform to those set forth in the Airport Layout Plan or as otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
1.  Design. All facilities shall incorporate architectural, landscaping, signage and site design standards which support the goals and policies of the General Plan. The design shall enhance the airport facility to ensure that a first class entry statement for the Mammoth Lakes resort community is maintained. All facilities shall be subject to Design Review under Chapter 17.88 (Design Review). 
2.  Operations. All facilities and operations shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner. 
3.  Yards, separation. All development shall have yards and separation between buildings and structures to provide adequate space for landscaping, vehicular/pedestrian circulation and emergency access as determined through the Design Review process. Hangars shall not require separation between structures. 
4.  Parking. Off-street parking, loading and delivery access shall be provided in conformance with parking requirements for similar uses. If similar uses are not listed in other sections of this Code, adequate parking and access shall be determined through the Design Review process. The Town may require parking and circulation studies and other documentation to determine adequate parking and access. 
5.  Building height. Required aviation safety structures (e.g., light standards, antennae) maximum 45 feet, all others 35 feet. 
6.  Floor area. Floor area calculations do not include uncovered decks, uncovered parking spaces, or garages. 
7.  Development standards. Except as provided in this section, development standards shall be as specified in the Use Permit but shall not be less than those specified for similar uses in other zones. 
8.  Lighting. All lighting shall meet the requirements of Section 17.36.030 (Exterior Lighting). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.32.070 - Mobile Home Park Zone (MHP). 
A.  Purpose. The MHP, Mobile Home Park Zone, is intended for the exclusive development of mobile home parks. All mobile home parks hereafter established shall be developed in accordance with the provisions and standards of this section. Mobile homes parks also are intended to offer an alternative mode of housing to the residents of the community. 
B.  Permits required. A zoning map amendment is required to rezone property to MHP. In addition, Design Review is also required. 
C.  Park development standards. The following requirements shall apply to the site of a mobile home park. Additional regulations may be specified by the Commission as conditions of the Design Review approval: 
1.  Minimum park area: 10 acres; 
2.  Minimum park street frontage: 200 feet; 
3.  Minimum site area per unit (density): 5,000 square feet; 
4.  Maximum density: 12 units per acre; 
5.  Minimum yards or setbacks: 20 feet adjoining a street, 10 feet adjoining any other lot line; 
6.  Maximum building height: 35 feet; and 
7.  Recreation area: minimum of 50 square feet of recreation area for each mobile home space. 
D.  Landscaping and screening. All yards and setback areas required for mobile home parks shall be landscaped in accordance with a site plan approved as a part of the zoning amendment and design review. The landscaping shall be permanently maintained and shall consist predominantly of native or climate adaptive trees and vegetation. Screening shall be provided around the entire park in accordance with the requirements established under design review. 
E.  Interior site development standards. The following requirements shall apply to development of mobile home spaces and to facilities within a mobile home park. Additional requirements may be specified as conditions of design review or as conditions of approval for the establishment of an MHP zone: 
1.  Mobile home space. Each space shall contain a minimum of 4,000 square feet for exclusive use by the occupants of the space. Each space shall have at least 40 feet of width adjoining an access drive and shall have dimensions capable of accommodating a rectangle with minimum dimensions of 45 feet by 65 feet. 
2.  Mobile home placement. Each mobile home shall be located not less than 10 feet from the boundary of a mobile home space, except that carports, patio covers, storage buildings, and similar structures accessory to mobile home may be located not less than three feet from the boundary of a mobile home space. 
3.  Access drives. All mobile home access drives within a mobile home park shall be privately owned, and shall have at least 28 feet of pavement width, exclusive of adjoining parking areas, and shall be constructed to Town standards. 
4.  Landscaping. At least one tree of a native species shall be planted on each mobile home space. 
5.  Minimum size mobile home. The minimum size for a mobile home established within a mobile home park shall be 12 feet by 50 feet. 
6.  Accessory buildings and uses. Accessory buildings and uses serving the entire mobile home park, including recreation facilities, laundry areas, mobile home offices, and maintenance or storage buildings, shall be located at least 50 feet from the boundary of the mobile home park site. All exterior maintenance or storage areas shall be screened by a six-foot masonry wall, fence, landscaping or a combination thereof. 
7.  Parking. One on-site parking space shall be provided for each mobile home space. 
8.  Guest parking. Guest parking or recreational vehicle storage areas shall be provided as required by the Commission. 
9.  Skirting. Skirting shall be required and maintained for each mobile home, which skirting shall be complementary to the design and coloration of the mobile home. 
10.  Mounting and tie-down. The mounting and tie-down of a mobile home shall be in conformance with all regulations of the State Department of Housing and Community Development. 
11.  Cabanas. A cabana may be established in conjunction with a mobile home provided the cabana shall be complementary to the design and coloration of the mobile home. 
F.  Application requirements. An application for the establishment of a mobile home park must be accompanied by a general development plan showing the following: 
1.  The location, design and configuration of each mobile home space; 
2.  The location and design of all accessory or community buildings, facilities and uses; 
3.  The location and design of all access drives, parking areas and storage yards; 
4.  The location and design of all walls, fences, on-site lighting facilities and a landscape palette; 
5.  The location and design of refuse collection facilities; and 
6.  The location and design of all utilities and storm drain facilities. 
G.  Pre-existing mobile home parks. A pre-existing mobile home park shall not be deemed nonconforming by reason of failure to meet the minimum requirements prescribed by this chapter, provided that the regulations of this chapter shall apply to the remodeling, enlargement or expansion of an existing mobile home park, and further provided that a pre-existing mobile home park on a site less than 10 acres shall not be further reduced in area. 
H.  Mobile home park subdivisions. The subdivision of land for the establishment of a mobile home subdivision shall comply with all of the requirements of this chapter and all provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act and the Town's subdivision ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.32.080 - Open Space Zone (OS). 
A.  Purpose. In addition to the purposes prescribed in Section 17.04.020, the Open Space Zone District is intended primarily to be applied to those areas of the town where it is desirable and necessary to provide permanent open space in conformance with the open space designation of the General Plan and to provide for the location and preservation of scenic areas and recreation areas. This zone classification is intended to be applied primarily to lands held under public ownership. 
B.  General permit requirements. Table 17.32.080 identifies the uses of land allowed by this Zoning Code in the Open Space Zone District, and the permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 17.08.020 (Requirements for Development and New Land Uses). 
TABLE 17.32.080: ALLOWED USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR OPEN SPACE ZONING DISTRICTS 
P: Permitted Use; U: Use Permit Required; A: Administrative Permit Required 
Land Use 	Permit Requirements 	See Specific Use Regulations 
Recreation, Education, & Public Assembly Use Classifications 
Parks and Playgrounds, Public 	P 	
Public Recreational and Cultural Facility 	U 	
Ski Facilities 	U 	
Transportation, Communications, Infrastructure Use Classifications 
Utilities, Major 	U 	
Agriculture and Natural Resource Use Classifications 
Animal Raising and Crop Cultivation 	U 	
Environmental Research facilities 	U 	
Flood Control Facilities 	U 	
Forestry Products 	U 	
Geothermal Exploration/Production 	U 	
Riding Academies and Commercial Stables 	U 	
Other Applicable Types 
Accessory Use 	P 	See 17.52.030 (Accessory Uses) 
Temporary Uses and Events 	See Chapter 17.56 (Temporary Uses and Events) 
Mobile Businesses 	A 	See 17.52.180, Mobile Businesses 
Telecommunication Facilities 	See 17.52.280 (Telecommunication Facilities) 
Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) 	See 17.52.300 (Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)) 
 
C.  Development and performance standards. In the Open Space Zone, standards of development and performance including parking requirements for those uses requiring a Use Permit shall be set forth in the conditions of approval. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.32.090 - Planned Residential Development Zone (PRD). 
A.  Purpose. In addition to the purposes outlined in Section 17.04.020, the Planned Residential Development Zone is intended to: 
1.  Facilitate development of areas designated for residential use on the General Plan and currently zoned for residential use by permitting greater flexibility and, consequently, more creative and imaginative designs for the development of such residential areas than generally is possible under conventional zoning or subdivision regulations. 
2.  Promote more economical and efficient use of the land while providing a harmonious variety of housing choices, a higher level of urban amenities, and preservation of natural and scenic qualities of open spaces. 
B.  Uses permitted. 
1.  Single-family and multi-family residential development; 
2.  Private residential recreational facilities; 
3.  Utilities; 
4.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to permitted uses; 
5.  Temporary uses as prescribed in Chapter 17.56; and 
6.  Model homes and subdivision sales offices subject to the granting of a Use Permit. 
C.  Development standards. The following development standards shall apply to all planned residential developments. 
1.  The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in a planned residential development shall be determined by applying the slope and density restrictions and bonuses of the underlying Residential Zoning District. 
2.  There shall be no minimum area requirement for individual lots or individual dwelling sites in a planned residential development. 
3.  The planned residential development shall be designed and developed in a manner compatible with and complementary to existing and potential residential development in the immediate vicinity of the project site. Site planning on the perimeter shall provide for the protection of the property from adverse surrounding influences, as well as protection of the surrounding areas from potentially adverse influences within the development. 
4.  The following specific site development requirements shall apply to a planned residential development in any residential zone; these requirements are minimums unless otherwise noted: 
a.  PRD site area: two and one half acres; 
b.  Site frontage on public street: 200 feet; 
c.  Front yard: 20 feet; 
d.  Side yard: 10 feet; 
e.  Side yard, street side: 20 feet; 
f.  Rear yard: 10 feet; 
g.  Building height, maximum: same as underlying zone; and 
h.  Site coverage, maximum: same as underlying zone. 
5.  Required open space and recreation areas shall comprise at least 40 percent of the total land area of the planned development. Land occupied by recreational buildings and structures may be counted as required open space. 
6.  Open space may be improved or may be left in its natural state particularly if natural features worthy of preservation exist on the site. Open space left in its natural state shall be kept free of litter and shall at no time constitute a health, safety, fire or flood hazard. Areas devoted to natural or improved flood control channels and those areas encumbered by flowage, floodway or drainage easements may be applied toward satisfying the open space requirement. 
7.  If development is to be accomplished in stages, the Use Permit approval shall phase improvements and provision of the open space, the construction of buildings, structures and improvements in such open space, and the construction of dwelling units in order that each development stage achieves a proportionate share of the total open space and environmental quality of the total planned development. 
8.  No building, except as provided in this article, shall be located closer than five feet to any interior vehicular lot or any other surfaced area reserved for public use or for use in common by residents of the planned development. Such setback generally shall be measured from the nearest edge of a surfaced area; provided, however, that where no sidewalk exists in conjunction with a public or private street, such setback shall be measured from the nearest edge of the street right-of-way or private road easement. 
9.  No garage or carport having straight-in access from a public or private street shall be located closer than 20 feet from the nearest edge of the sidewalk of such street, or, where no sidewalk exists, from the nearest edge of the street right-of-way or road easement. 
10.  Spacing between buildings shall be a minimum of 10 feet. Where a roof sheds snow toward another building, the spacing between buildings shall be increased or alternate design requirements shall be imposed by the Commission. 
11.  All public streets within or abutting the proposed planned development shall be dedicated and improved to Town specifications for the particular classification of street. When the developer desires to retain any streets within the development as private streets, such streets shall be permanently reserved and maintained for their intended purposes by means acceptable to the Commission upon recommendation of the Public Works Director. Other forms of access, such as pedestrian ways, courts, plazas, driveways or open parking lots shall not be offered for dedication. 
12.  Planned residential development shall relate harmoniously to the topography of the site, shall make suitable provision for the preservation of watercourses, drainage areas, wooded areas, rough terrain, and similar natural features and areas, and, shall be otherwise so designed as to use and retain such natural features and amenities to the best advantage. 
13.  All utilities within a planned residential development shall be placed underground. Appurtenances and associated equipment such as propane tanks, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed above ground. 
14.  The type, number and location of fire hydrants and other fire protective devices shall be subject to the specifications of the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District. 
D.  Performance and environmental standards. In the Planned Residential Development Zone, performance and environmental standards for individual projects shall be as specified in the development plan but shall not be less than those specified for similar uses in the residential zones. 
E.  Pre-application procedures. Prior to submitting an application for a planned residential development, the applicant or prospective developer shall hold preliminary consultations with the Director to obtain information and guidance before entering into binding commitments incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys and other data. 
F.  Permits Required. A planned residential development requires filing of a zoning map amendment, zoning text amendment, and use permit in order to establish the zone and development standards. 
G.  Application - Development plans and maps. An application for a planned residential development, or modification of an existing planned residential development, shall be prepared, filed, and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.60 (Applications Processing, and Fees) and shall include all information specified by the Department. 
H.  Adoption of development plans and maps. The development plans and maps submitted with the application for a planned residential development shall be approved and adopted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.112 (General Plan, Zoning Map, and Zoning Code Amendments). 
I.  Amendments to development plans and maps. All development within the planned residential development zone shall comply with the development plans and maps as approved and adopted by the Council. Any amendments to the development plans and maps shall be accomplished in the same manner as an amendment to the zoning regulations as prescribed in Chapter 17.112 (General Plan, Zoning Map, and Zoning Code Amendments). 
J.  Findings. As a condition necessary for the granting of a planned residential development zone request, the following findings shall be made: 
1.  That the development at the location proposed is consistent with and conforms to the goals and policies of the General Plan or any applicable specific plan for the area; 
2.  That the development and proposed location is consistent with the objectives and standards of the Planned Residential Development Zone and the subdivision ordinance; 
3.  That the development at the location proposed and the development standards to be followed or maintained will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity; 
4.  That the development will promote or preserve environmental qualities and conserve energy usage and energy resources including the protection of adequate sunlight for use of solar energy systems; and 
5.  That the development will promote design standards established by the Commission and the Council. 
K.  Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be located and established as specified on the development plans and maps as approved and adopted by the Council; however, accessory structures shall meet all of the setback requirements for site development as specified in Section 17.32.090C. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.32.100 - Public and Quasi-Public Zone (P-QP). 
A.  Purposes. In addition to the purposes prescribed in Section 17.04.020, the Public and Quasi-Public Zone is intended to permit adequate identification of areas reserved and developed for public uses other than street rights-of-way, to provide for educational and cultural activities and facilities, to provide for expansion of their operations or change in use, and, to identify and preserve areas of historic and community significance for the enjoyment of future generations. 
B.  General Permit Requirements. Table 17.32.100 identifies the uses of land allowed by this Zoning Code in the Public and Quasi-Public Zone District, and the permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 17.08.020 (Requirements for Development and New Land Uses). 
TABLE 17.32.100: ALLOWED USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC & QUASI-PUBLIC ZONING DISTRICTS 
P: Permitted Use; U: Use Permit Required; A: Administrative Permit Required; - : Use Not Allowed 
Land Use 	Permit Requirements 	See Specific Use Regulations 
Residential Use Classifications (Within the General Plan Institutional Public Land Use Designation) 
Assisted Living Facility 	P 	See 17.52.260 (Residential Care and Assisted Living Facilities) 
Convalescent Home 	P 	
Emergency Housing/Shelter 	P 	
Institutional Public Employee Housing 	U 	
Residential Care Facility 	See subclassifications below 
 General 	P 	See 17.52.260 (Residential Care and Assisted Living Facilities) 
Student and Faculty Housing 	U 	
Supportive Housing 	See 17.52.290 (Transitional and Supportive Housing) 
Transitional Housing 	See 17.52.290 (Transitional and Supportive Housing) 
Recreation, Education, & Public Assembly Use Classifications 
Community Assembly 	A 	
Parks and Playgrounds, Public 	P 	
Schools, Public or Private 	P 	
Ski Facilities 	U 	
Theater, Cinema or Performing Arts 	P 	
Service Use Classifications 
Animal Care and Boarding 	See subclassifications below 
 Kennel 	U 	See 17.52.070 (Animal Care and Boarding) 
Cemeteries and Interment Services 	U 	
Day Care Centers 	P 	See 17.52.100 (Child Day Care Facilities) 
Government Offices 	P 	
Medical Services 	See subclassifications below 
 Hospital 	A 	
 Clinics and Laboratories 	P 	
 Physical Wellness and 
 Rehabilitation Facili- 
 ties 	P 	
Public Safety Facili 
ties 	P 	
Transportation, Communications, Infrastructure Use Classifications 
Airports and Heliports 	U 	
Parking, Public or Private 	P 	
Transportation Passenger Facilities 	U 	
Utilities, Major 	U 	
Agriculture and Natural Resource Use Classifications 
Flood Control Facilities 	U 	
Geothermal Exploration/Production 	U 	
Other Applicable Types 
Accessory use 	P 	See 17.52.030 ( Accessory Uses) 
Temporary Uses and Events 	See Chapter 17.56 (Temporary Uses and Events) 
Telecommunication Facilities 	See 17.52.280 (Telecommunication Facilities) 
Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) 	See 17.52.300 (Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)) 
 
C.  Property Development Standards. The following development standards shall apply to all development in the Public and Quasi-Public Zone District. 
1.  Site Standards. 
a.  Site area: 20,000 square feet; 
b.  Site width: 100 feet; 
c.  Site depth: 100 feet; 
d.  Front yard: 20 feet; 
e.  Side yard: 20 feet; and 
f.  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
2.  Accessory Unit Standards. The maximum density for accessory housing is four units per gross acre and subject to RMF-1 development standards. 
3.  Physical Wellness and Rehabilitation Facilities Floor Area Ratio Standards. The maximum floor area ratio for physical wellness and rehabilitation facilities is 0.5. 
4.  Screening and Landscaping. Standards for screening of facilities and uses and landscaping of the site shall be as specified in the use permit or design review approval. 
5.  Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for each use as prescribed for similar uses in this Code. 
D.  Performance and Environmental Standards. Performance standards shall be as specified in the Use Permit but shall not be less than those specified for similar uses in other zones. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 17-10, § 4(Exh. A), 11-1-2017; Ord. No. 19-02, § 4(Exh. A, a., b.), 3-6-2019)  
17.32.110 - Resort Zone (R). 
A.  Purposes. In addition to the purposes outlined in Section 17.04.020, the Resort Zone is intended to: 
1.  Provide for the classification and development of parcels of land as coordinated, comprehensive projects so as to take advantage of the superior environment which can result from large scale community planning; 
2.  Allow diversification of land uses as they relate to each other in a physical and environmental arrangement, while ensuring substantial compliance with the provisions; and 
3.  Provide for a zone classification encompassing various types of land uses such as: single-family residential developments, multiple housing projects, professional and administrative office uses, hotels including attendant support commercial activities, recreational facilities, public or quasi-public uses, or combinations of such uses through the adoption of a master plan and text materials which set forth land use relationships and development standards. 
B.  Uses Permitted. 
1.  Those uses designated on the Master Plan for the particular property as approved by the Council; 
2.  The continuation of all land uses which existed in the zone at the time of adoption of the Master Plan. Existing land uses shall either be incorporated as part of the Master Plan or shall terminate in accordance with a specific abatement schedule submitted and approved as part of the master plan; 
3.  Transient occupancy or rental not otherwise explicitly prohibited by the approved Master Plan for the particular property; 
4.  Utilities; 
5.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to permitted uses; 
6.  Temporary uses as described in Chapter 17.56; and 
7.  Fractional-use projects subject to Section 17.52.120 (Fractional/Timeshare Developments). 
C.  General Requirements. The following requirements shall apply to all Resort Zone properties: 
1.  An application for a zone change to permit the establishment of a Resort Zone shall include and be accompanied by a Master Plan for the entire property; 
2.  An application for development of property within a Resort Zone shall be subject to the approval of a Master Plan by the Commission and Council; 
3.  The area contained within a proposed Resort Zone shall be not less than 20 acres; 
4.  A Use Permit may be required for any land use designation on the Master Plan; 
5.  If ambiguity exists as to the specific dimensions or extent of any designated area on the master plan, the specific boundaries shall be set by the filing of a record of survey of the parcel in question in conjunction with the filing of a use permit, tentative subdivision, or parcel map, or construction permits; 
6.  The maximum permissible residential density is eight units per acre; 
7.  The maximum permissible hotel/motel density is 16 hotel rooms per acre. For the purposes of calculating residential density, a hotel room, one bedroom unit or studio unit up to a maximum of 850 square feet of living area, shall be considered to equal one-half of a dwelling. Living area is all space within the unit other than the garage and does not include common area hallways or similar spaces in a multiple-family structure; 
8.  The maximum site coverage in a Master Plan area shall be 50 percent; and 
9.  Existing properties located within a Resort Zone shall not be subdivided unless the subdivision map is in conformance with an approved Master Plan. 
D.  Performance and environmental standards. In the Resort Zone, performance and environmental standards shall be as specified in the Master Plan or accompanying text consistent with Chapter 17.120 (Master Plans). Also, the Master Plan shall indicate the design theme for the entire project; generally the theme shall conform to Chapter 17.88 (Design Review). 
E.  Pre-application procedures. Prior to submitting an application for a resort development, the applicant should hold preliminary consultations with the Director to obtain information and guidance before entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial expense in the preparations of plans, surveys and other data. Such preliminary consultations should be relative to a preliminary master plan and other material which expresses the relationship between the various land uses and the development concepts to be employed. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), 1-21-2015)  
Article III. - Site Planning and General Development Standards  
Chapter 17.36 - Standards for All Development and Land Use 
 
17.36.010 - Purpose and Applicability. 
A.  Purpose. The provisions of this chapter expand the standards of Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) by addressing the details of site planning and project design that apply, except where specifically stated, to development in all zoning districts and to ensure that development, and new or modified land uses are of appropriate character and quality, considerate of the community's natural resources, compatible with existing and future land uses, and consistent with the General Plan. 
B.  Applicability - General standards. The provisions of this chapter apply to all proposed development and new land uses regardless of the applicable zoning district. 
1.  These standards shall be considered in combination with the standards for each zoning district in Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). If there is a conflict, the standards specific to the zoning district shall override these general standards. 
2.  All new or modified structures and uses shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter before construction and operation, unless specifically exempted by an applicable provision of this Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.36.020 - Creation or Modification of Lots. 
In reviewing the creation or modification of lots, the Town shall consider the suitability of the land for the proposed lot density and the suitability of individual lot sites for the proposed use. The specific items to be considered in determining suitability shall include, but not be limited to: access and parking; building sites on the lot; topography; grading; parking; snow storage; utilities; revegetation of cuts; fills and trenches that may be required; drainage and erosion control, both on-site and off-site; and any items addressed in any relevant environmental document. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.36.030 - Exterior Lighting. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide rules and regulations for outdoor lighting within the Town of Mammoth Lakes in order to accomplish the following: 
1.  To promote a safe, glare-free, and pleasant nighttime environment for residents and visitors; 
2.  To protect and improve safe travel for all modes of transportation; 
3.  To prevent nuisances caused by unnecessary light intensity, glare, and light trespass; 
4.  To protect the ability to view the night sky by restricting unnecessary upward projection of light; 
5.  To phase out existing non-conforming fixtures that violate this section, including those owned by the town and other public agencies; and 
6.  To promote lighting practices and systems that conserve energy. 
B.  Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the Town of Mammoth Lakes Outdoor Lighting Ordinance. 
C.  Figures. The figures incorporated in this section or shown on informational sheets produced by the Town of Mammoth Lakes are provided as guidelines for the public and staff to use in meeting the intent of this section. The figures serve only as examples. The Town of Mammoth Lakes does not endorse or discriminate against any manufacturer or company that may be shown, portrayed, or mentioned as examples. 
D.  Applicability. 
1.  New Outdoor Lighting. All outdoor lighting fixtures installed after the effective date of this section shall conform to the requirements established by this section. 
2.  Existing Outdoor Lighting. All existing outdoor lighting fixtures installed prior to the effective date of this section shall be addressed as follows: 
a.  To immediately address nuisances caused by improperly installed, unshielded, or misdirected fixtures, all existing outdoor lighting fixtures shall be adjusted or modified to the extent practical to reduce or eliminate glare, light trespass, and light pollution. 
b.  All existing outdoor lighting fixtures located on a property that is part of an application for design review approval; a conditional use permit; subdivision approval; or, a building permit for a new structure or addition(s) of twenty-five percent or more in terms of gross floor area, seating capacity, or parking spaces (either with a single addition or cumulative additions), shall meet the requirements of this section for the entire property. Such applications are required to include an outdoor lighting plan pursuant to Section 17.36.030G. Conformity shall occur prior to final inspection, final map recordation, or business license issuance, when applicable. 
c.  All existing outdoor lighting fixtures on property used for commercial and industrial purposes not in conformance with this section shall be brought into conformance as of the effective date of this section. 
d.  All existing outdoor lighting fixtures on property used for residential, institutional, public, and semi-public uses not in conformance with this section shall be brought into conformance as of the effective date of this section. 
E.  Exemptions. 
1.  The following are exempt from the provisions of this section: 
a.  Seasonal displays using multiple low wattage bulbs (approximately fifteen lumens or less), provided that they do not constitute a fire hazard, create a nuisance, and are maintained in a safe and attractive condition. 
b.  Vehicular lights and all temporary emergency lighting needed by the police department and fire protection district, or other emergency services. 
c.  All temporary lighting used for the construction or repair of roadways, utilities, and other public infrastructure. 
d.  All lighting required by state or federal regulatory agencies. 
2.  The Director may authorize additional property specific exemptions when proposed outdoor lighting does not conflict with the purposes of this section. An application for such an exemption must be made in writing and include an outdoor lighting plan pursuant to Section 17.36.030G. Temporary lighting for special events shall be reviewed in this manner. 
F.  General Requirements. The following general standards apply to all non-exempt outdoor lighting fixtures: 
1.  Nuisance Prevention. All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be designed, located, installed, aimed downward or toward structures, retrofitted if necessary, and maintained in order to prevent glare, light trespass, and light pollution. 
  
2.  Maintenance. Fixtures and lighting systems shall be in good working order and maintained in a manner that serves the original design intent of the system. 
3.  Lighting Levels. Outdoor lighting installations shall be designed to avoid harsh contrasts in lighting levels between the project site and the adjacent properties. The Commission may, by resolution, adopt standards for maximum or minimum lighting levels for various zoning districts and for public streets, sidewalks, or trails, as developed by the Community and Economic Development and Public Works departments. 
4.  Lamp Types. Metal halide or high pressure sodium lamps are preferred for all new commercial and industrial area lighting (parking lot and yard lights) and street lighting installed after the effective date of this section due to good color rendering and good energy efficiency. Low pressure sodium lamps may be used for area lighting, but are not preferred due to poor color rendering. Low wattage incandescent or compact fluorescent lamps are preferred for residential lighting. 
5.  Fixture Types. All new outdoor lighting shall use full cut-off luminaries with the light source downcast and fully shielded with no light emitted above the horizontal plane, with the following exceptions: 
  
a.  Fixtures that have a maximum output of four hundred lumens or less, regardless of the number of bulbs, may be left unshielded provided that it has an opaque top to prevent the light from shining directly up. However, partial (e.g., obscured glass) or full shielding is preferred to control light output in all situations. 
b.  Fixtures that have a maximum output of one thousand lumens or less may be partially shielded using a semi-translucent barrier, provided that the lamp is not visible from off-site, no direct glare is produced, and the fixture has an opaque top to keep light from shining directly up. For example, a low-output style wall pack. 
c.  Floodlights that do not meet the definition of "full cut-off" may be used if permanently directed downward, if no light is projected above the horizontal plane, and if fitted with external shielding to prevent glare and off-site light trespass. Unshielded floodlights and "barnyard"-type fixtures are prohibited. 
6.  Accent Lighting. Architectural features may be illuminated by uplighting, provided that the light is effectively contained by the structure, the lamps are low intensity to produce a subtle lighting effect, and no glare or light trespass is produced. For national flags, statues, public art, or other objects of interest that cannot be illuminated with down-lighting, upward lighting may only be used in the form of one narrow-cone spotlight that confines the illumination to the object of interest. 
7.  The provisions of this section are not intended to prevent the use of any design, material, or method of installation or operation not specifically prescribed herein, provided that the Director has approved any such alternative. A proposed alternative may be approved if it provides at least approximate equivalence to the applicable specific requirements of this section, or if it is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this section. 
8.  The Town of Mammoth Lakes reserves the right to further restrict outdoor lighting including, but not limited to, pole height and level of illumination, when it is deemed in the public interest consistent with the purpose of this section. 
G.  Outdoor lighting plans. 
1.  An outdoor lighting plan shall be submitted in conjunction with an application for design review approval; a use permit; subdivision approval; or, a building permit for a new structure or addition(s) of 25 percent or more in terms of gross floor area, seating capacity, or parking spaces (either with a single addition or cumulative additions). An outdoor lighting plan is required for all new outdoor lighting installations on commercial (includes multi-family residential project of four or more units), industrial, public and institutional properties. The Director may request outdoor lighting plans from applicants for other types of projects due to project location, size, or proposed use, as necessary. An outdoor lighting plan shall include at least the following: 
a.  Manufacturer specification sheets, cut-sheets, or other manufacturer provided information for all proposed outdoor lighting fixtures to show fixture diagrams and light output levels; 
b.  The proposed location, mounting height, and aiming point of all outdoor lighting fixtures (a site plan is preferred); and, 
c.  If building elevations are proposed for illumination, drawings for all relevant building elevations showing the fixtures, the portions of the elevations to be illuminated, the luminance level of the elevations, and the aiming point for any remote light fixture. 
2.  If needed to review the proposed outdoor lighting fixture installation, the Director may require additional information following the initial outdoor lighting plan submittal, including but not limited to a written narrative to demonstrate the objectives of the lighting, photometric data, Color Rendering Index (CRI) of all lamps and other descriptive information on the fixtures, computer generated photometric grid showing foot-candle readings every ten feet within the property or site and ten feet beyond the property lines (An iso-foot-candle contour line style plan may be acceptable), and/or landscaping information to describe potential screening. 
3.  The Director may approve, deny, or require modifications to any outdoor lighting plan in order to meet the purpose of this section. 
H.  Prohibitions. 
1.  The installation of any new fixture not in conformance with this section is prohibited after the effective date of this section. 
2.  Suppliers of outdoor lighting fixtures within the Town of Mammoth Lakes are required to have an inventory that includes outdoor lighting fixtures that conform to the requirements of this section. 
3.  No outdoor lighting fixtures shall be installed, aimed, or directed to produce light that spills over into neighboring properties or the public right-of-way. Light trespass is prohibited. 
4.  No outdoor lighting fixture may be installed or maintained in such a manner to cause glare visible from off-site. 
5.  No outdoor lighting fixture may be operated in such a manner as to constitute a hazard or danger to persons, or to safe vehicular travel. 
6.  Blinking, flashing, moving, revolving, scintillating, flickering, changing intensity, and changing color lights and internally illuminated signs are prohibited, except as allowed by Chapter 17.48 (Signs). 
7.  The installation of new mercury vapor lamps is prohibited. 
8.  Search lights, laser source lights, or any similar high-intensity light is prohibited except by police and fire personnel or at their direction, or for approved temporary lighting under a special event permit issued by the Director. 
I.  Signs. All outdoor lighting for signs shall conform to Chapter 17.48 (Signs). Where 17.36.030 conflicts with the Chapter 17.48 (Signs), Chapter 17.48 (Signs) will take precedence. 
J.  Outdoor performance, sport, and recreation facilities. 
1.  Where playing fields or other special activity areas are to be illuminated, lighting fixtures shall be mounted, aimed, and shielded so that their beams fall within the primary playing area and immediate surroundings, and so that no significant off-site light trespass is produced. 
2.  Lighting for playing fields and other special activity areas shall be turned off as soon as possible following the end of an event. Where feasible, a low level lighting system shall be used to facilitate patrons leaving the facility, cleanup, nighttime maintenance, and other closing activities. 
K.  Winter lighting for snow removal. Property owners are encouraged to illuminate buildings located within twenty feet of the public right-of-way during public snow removal activities. The purpose is to make buildings fronting public roads visible in order to assist road maintenance crews and minimize the chance of property damage during snow removal activities. It is only necessary to illuminate a portion of the building facade. This section is not intended as a requirement to illuminate the right-of-way, driveways, or any portion of the front or side yard (Section 12.16.080). All such lighting must conform to the requirements of this section for down-direction, shielding, glare and light trespass prevention. 
L.  Energy conservation measures. Incorrect installations, poor choice of fixtures, and over-lighting can result in unnecessarily high energy costs. The following recommendations are intended to encourage the efficient use of energy for lighting purposes. 
1.  All non-essential outdoor commercial and residential lighting should be turned off after business hours and/or when not in use. 
2.  Where practical, outdoor lighting installations should include timers, dimmers, sensors, or photocell controllers that turn the lights off during daylight hours to reduce overall energy consumption and eliminate unnecessary lighting. Sensor activated fixtures should not be triggered by activity off the subject property. 
3.  When selecting new outdoor lighting, the full cost of operation over the life of the fixture(s) should be considered. Substantial annual energy savings will be realized by using quality efficient fixtures. 
4.  Indiscriminate and excessive lighting should be avoided. Light should be directed only to where it is needed with appropriate intensity. 
M.  Violations and penalties. It shall be unlawful to install or operate any outdoor lighting fixture in violation of this section. Any person violating any provisions of this section may be subject to the provisions of Municipal Code Chapter 8.32 (Civil Penalties). In addition, any outdoor lighting fixture erected or maintained contrary to the provisions of this section may be declared to be a public nuisance subject to the procedures set forth in Municipal Code Chapter 8.20 (Nuisances). Such remedies are in addition to and may be sought or imposed concurrently with, any other remedy provided by law, regulation, or ordinance. 
N.  Figures and diagrams. The following figures illustrate examples of acceptable and unacceptable types of outdoor lighting fixtures. Note that even those types of fixtures shown as "acceptable" must be installed and aimed properly to comply with this section. 
  
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), 1-21-2015)  
17.36.040 - Fences and Walls. 
The following standards shall apply to the installation of fences and walls, regardless of whether a permit or Town approval is required by this section, except where an applicable Specific or Master Plan establishes different standards. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a fence or wall required by law or regulation of the Town, State, or an agency thereof. For the purposes of brevity, the term "fence" as used in this section shall mean "fence and wall." 
A.  Fence height limitations. Fences are subject to the height limitations shown in Table 17.36.040A. An increase in height may be granted by the Director for required retaining walls. 
TABLE 17.36.040(A): HEIGHT LIMITS FOR FENCES 
Zoning 
District 	Within Front or Street Side Setback 	Within Side or Rear Setback 	Remainder of Lot 
Industrial 	8 ft., Must be setback 10 ft. from the property line along Commerce Dr. or other access way off Commerce Dr. No fences are permitted within 10 feet of the property line along Commerce Drive. 
All Other Zones 	3 ft. 	6 ft. 	6 ft. 
 
B.  Fence Height Measurement. 
1.  Fence height shall be measured as the vertical distance between the grade at the base of the fence and the top edge of the fence material. 
2.  Where there is a difference in the ground level between two adjoining parcels of less than two feet, the height of a fence constructed along the common property line shall be determined by using the natural grade of the lowest contiguous parcel. 
3.  When there is a difference in the ground level between two adjoining parcels of two feet or more, the Director shall determine the grade from which the fence shall be measured. 
  
C.  Retaining Walls. All retaining walls visible from off-site shall be made of split face block, faced with rock, or similarly treated to be attractive. 
D.  Prohibited materials. The use of barbed wire, chain link, rope, electrified fence, glass, razor wire fence, or similar materials in conjunction with a fence or wall, or by itself within any zoning district, is prohibited except for the following cases: chain link is allowed for tennis courts or similar recreational facilities, pet enclosures of 200 square feet or less, industrial uses, utility companies, or in areas where there is a safety hazard. If chain link is used it shall be painted or coated in a dark green, brown, or black color. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.36.050 - Grading and Clearing. 
A.  No lot may be graded or vegetation cleared unless such action is shown on and consistent with an approved development plan or building permit. Grading shall be limited to that area required for construction of the structure, utilities, driveways and access to one primary entrance of the structure which is provided for resident and guest access. Grading across multiple lots or multiple building sites is not permitted except as may be approved in conjunction with a master planned development when the proposed land use cannot be reasonably accommodated on separate lots. Front, side and rear yards may not be graded or cleared except to provide for: 
1.  The above construction and access requirements; 
2.  Limited additional access to the front (streetside) of the structure; 
3.  Snow or materials storage; 
4.  Landscaping which is exempt from grading and clearing regulations identified in Title 12 of the Municipal Code; or 
5.  As approved under a Design Review approval. 
B.  Generally, existing trees and vegetation shall be preserved. Except as permitted by the Director, no live trees over 12 inches Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) in diameter shall be removed. The Director shall base his approval upon the health of the tree(s), the necessity to remove the tree(s) because of building or driveway construction or snow removal/storage, potential hazard, fuels reduction activities as approved by the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District, or solar access. Creation of views, lawns, or similar amenities shall not be sufficient cause to remove native trees. As mitigation for tree removal, the Director may require replacement plantings. Required replacement shall be limited to plantings in areas suitable for tree replacement with species identified in the Mammoth Lakes Design Guidelines. Substantial replacement will be required, minimum replacement tree size shall be three gallons. The property owner is required to maintain replacement plantings to that approved by the Director. 
C.  All construction and uses, including paving, driving and parking areas, shall comply with the discharge requirements of the Lahontan Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
D.  All provisions of Chapter 12.08 (Land Clearing, Earthwork, and Drainage Facilities) shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.36.060 - Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions. 
The intent of this section is to describe how building height is measured and describe exceptions to height limits. All structures shall comply with the following standards relating to height, except for fences and walls, which are instead subject to the provisions of Section 17.36.040 (Fences and Walls). 
A.  Maximum Height of Structures. The height of structures shall not exceed the standard established by the applicable zoning district in Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). 
B.  Height Measurement. 
1.  Building Height Calculation. Building height is measured from the finished grade at all points on the lot to the top of the structure directly above, i.e., maximum height is defined by a warped plane that is parallel to the finished grade on the lot. 
a.  Maximum height shall be measured from finished grade adjacent to the building exterior to the highest point of coping of a flat roof, the top of a mansard roof, or the highest point of the highest pitched roof. 
b.  "Finished Grade" is defined as the final ground surface elevation after the completion of grading or other site preparation related to a proposed development that conforms to an approved grading permit and/or building permit. In cases where substantial fill is proposed, "finished grade" shall be established by the Director, consistent with parcels in the immediate vicinity, and shall not be, nor have been artificially raised to gain additional building height. 
c.  Where a building sits atop a parking podium (underground parking) the building height shall be measured from the top of the parking podium provided that the building height does not increase by more than seven feet six inches. 
d.  Roofs of primary buildings with a pitch greater than 6:12 shall be allowed an additional five feet above the maximum building height in the zone; provided that snow shall not shed into any pedestrian areas. Accessory buildings and structures regardless of roof pitch shall not be allowed any additional building height. 
  
2.  Alternative Building Height Calculation on Lots Having an Average Slope of 10 percent or greater. These provisions allow a different way of calculating height on lots with an average slope calculated over the entire lot of 10 percent or more due to the constraints associated with these sites. 
a.  The building height is calculated by measuring the height at the four outermost corners of the structure from finished grade to a horizontal plane which intersects the topmost point of the building and dividing that total by four (A+B+C+D = X/4 = height). 
b.  No portion of any building shall exceed 10 feet above the maximum permitted height allowed in Article II as measured from finished grade at any point beneath the structure to the roof of the building above that point. 
c.  An uncovered deck that projects no more than 10 feet from the building shall not be considered one of the four corners from which the average height calculation is derived. 
  
3.  Exceptions to Height Limits. The overall building height shall not exceed the maximum permitted height, described in Article II, except as follows or as otherwise permitted by Chapter 17.76 (Adjustments): 
a.  The following elements attached to a building shall be excluded from the height measurement with the limitation that the total area covered by such elements shall not exceed 20 percent of the roof area of the building and the height shall not exceed 14 feet above the maximum permitted height. Any roof mounted structure shall be set back from the edge of the structure a minimum of one foot for every foot in height above the roof on which they are situated. Refer to Section 17.36.090 for screening requirements. 
i.  Antennas (Antennas shall comply with Section 17.52.280, Telecommunications Facilities); 
ii.  Chimneys; 
iii.  Stair and elevator towers; 
iv.  Mechanical equipment; 
v.  Steeples, towers and other unoccupied architectural features; and, 
vi.  Other similar features as approved by the Director. 
b.  Solar roof paneling shall be excluded from the height measurement with the limitation that the height shall not exceed 14 feet above the maximum permitted height. There shall be no limitation on the roof area covered by solar roof paneling. 
c.  Public safety communication facilities, such as radio towers and antennas used for emergency service dispatch, shall be excluded from the height measurement, but shall be no taller than necessary to be effective as determined by the review authority. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.36.070 - Performance Standards. 
A.  Heat/Cold, Glare. No use, except a temporary construction operation, shall be permitted which creates changes in temperature or direct glare (for example welding), detectable by the human senses without the aid of instruments, beyond the boundaries of the site. 
B.  Electrical Disturbances. No use shall be permitted which creates electrical disturbances that affect the operation of any equipment beyond the boundaries of the site. 
C.  Fuel and Explosive Hazards. All storage of, and activities involving, flammable or explosive materials shall be subject to the approval and conditions specified by the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District and other state or local agencies as well as the California Building Standards Code. 
D.  Odor. No use shall be permitted which creates noxious or annoying odor in such quantities as to be readily detectable beyond the boundaries of the parcel or unit where the use is located. 
E.  Radioactivity. The use of radioactive materials shall be limited to medical uses and measuring, gauging, or calibration devices. 
F.  Vibration. No use, except temporary construction operations, shall be permitted which generates inherent and recurrent ground vibration perceptible without instruments beyond the boundary of the lot on which the use is located. 
G.  Solid Waste Disposal. All solid waste generated by a use which is not disposed of on-site in compliance with all applicable laws shall be transported to an approved landfill site, transfer station, or recycling center for proper disposal at least one time per week, or sooner, if deemed necessary by the Mono County Environmental Health. Litter shall be removed from a site promptly and not be allowed to accumulate. 
H.  Hazardous Materials. The use, storage and disposal of hazardous materials shall be subject to the approval and conditions of the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District and the Mono County Environmental Health. All containers storing hazardous materials shall be labeled and sealed at all times and shall be stored on impervious surfaces approved by the Public Works Director. 
I.  Particulate or Gaseous Emissions. Any use which emits smoke, dust, or other airborne particulates or gases shall be subject to the approval and conditions of the Great Basin Unified Air Pollution Control District. Continuous efforts for dust control during dust-generating activities are required. Dust generation during windy conditions shall be prohibited if abatement measures do not contain dust on-site. 
J.  Noise. Interior and exterior noise shall meet the requirements of Chapter 8.16 of the Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code. 
K.  Property Maintenance. All properties shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion at all times. 
L.  Conformance. Whenever there is a question of conformance with the standards outlined in this subsection, the Director shall require the property owner or operator to engage the services of an independent certified testing firm approved by the Director. The results of all such tests shall be furnished to the Director. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 7), 1-21-2015)  
17.36.080 - Propane Tanks. 
A.  Setbacks. Propane tanks shall not be located in the front or street side yard setback areas unless authorized by the Director and Public Works Director based upon safety concerns or accessibility of the tank location. Propane tank location shall meet the requirements of the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District. 
B.  Screening. Propane tanks shall be painted tan or light green. Propane tanks located within the front or street side setback area are subject to additional screening and protection from snow removal operations as approved by the Director. 
C.  Shared Propane Tanks. When a propane tank is proposed to be shared between properties, a development or plot plan must be approved by the Department showing propane tank locations and gas lines. An agreement shall be recorded against the property to share an off-site tank or gas line among adjacent property owners. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.36.090 - Screening and Buffer. 
This section establishes standards for the screening and separation of adjoining residential and non-residential districts, equipment and outdoor storage areas, and surface parking areas. 
A.  Screening Between Industrial and Other Land Uses. Where a lot with an industrial use abuts a property in any other zone district or use, the following setback and screening requirements shall be provided as part of the development or land use. 
1.  Setbacks. Industrial structures and activities shall maintain a minimum of 15 feet from any residential zoning district or use. 
2.  Screening. A six-foot masonry or solid fence and/or screening landscaping shall be provided and maintained on the interior lot lines of any lot that contains an industrial use and any other district or use, subject to the approval of the Director. 
  
B.  Screening Between Retail and Service Uses and Residential Land Uses. Where a lot with a retail or service use abuts a residential zoning district, the following setback, screening, and landscaping requirements shall be provided as part of the development or land use. 
1.  Setbacks. Retail and service uses shall maintain a minimum 15-foot setback as a buffer area from the residential zoning district. 
2.  Screening. The buffer area between retail and service uses and residential districts shall be landscaped and may include fencing to provide a reasonable buffer between the two uses. No structures, paving, or snow storage are permitted in this area. 
  
C.  Mechanical Equipment, Loading Docks, and Refuse Areas. 
1.  Ground level mechanical equipment, loading docks, refuse and recyclable materials storage areas, and utility services shall be screened from public view from adjoining public streets and rights-of-way as determined by the Director. 
2.  Rooftop mechanical equipment (e.g., air conditioning, heating, vents, flues, exhaust pipes, and ventilation ducts, etc.) shall be combined and/or collected together on slopes of roofs and screened from public view from adjoining public streets and rights-of-way as determined by the Director. 
3.  The method of screening shall be architecturally compatible with other on-site development in terms of colors, materials, and architectural style as determined by the Director. 
4.  All mechanical equipment screening shall be subject to review and approval by the Director and the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.36.100 - Setback Requirements and Exceptions. 
This section provides standards for the use and minimum size of required setbacks. These standards are intended to provide open areas around structures for visibility and traffic safety; access to and around structures; access to natural light, ventilation and direct sunlight; snow shedding; separation of incompatible land uses; and space for privacy, landscaping, and recreation. 
A.  Setback requirements. 
1.  All structures shall comply with the setback requirements of the applicable zoning district established by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), and with any special setbacks established for specific uses by this Code, except as otherwise provided by this section. No portion of a structure, including eaves or roof overhangs, shall extend beyond a property line; or into an access easement or street right-of-way. 
2.  All setbacks shall be open and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for trees and plant materials and as provided in this section. 
3.  For properties fronting on a substandard street, the front and street side setback lines shall be measured from the ultimate right-of-way line, based upon the adopted road standards of the Town. 
B.  Special Active Fault Trace. A minimum setback of 50 feet shall be provided between buildings intended for human occupancy and an active fault trace as identified on special studies zones maps prepared by the State Geologist. 
C.  Permanent Lake or Stream Setbacks. 
1.  Purpose. This section provides standards for development adjacent to permanent streams, creeks and lakes throughout the Town, which are valuable as open space areas, provide habitat for plants and animals, and are of recreational and scenic interest. Therefore, it is important for the Town to provide appropriate buffers between these designated water bodies and adjacent development to protect this important community resource. 
2.  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to any permanent lake or stream, defined as any stream, lake, river, pond or other body of water or waterway which, most years, under natural conditions, will contain water all year. 
3.  Streambed Information Required. At the time of permit application, applicants with parcels adjoining any of the above-specified waterways or water bodies shall submit a site specific streambed information prepared by a hydrologist, civil engineer, or other qualified professional approved by the Town to identify the precise top of bank of the waterway as defined below. The Director may waive the requirement for a streambed analysis if it is determined that the project, because of its size, location, or design will have no impact on the water body, or that sufficient information exists and further analysis is not necessary. The mapping shall be provided at a scale of at least 1:100. The information provided shall include any information determined necessary by the Director to properly analyze the potential impacts of the proposed project on the water body and necessary mitigations. 
4.  Top of Bank Determination. Top of bank shall be determined as the point beyond which the slope of the upper elevation of land, which confines the channel waters flowing in a watercourse in their normal course of high seasonal flow, does not exceed ten percent. 
5.  [Setbacks, easements, or dedications.] A setback, easement or dedication including any land within the channel and a minimum of fifty feet from the top of bank shall be required for all zoning districts. The review authority may require a larger setback, easement, or dedication if found to be necessary to protect sensitive environmental resources. 
6.  Structures. No structure, fence, parking access, parking space, paved area or swimming pool shall be constructed within a creek or creekside setbacks. Public roads, and sidewalks, paths or trails and other public facilities may be constructed within the setback. 
7.  Modifications to Lake and Stream/Creek Corridor Development Standards. The Commission may modify the development standards outlined in subsection 5, in compliance with Chapter 17.72 (Variances) and Chapter 17.76 (Adjustments). In addition to the findings described therein, the following findings shall be made in order to approve a Variance or Adjustment to the lake and stream corridor development standards: 
a.  The entirety of the project is outside of the 100-year flood plain. 
b.  The creek bank in the vicinity of the modification has been demonstrated as historically stable. 
c.  Riparian resources will not be significantly diminished as a result of the modification. 
  
D.  Development Standards. 
1.  Setbacks shall be required for all ministerial projects. Either a setback, easement, or dedication shall be required for all discretionary land use entitlements. Tentative maps shall be conditioned in compliance with Title 16 (Subdivisions). 
2.  Grading and Landscaping. Grading or filling, planting of exotic/non-native or non-riparian plant species, or the removal of native vegetation shall not be permitted within a setback area. Exceptions to this include grading, landscaping, and vegetation management activities determined necessary by an applicable permitting or regulating agency for fire safety, to maintain safe public access on an established road, path or trail, or to maintain the health and ecological function of the water body, and for which necessary approvals from a permitting agency have been obtained. 
3.  Drainage structures. Where constructed drainage devices and improvements are required, they shall be placed in the least visible locations and naturalized through the use of native rock, textured earth-tone concrete, and native landscaping. 
4.  Bridges. Bridges and crossings may be allowed within the required setback if approved by the Town Engineer and approvals have been obtained from all agencies with permitting authorities. Bridges and crossing structures shall be designed to be no wider than necessary to accommodate their intended use. 
5.  Limitations on the use of setbacks. 
a.  Vehicle parking and driveways. Required setback areas shall not be used for parking or driveways except for: 
i.  Driveways crossing street or street-side yard setbacks that provide direct access to a garage from the street abutting the affected setback. 
ii.  Single-family or townhome parking in driveways leading to a garage. 
iii.  Shared driveways on the common property line of the sharing parcels and associated parking, provided that such parking does not impede access to a parcel other than the parcel where the parking is located. 
iv.  Driveways on flag lots or lots with similarly restricted access where the width for access is less than thirty feet. 
v.  Parking of boats, trailers and vehicle accessories may be kept in required side yard or rear yards subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.52 (Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities). 
vi.  In the event practical difficulties and hardships result from the strict enforcement of vehicle parking in setback areas, the Director may grant an adjustment to allow parking within the setback area provided that the findings required by Chapter 17.76 (Adjustments) can be made and the parking area is protected from snow shed, does not impede emergency access, does not interfere with Town snow storage easements, and conforms to the California Building Standards Code requirements. 
b.  Vehicle Parking on Commerce Circle. Parking is permitted within the front yard setback areas on Commerce Circle subject to the following conditions: 
i.  The lot must be substandard in either width or area, 
ii.  The maximum parking requirement for all uses on the site cannot exceed three spaces, 
iii.  Parking must be oriented at a 90 degree angle to the street, 
iv.  All parking spaces must be adjacent to one another, and 
v.  The parking spaces shall not exceed 30 feet in overall width at the property line (or 34 feet if accessible parking is required). 
E.  Measurement of setbacks. Setbacks shall be measured as follows. 
1.  Front yard setbacks. The front yard setback shall be measured from the nearest point on the front property line of the parcel to the nearest line of the structure, except as follows. Whenever a future right-of-way width line is officially established for a street; required setbacks shall be measured from the established lines 
a.  Corner parcels. The measurement shall be taken from the nearest line of the structure to the nearest point of the property line adjoining the street which has the narrowest parcel frontage. Whenever a future right-of-way width line is officially established for a street, required setbacks shall be measured from the established line(s); and 
b.  Flag lots. The measurement shall be taken from the nearest line of the structure to the point where the access strip meets the bulk of the parcel; establishing a building line parallel to the lot line nearest to the public street or right-of-way. 
2.  Side yard setbacks. The side yard setback shall be measured from the nearest point on the side property line of the parcel to the nearest line of the structure; establishing a setback line parallel to the side property line, which extends between the front and rear yards. 
3.  Street side yard setbacks. The side yard on the street side of a corner parcel shall be measured from the nearest point of the side property line adjoining the street to the nearest line of the structure. Whenever a future right-of-way width line is officially established for a street, required yards shall be measured from the established line. 
4.  Rear yard setbacks. The rear yard shall be measured from the nearest point on the rear property line of the parcel to the nearest line of the structure, establishing a setback line parallel to the rear property line, which extends between the side yards. 
  
F.  Allowed projections into setbacks. Attached architectural features may extend beyond the wall of the structure and into the front, side, and rear setbacks, in compliance with Table 17.36.100, below, subject to all applicable requirements of the California Building Standards Code. 
TABLE 17.36.100: ALLOWED PROJECTIONS INTO SETBACKS 
Projecting Feature 	Allowed Projection into Specified Setback 
	Front/Street 
Side
Setback 	Side
Setback 	Rear
Setback 
All projections 	Adequate snow shedding area shall be maintained 
Bay windows that are less than 12 feet in width, occupy less than 50% of the length of the building wall on which they are located, and do not contain floor area. 	May encroach 3 feet into the setback area provided any foundations, piers, supports or other structural connections to the ground comply with the required setback. 1 
Chimneys and roof eaves. 	
Awnings, canopies, covered entries, uncovered balconies, uncovered decks, landings, stairways, and wing walls. 	
Stairways and walkways not more than 18-inches above original grade providing access to the main entrance of a residence. (Handrails may exceed 18-inches). 	Permitted anywhere within the front or street side yard setback area. 
Stairs, walkways, and uncovered decks less than 18-inches above grade, not providing access to the main entrance. 	May encroach into required side or rear yard, but not closer than 3 feet to the property line. 
Uncovered bridges providing access to required residential parking areas and the main entry of a residence. 	Permitted anywhere within the front or street side yard setback area. 
Notes: 
1 The foundations, piers, supports or other structural connections to the ground for chimneys, covered entries, stairways, and wing walls are permitted within the required setback. 
 
G.  Setback requirements for specific structures and equipment. 
1.  Pools and Spas. Swimming pools and spas at grade, including all accessory structures and equipment shall maintain the setback requirements set forth for the main structure. 
2.  Satellite Dish/Antenna. Satellite dishes and antennas shall maintain the setback requirements set forth for the main structure. 
3.  Detached Storage Sheds. Detached storage sheds not more than 120 square feet and eight feet in height shall meet the following requirements. 
a.  Detached storage sheds shall be located on the rear 50 percent of the building site. The distance between the front and rear property lines shall be the basis for determining the rear 50 percent of the property. 
b.  Detached storage sheds may encroach into required side or rear yard, but not closer than 3 feet to the property line. 
c.  Storage sheds shall be located at least 20 feet from any property line bordering a street. 
H.  Structures in setback areas. Any damage sustained to any fence, garage, wall, barrier, or other building or structure located within the front or street side yard setbacks as the result of snow removal operations other than direct contact by snow removal equipment, shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner and the Town shall have no liability whatsoever therefor. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, §§ 8, 9), 1-21-2015; Ord. No. 17-10, § 4(Exh. A), 11-1-2017)  
17.36.110 - Snow Storage. 
All development and proposed land uses that are planned with off-street parking and circulation areas shall be designed and constructed to provide snow storage areas in compliance with the minimum standards of this section. 
A.  Application content requirements. All land use permit applications subject to this section shall include identification of required snow storage areas on the required site plan. 
B.  Minimum storage area required. Each unenclosed parking area, including circulation. 
1.  Residential zones. An area equal to a minimum of 75 percent of all uncovered required parking and driveway areas shall be provided for the storage of snow. 
2.  Industrial zones. An area equal to a minimum of 40 percent of all uncovered required parking and driveway areas shall be provided for the storage of snow. 
3.  Commercial zones. An area equal to a minimum of 60 percent of all uncovered required parking and driveway areas shall be provided for the storage of snow. 
a.  Reduction of Snow Storage Area in Commercial Zones. The review authority may reduce or waive the required snow storage area(s) if the following conditions are met: 
i.  The affected property participates in a snow removal maintenance district; 
ii.  The property owner commits to permanently haul on-site snow from the property to an approved off-site snow storage area. The commitment to haul on-site snow shall be in the form of a recorded document mutually agreed to between the property owner and the Town; and 
iii.  A snow storage management plan is submitted and approved by the Town that includes the following: 
(1)  The site shall designate temporary or interim snow storage areas that do not interfere with more than one-third of the project required minimum parking. 
(2)  Interim snow storage shall be removed within five calendar days following a storm cycle or when chain controls are lifted. 
(3)  Interim snow storage shall not be in a location that will damage trees, landscape, or other facilities. 
(4)  Interim snow storage shall not block any required access, sidewalk, trail, or public path. 
(5)  Snow shall be hauled to an approved and permitted location. 
(6)  Snow hauling shall generally be completed during non-business hours. 
(7)  The snow management plan shall designate the removal methods. 
(8)  Drainage facilities shall not be blocked. 
(9)  Snow storage shall be located so that snow moving equipment is not required to enter the public streets to move snow to the storage area unless an encroachment permit is obtained. 
(10)  Snow storage shall be located in areas that are substantially free and clear of obstructions (e.g., propane tanks, trees, large boulders, trash enclosures, utility pedestals). 
C.  Location. Snow storage areas: 
1.  Shall be located near the sides or rear of parking areas and driveways, away from the primary street frontage; 
2.  Shall be located to maximize solar exposure to the greatest extent feasible; 
3.  Shall be located so that snow moving equipment is not required to enter the public streets to move snow to the storage area; 
4.  Shall be located in a manner to preserve sight lines for vehicles entering or exiting driveways; 
5.  Shall be located in areas that are readily accessible and substantially free and clear of obstructions (e.g., propane tanks, trees, large boulders, trash enclosures, utility pedestals); 
6.  Shall not block any required access, sidewalk, trail, or public path; 
7.  May be located within parking areas but such areas may not be counted towards meeting parking requirements for the use; and 
8.  May be located within required landscaping areas but the areas shall be planted with landscaping tolerant of snow storage or be native vegetation. 
D.  Minimum dimensions. The minimum dimension of a snow storage area shall be 10 feet in any direction. 
E.  Drainage. Snow storage areas shall be designed to provide adequate drainage to prevent ponding and the formation of ice, especially within pedestrian areas and driveways. Drainage from snow storage areas shall be directed towards on-site drainage retention/treatment facilities. Snow storage areas for commercial projects are required to install oil/water separators. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), 1-21-2015)  
17.36.120 - Solar Access and Solar Equipment Guidelines. 
Passive and active heating and cooling opportunities should be incorporated into single-family residential subdivisions and multi-family residential projects as provided by this section. 
A.  Shading. Developments have the potential to shade and decrease the solar access of adjacent properties. Developments shall be designed to preserve the solar access of adjacent properties to the extent practicable. The Director may require a shade analysis for developments that could significantly affect the solar access of neighboring properties or public right-of-ways. 
B.  Solar Design. The high number of sunny days in Mammoth Lakes provides the opportunity to significantly increase the energy efficiency of structures through the use of effective active or passive solar design. Developments are encouraged to maximize the use of solar design. In addition, properly oriented roof areas allow for the installation of efficient solar energy systems. The Town encourages roof areas to be designed to allow for the installation of efficient solar energy systems. 
C.  Solar Collector installation. Solar collectors, if provided, shall be located and installed in the following manner: 
1.  Roof-mounted solar collectors shall be placed in the least conspicuous location without reducing the operating efficiency of the collectors; 
2.  Wall-mounted and ground-mounted collectors shall be screened from public view, to the maximum extent feasible; 
3.  Roof-mounted collectors shall be installed at the same angle or as close as possible to the pitch of the roof. Solar panels may be placed on a flat roof in an angled position if they are appropriately screened from view by elements that are compatible with the architectural style, color, and use of materials on the main portions of the building; 
4.  Appurtenant equipment, particularly plumbing and related fixtures, shall be installed in the attic whenever possible or screened from public view, to the maximum extent feasible; 
5.  Exterior surfaces of the collectors and related equipment shall have a matte, non-reflective finish and shall be color-coordinated to harmonize with roof materials and other dominant colors of the structure; and 
6.  All solar collectors shall comply with the requirements of the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.36.130 - Solid Waste/Recyclable Materials Separation and Storage. 
This section provides standards which recognize the Town's support for and compliance with the California Solid Waste Reuse and Recycling Access Act (Public Resources Code Sections 42900 through 42912). 
A.  Applicability. These requirements apply to new multi-family residential development of three or more units and non-residential development. 
B.  Extent of storage area required. Solid waste and recyclables separation and storage areas shall be provided in the number, dimensions, and types required by the Department or review authority. Additional storage areas may be required, as deemed necessary by the Director. 
C.  Requirements. A paved area for dumpsters and recycling containers shall be provided within all multi-family projects of three or more units, commercial, and industrial development. The paved area shall be readily accessible to refuse collection and recycling vehicles and shall not be located in the front or side setback area unless authorized by the Director and Public Works Director based upon safety concerns, or accessibility of the dumpster location. Dumpsters approved within the front or street side setback area are subject to additional screening with fencing or landscaping as approved by the Director. 
D.  Animal Resistant. Trash enclosures, receptacles, and food storage areas shall be animal resistant. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 17-10, § 4(Exh. A), 11-1-2017)  
17.36.140 - Tree Removal and Protection. 
A.  Purpose. This section includes provisions to protect and to regulate the removal of certain trees, based on the important environmental, aesthetic and health benefits that trees provide to Mammoth Lakes residents and visitors, and the contribution of such benefits to public health, safety and welfare. These benefits include, but are not limited to, enhancement of the character and beauty of the community as a "Village in the Trees," protection of property values, provision of wildlife habitat, reduction of soil erosion, noise buffering, wind protection, and visual screening for development. 
B.  Applicability. The terms and provisions of this section shall apply to all private and public property within the Town of Mammoth Lakes. 
C.  Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: 
1.  Removal of a tree that presents an immediate safety hazard to life or property, as determined by the Town Manager, Director, Building Official, Public Works Director, Police Chief, Fire Marshall, Public Utility Company, or their designees. 
2.  Routine tree maintenance, such as the trimming or thinning of branches. 
3.  Tree removal performed by the Town, public utilities, or other public agencies in public utility easements or public rights-of-way; 
4.  Tree removal for fuels reduction purposes on publicly owned land, performed in conjunction with an approved fuel reduction program or activity; 
5.  Removal of trees felled by natural weather conditions or an act of God; 
6.  Removal of visibly dead trees; and 
7.  Coniferous and deciduous trees with a "Diameter at Breast Height" (DBH) of less than 12 inches. 
D.  Tree removal permit required. No person shall remove or cause to be removed any tree from any property, which is subject to this section and not otherwise exempted pursuant to Section 17.36.140.C, 17.36.140.F. or 17.36.140.G, without first obtaining a valid tree removal permit pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). 
E.  Tree removal permit application and review. 
1.  Tree removal permit application. The following information shall be provided in the tree removal permit application: 
a.  A site plan or drawing showing the location, type and size of all tree(s) proposed to be removed; 
b.  A statement of the reasons for removal; and 
c.  Written consent of the owner of record of the land on which the tree(s) are proposed to be removed, or their authorized agent or contractor. 
2.  Tree removal permit review. The following shall be considered when reviewing tree removal permits: 
a.  The Director shall inspect the property and evaluate each application. The applicant shall clearly mark or flag all trees proposed for removal. 
b.  The Director shall issue a permit if any of the conditions 1. through 10. below are determined to apply. The Director may request the applicant to provide a professional assessment by a Registered Professional Forester (RPF) or arborist to support the reasons for the proposed tree removal. 
i.  The tree(s) is infected with an epidemic insect or disease where the recommended control is not applicable and an arborist has recommended removal to prevent transmission; 
ii.  The tree is visibly dying; 
iii.  The tree(s) presents a hazard to health, safety or property that cannot be corrected by pruning, transplanting or other treatments; 
iv.  The tree(s) severely interfere with the growth and development of a more desirable tree; 
v.  The removal of the tree would be necessary to provide for the required amount of snow storage on a residential or commercial property; 
vi.  The removal of the tree would substantially increase mid-day solar access to a solar collector; 
vii.  The tree(s) interferes or is causing extensive damage to utility services or facilities, roadways, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, pavement, water or sewer line, foundations or existing structures; 
viii.  The removal of the trees(s) would be necessary to maintain defensible space around a structure, or for fuels reduction purposes approved by Mammoth Lakes Fires Protection District; 
ix.  The removal of the tree(s) would allow for improved enjoyment or quality of a publicly-accessible recreation or event site (e.g., improved event circulation or seating, enhanced golf course playability, etc.) consistent with the Town's destination resort objectives. 
x.  Other reason, which, in the determination of the Director, would be necessary to maintain public health, safety or welfare, or to avoid damage to buildings or property. 
c.  Creation of views, lawns, or similar amenities shall not be sufficient cause to remove trees. 
3.  Expiration of tree removal permits. Tree removal permits shall remain valid for a period of five years from date of issue. 
F.  Multi-family residential project tree management plan. An Administrative Permit for a tree management plan may be approved by the Director for an existing multi-family residential or lodging property of twenty-five units or more consistent with the standards of this section. Separate tree removal permits would not be required with an approved tree management plan. 
1.  Tree Management Plan. A tree management plan shall include the following information: 
a.  Name of multi-family residential or lodging property. 
b.  Narrative describing purpose and objectives of the tree management plan. 
c.  Location, species, diameter at DBH, reason, and anticipated year of removal for each tree expected to be removed under the management plan. 
d.  Signature of certified RFP or arborist certifying the validity of the tree management plan. 
2.  Expiration of tree maintenance plan. Tree management plans shall remain valid for a period of five years from date of issue. Substantial revisions or amendments to an approved tree management plan shall be approved by the Director. 
G.  Construction-related tree removal and protection. If a site has received development approval through a land use, building, or grading permit that includes a tree removal and protection plan consistent with the standards of this section, then a separate tree removal permit is not required, and removal of trees is considered approved through the land use, building, or grading permit. 
1.  Tree removal and protection plan. A tree removal and protection plan is required prior to conducting development activities which require a land use permit, building permit or grading permit, including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavation or demolition work on any property or development site containing one or more trees. 
a.  The tree removal and protection plan shall clearly depict all trees to be preserved and/or removed on the site. The plan must be drawn to scale and include the following: 
i.  Location, species and diameter of each tree at DBH. 
ii.  Clear identification of all trees proposed to be removed. 
iii.  Location of drip line of each tree. 
iv.  Location of existing and proposed roads, water, sanitary and storm drain, irrigation and other utility lines/facilities and easements. 
v.  Location of existing and proposed structures. 
vi.  Grade change or cut and fill during or after construction. 
vii.  Existing and proposed impervious surfaces. 
viii.  Location and type of tree protection measures to be installed per Section G.1.b., below. 
b.  Tree protection measures. Except as otherwise allowed by the review authority or Director, all required tree preservation measures set forth in this section shall be instituted prior to any construction or development activities, including but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavation or demolition work, and shall be removed only after completion of all construction activity, including landscaping and irrigation installation. 
i.  Fencing, a minimum of three feet tall with posts placed no more than ten feet apart shall be installed at the edge of the tree drip line. Fencing shall be flush with the initial (undisturbed) grade. 
ii.  No construction activity shall occur within the tree drip lines, including, but not limited to dumping or storage of materials such as building supplies, soil, waste items, equipment or parked vehicles. 
iii.  Tree drip lines shall be maintained free of chemically injurious materials and substances such as paints, thinners, cleaning solutions, oil and gasoline, concrete or drywall excess, construction debris or run-off. 
iv.  No excavation, trenching, grading, root pruning or other activity shall occur within the drip line unless approved by the review authority or the Director. 
v.  The applicant shall not proceed with any development or construction activities, except installation of erosion control measures, until the Town has inspected and approved the installation of the required tree protection measures and a grading and/or building permit has been issued by the Town. 
c.  Waiver of requirement to provide tree removal and protection plan. The Director may waive the requirement to provide a tree removal and protection plan where it can be demonstrated, to the Director's satisfaction, than no trees would be removed or otherwise directly or indirectly affected by the proposed activity. 
H.  Penalty for removal of a tree without a permit. The following penalties may be imposed for removal of a tree(s) without an approved tree removal permit where one is required, consistent with Municipal Code Section 8.32 (Administrative Citations). 
1.  Coniferous trees over 12 inches: a fine of no less than $2,500 per tree and/or as valued by an RPF or arborist; in no circumstances shall the fine be less than $2,500 and no more than $50,000, per tree; 
2.  Deciduous trees over 12 inches: a fine of $1,000 per tree and/or as valued by an RPF or arborist; in no circumstances shall the fine be less than $1,000 and no more than $5,000; 
3.  Replacement plantings may be required as determined by the Director consistent with Section 17.36.140. I, which may include valuation by an RPF or arborist. 
I.  Mitigation for tree removal. As mitigation for tree removal, either in conjunction with a tree removal permit, construction-related tree removal, or as penalty for tree removal performed without a permit, the Director may require replacement plantings. If required, replacement shall be limited to plantings in areas suitable for tree replacement with species identified in the Town of Mammoth Lakes' Recommended Plant List. The replacement ratio shall be determined by the Director. If required, the minimum replacement tree size shall be seven gallons. Replacement requirements may also be determined based on the valuation of the tree as determined by an RPF or arborist. The property owner shall maintain plantings to a level approved by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), 1-21-2015)  
Chapter 17.40 - Water Efficient Landscape Regulations[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-07, § 4(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 21, 2016, repealed the former Chapter 17.40, §§ 17.40.010—17.40.080, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Chapter 17.40 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, adopted Mar. 19, 2014; and Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), adopted Jan. 21, 2015. 
 
17.40.010 - Purpose. 
The specific purposes of the water efficient landscape regulations are to: 
A.  Implement the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act and the 2015 California Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (CA MWELO); 
B.  Reduce water waste in landscaping by promoting the use of alpine region-appropriate plants that require minimal supplemental irrigation, and by establishing standards for irrigation efficiency; 
C.  Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining, and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects; 
D.  Promote rainwater capture and graywater use; and 
E.  Promote the effective and efficient irrigation of landscapes. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 4(Exh. A), 9-21-2016)  
17.40.020 - Applicability. 
A.  The standards of this section apply to all of the following landscape projects: 
1.  New construction projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred square feet. 
2.  Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet. 
3.  Existing landscapes that were installed before December 1, 2015 and are over one acre in size shall be subject to the provisions for existing landscapes provided for in Section 17.40.040.H. 
B.  Any landscape project with an aggregate landscape area of five hundred to two thousand five hundred square feet may comply with the performance requirements of this section or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in the Water Efficient Landscape Checklist. 
C.  For projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater captured on-site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than two thousand five hundred square feet of landscape and meets the lot or parcel's landscape water requirement (Estimated Total Water Use) entirely with treated or untreated graywater or through rainwater captured on-site is subject only to the irrigation system requirements of the Water Efficient Landscape Checklist. 
D.  The following are exempt from the standards of this section: 
1.  New construction with an aggregate landscape area less than five hundred square feet; rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area of less than two thousand five hundred square feet. 
2.  Registered local, state, or federal historic sites. 
3.  Temporary irrigation systems utilized for three full growing seasons or less for purposes of ecological restoration, erosion/sedimentation control, and mine reclamation projects. 
4.  Community gardens or plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. 
5.  Commercial cultivation of agricultural products, including but not limited to products of farms, orchards, production nurseries and forests. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 4(Exh. A), 9-21-2016)  
17.40.030 - Landscape and Irrigation Plans. 
A Landscape Documentation Package that complies with the requirements described in Section 17.40.040 shall be submitted with the permit application for all applicable projects, except for projects that are exempt pursuant to Section 17.40.020.D. When landscaping is proposed or required as part of a discretionary permit (i.e., use permit, tentative map, etc.), the application shall include a statement on the plans or a condition of approval shall be included that indicates compliance with the Town's Water Efficient Landscape Regulations shall be demonstrated at the building permit phase. For discretionary permits that will not entail subsequent building or grading permits, a fully compliant Landscape Documentation Package may be required as part of the discretionary permit process. The contents the of Landscape Documentation Package shall be drawn to scale and shall demonstrate landscape water efficiency pursuant to Section 17.40.050, Water Efficient Design and Compliance Options. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 4(Exh. A), 9-21-2016)  
17.40.040 - General Requirements. 
A.  Plant Materials. 
1.  Plants shall be selected appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic and topographical conditions of Mammoth Lakes. Native species and natural areas are to be protected and preserved to the extent possible. Generally, turf is discouraged. The planting of trees is encouraged wherever it is consistent with the other provisions of this chapter. Recommendations for plant materials that could meet the requirements of this section are included in the Mammoth Lakes Recommended Plant List found in the Making the Most of Every Drop users guide and methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following: 
a.  Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental influence on local climate; 
b.  Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, powerlines) and allow for adequate soil volume for healthy root growth; and 
c.  Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize winter solar gain. 
2.  Plants having similar water use should be grouped together by hydrozone (i.e. high, medium, low). Though not encouraged, plants of low and moderate water use may be planted in the same hydrozone, and plants of moderate and high water use may be planted in the same hydrozone. Plants of low and high water use may not be planted in the same hydrozone. The Estimated Total Water Usage (Section 17.40.040.F) for these mixed areas shall assume a plant factor based on the proportions of the represented plant species or apply the plant factor of the least water efficient plant species (refer to Making the Most of Every Drop user guide). 
3.  Plant materials and mulches will be in compliance with local fire codes. Fire prevention measures shall be addressed in areas that are fire prone as identified by The Mammoth Fire Severity Zone Map. 
4.  Turf shall not be planted on slopes greater than twenty-five percent. 
5.  No portions of turf areas shall be less than ten feet wide to prevent overspray. 
6.  Noxious weeds as identified by the USDA and invasive plant species as identified in by the California Invasive Plant Inventory are prohibited. 
7.  The landscape area shall be the sum of all the landscaped areas on the site per the definition in Section 17.148.020. 
8.  The landscape area shall use efficient water conservation practices and shall generally separate areas of similar slope, sun exposure, soil, and other site conditions appropriate for the selected plants. Refer to the Making the Most of Every Drop user guide. 
9.  High water use plants (including turf), characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street medians. 
10.  The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water plants as a group. 
B.  Soil Preparation and Mulch. 
1.  Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting holes need meet this requirement. 
2.  For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four cubic yards per one thousand square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than six percent organic matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and tilling. 
3.  A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of non-turf planting areas, except for creeping or rooting groundcovers, direct seeding, and other applications where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five percent of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such. Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet current engineering standards. The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement. 
4.  Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-consumer materials shall be used instead of inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local fire codes. 
5.  When a soil management report is required pursuant to the application requirements, the soil analysis recommendations shall be implemented and soil amendments shall be incorporated according to the report and what is appropriate for the plants selected. 
C.  Irrigation Specifications. 
This section applies to landscapes areas requiring permanent irrigation, not areas that require temporary irrigation solely for the plant establishment period. 
1.  The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, operation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation system is expected to meet or exceed seventy-five percent efficiency for overhead spray devices and eighty-one percent efficiency for drip system devices, and be installed in compliance with the manufacturers' recommendations. 
2.  All irrigation systems shall be designed to avoid runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, or structures. 
3.  Automatic irrigation controllers and sensors are required. Controllers may either be weather-based or soil moisture-based controllers utilizing non-volatile memory that automatically adjust irrigation in response to changes in plants' needs as weather conditions change. Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, shall be required and shall function to suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions. 
4.  Proper irrigation equipment and schedules, including features such as repeat cycles, shall be used to closely match application rates with soil type and soil infiltration rates in order to minimize runoff. 
5.  Low-volume irrigation shall be required in mulched areas to maximize water infiltration into the root zone. Narrow or irregularly shaped areas that are less than ten feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or overspray. In areas with slopes greater than twenty-five percent, the area shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding three-quarters of an inch per hour unless the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the Landscape Documentation Package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
6.  Pressure regulation is a key component in efficient irrigation system operation. Static pressure throughout the Town varies greatly due to many factors (e.g., topography, time of year, time of day, location of project in relationship to water source, etc.). Pressure regulation shall be required on all projects and set to sixty pounds per square inch unless the landscape plan demonstrates a need for higher pressure. The system shall be designed to ensure that the dynamic pressure at irrigation feature is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure range for optimal performance. 
7.  Overhead irrigation is prohibited within twenty-four inches of any non-permeable surface. If planted, only low-volume irrigation shall be allowed within the twenty-four inch setback. 
8.  Recirculating water shall be used for decorative water features. Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation. 
9.  Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. 
10.  Irrigation systems for non-residential landscapes and residential landscapes of five thousand square feet or larger shall include flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction. 
11.  Master shut-off valves are required on all landscape projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low pressure shut down features. 
12.  Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency or routine repair. 
13.  Check valves or anti-drain valves are required on all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur. 
14.  The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan and each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use. Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone. 
15.  Sprinkler heads shall have matched precipitation rates within each control circuit valve and shall be selected for proper coverage and precipitation rate. Head to head coverage is recommended and sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacture's recommendations. 
16.  Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or located in high traffic areas. 
17.  Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when designing irrigation for the tree. 
18.  All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers/International Code Council's (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 "Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard." All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of sixty-five hundredths or higher using the protocol defined in the ASABE/ICC 802-2014. 
D.  Mammoth Community Water District (MCWD) Served Connections. 
1.  Separate landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or private submeter, shall be installed for all non-residential irrigated landscapes of one thousand square feet, but not more than five thousand square feet (the level at which Water Code 535 applies) and residential irrigated landscapes of five thousand square feet or greater, or as required by MCWD Code if the MCWD Code has more stringent standards. A landscape water meter may be either a customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided by the MCWD or a privately owned meter or submeter. 
2.  When a landscape has a separate water meter the irrigation system and decorative water features shall be designed to allow for the current and future use of recycled water and shall use recycled water. Compliance or exemption shall be documented via a written letter from the MCWD, that details compliance or states that recycled water meeting all public health codes and standards is not available and will not be available for the foreseeable future. 
3.  Program settings for irrigation controllers shall comply with MCWD watering regulations. 
4.  All irrigation shall be subject to regulations and restrictions put forth by the MCWD. 
E.  Maintenance. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package. Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to: testing; auditing; adjusting and repairing backflow prevention devices, pressure regulating devices and irrigation equipment; resetting the automatic controller; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscaped areas; and removing obstructions to emission devices. Refer to Section 17.40.070. 
F.  Water Budget Worksheet. When a Landscape Documentation Package is required, the project applicant shall complete the Water Budget Worksheet contained within the Landscape Documentation Package application which contains information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and area associated with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas, exclusive of Special Landscape Areas (SLAs). The ETAF for a landscape project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA) is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU) is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the landscape design. ETWU must be below the MAWA. 
1.  In calculating the Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA) and Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU), a project applicant shall use the Evapotranspiration (ETo) value for Mammoth Lakes, which is thirty-three inches. 
2.  Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements: 
a.  The plant factor (PF) value may be found in the Making the Most of Every Drop users guide, or for more specific information the WUCOLS publication, or may be more precisely determined by a landscape professional, with consideration of site-specific soil and microclimate conditions. The PF ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use plants, 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants. 
b.  All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone. 
c.  All Special Landscape Areas (SLAs) shall be identified and their water use calculated. ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) SLAs shall not exceed 1.0. 
G.  Graywater Systems. Graywater systems are encouraged for on-site landscape irrigation. All gray water systems shall conform to the California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16) and any requirements of the town and/or MCWD. 
H.  Existing Landscapes Over One Acre in Size. For existing landscapes over one acre in size that have a landscape water meter, the town and/or MCWD shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the Maximum Applied Water Allowance for existing landscapes. The Maximum Applies Water Allowance for existing landscapes shall be calculated as: MAWA = (0.8) (ETo) (LA) (0.62). For existing landscapes over one acre in size that do not have a landscape water meter, the town and/or MCWD shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste. 
I.  Other Information. Other information determined necessary by the director. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 4(Exh. A), 9-21-2016)  
17.40.050 - Water Efficient Design and Compliance Options. 
One of four options (Option(s) A-D) for landscape design compliance documentation shall be chosen to demonstrate that the landscape project meets water efficiency requirements. The options coordinate with the level of water conservation in the design of the landscape. Refer to the Making the Most of Every Drop user guide for additional information and examples of Landscape Documentation Package contents for Options B and C. 
A.  Option A: Water Efficient Landscape Checklist. 
A Water Efficient Landscape Checklist may be submitted in-lieu of completion of Option(s) B-D for any landscape project that complies with all of the requirements and limitations of the Water Efficient Landscape Checklist and has an aggregate landscape area of five hundred to two thousand five hundred square feet. 
1.  Water Efficiency. Plans must demonstrate all of the following as a means of achieving water efficiency. 
a.  Residential. 
i.  At least seventy-five percent of the landscape area shall consist of low to very-low water-use plants (plant factor of 0.3 or less), excluding edibles and areas using recycled water. 
ii.  A maximum of twenty-five percent of the landscape area is permitted to be turf or other high water-use plants (plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0), however the average plant factor for this area shall not exceed 0.6. Landscape areas that have turf or other high water-use plants shall not be on slopes greater than twenty-five percent or in areas less than ten feet wide. 
b.  Non-Residential. 
i.  One hundred percent of the landscape area shall consist of low to very-low water-use plants (plant factor of 0.3 or less), excluding edibles and areas using recycled water. 
2.  Landscape Documentation Package Required Contents. 
a.  Landscape Checklist Form. Submittal of the signed Landscape Checklist form confirming that the soil preparation, irrigation system, planting, mulch, and other landscape elements will comply with the Checklist standards. 
b.  Certification of Substantial Compliance. Refer to Section 17.40.040.E. 
c.  Irrigation Survey and Report. Refer to Section 17.40.060.A.2. 
B.  Option B: Low Water Use/No Lawn. 
1.  Water Efficiency. Plans must demonstrate all of the following as a means of achieving water efficiency. 
a.  No turf or Special Landscape Areas are allowed. 
b.  At least fifty-one percent of the landscape area consists of low water-use plants (plant factor of 0.3 or less). 
c.  The remaining percentage of the landscape area shall consist of plantings that have an average plant factor of 0.6 or less. 
2.  Landscape Documentation Package Required Contents. 
a.  Landscape Area Plan. Locates, delineates, and identifies square footage of all landscape area hydrozones by number, letter, or other method. Each hydrozone will note the associated plant factor or water usage (i.e. very-low, low, medium or high) for the types of plants to be installed within the hydrozone. 
b.  Project Plant Schedule. Lists landscape plants including common name, Latin name, water usage (low, medium or high), and fire hazard (low, medium or high). 
i.  The plant list should not include any plant types that increase wildfire susceptibility. 
ii.  Identify species contained in seed mix, if applicable. 
c.  Basic Irrigation Plan. Identifies station control valve(s) location, backflow prevention device, pressure regulation valve(s), point of connection to property's service lateral, extent of area serviced by irrigation, and specifies the type of irrigation emission devices (e.g., drip, spray, soaker hose or other) for each hydrozone. Each hydrozone shall be on a separate valve. Low-volume irrigation is required in all areas. 
d.  Maintenance Schedule. Refer to Section 17.40.040.E. 
e.  Certification of Substantial Completion. Refer to Section 17.40.060.A.1. 
f.  Irrigation Survey and Report. Refer to Section 17.40.060.A.2. 
C.  Option C: Medium Water Use/Limited Lawn. 
1.  Water Efficiency. Plans must demonstrate all of the following as a means of achieving water efficiency. 
a.  The ETWU for the landscape must be less than or equal to eighty-five percent of MAWA. 
b.  Turf shall not exceed twenty percent of the total landscape area, or one thousand two hundred fifty square feet, whichever is less. 
2.  Landscape Documentation Package Required Contents. 
a.  Landscape Area Plan. Locates, delineates, and identifies square footage of all landscape area hydrozones by number, letter, or other method. Each hydrozone will note the associated plant factor or water usage (i.e. very-low, low, medium or high) for the types of plants to be installed within the hydrozone. 
b.  Project Plant Schedule. Lists landscape plants including common name, Latin name, water usage (low, medium or high). 
i.  The plant list should not include any plant types that increase wildfire susceptibility. 
ii.  Identify species contained in seed mix, if applicable. 
c.  Slope Plan. If turf is included in the landscape a separate plan shall identify the extent of turf areas and the percent grade of the property to demonstrate that turf will not be planted on a slope of twenty-five percent or more. 
d.  Basic Irrigation Plan. Identifies station control valve locations, backflow prevention device, pressure regulation valve(s), point of connection to property's service lateral, extent of area serviced by irrigation, and specifies the type of irrigation emission device (e.g., drip, spray, soaker hose or other) for each hydrozone. Each hydrozone shall be on a separate valve. Irrigation devices installed for turf shall have matched precipitation rates and sprinkler layout shall be designed for high distribution uniformity. 
e.  Water Budget Worksheet. Show Maximum Applied Water Allowance and Estimated Total Water Usage calculations (17.40.040 F). 
f.  Maintenance Schedule. Refer to Section 17.40.040.E and Section 17.40.070. 
g.  Certification of Substantial Completion. Refer to Section 17.40.060.A.1 
h.  Irrigation Survey and Report. Refer to Section 17.40.060.A.2 
D.  Option D: Maximum Applied Water Allowance Compliance Option. 
1.  Plans shall be prepared by, and bear the signature of, a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized by the State of California to design the required elements. 
2.  Plans shall demonstrate that the total landscape area Maximum Applied Water Allowance shall not be exceeded by the landscape's Estimated Total Water Usage. 
3.  Landscape Documentation Package Required Contents. 
a.  Detailed Planting Plan. Shall include the following: 
i.  General notes, planting notes, plant layout based on size at maturity, species, and symbol legend; 
ii.  Spacing of proposed plantings; 
iii.  Locations of and trunk diameter of all existing trees whose trunk circumference is greater than twelve inches, measured at diameter at breast height. 
iv.  Existing features to remain, such as trees, fencing, hardscape, etc.; 
v.  Existing features to be removed; 
vi.  Identification of pertinent site factors such as sun exposure, microclimate, property lines, buildings, underground/above-ground utilities, existing drainage features, etc.; 
vii.  Locate, delineate, and identify square footage of each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method. Each hydrozone will identify the associated plant factor (i.e., very-low, low, medium, or high) for the types of plants to be installed within the hydrozone; 
viii.  Identify and provide square footage of any special landscape areas; 
ix.  Demonstrate plants have been arranged to provide defensible space for wildfire protection; 
x.  Identify type of mulch and application depth; and 
xi.  Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious). 
b.  Project Plant Schedule. Lists all plants including common name, Latin name, quantity, plant factor and water usage, to be installed as part of the project. 
i.  The plant list should not include any plant types that increase wildfires susceptibility. 
ii.  Identify species contained in seed mix, if applicable. 
c.  Soil Management Report. The purpose of this report is to reduce run-off and encourage healthy plant growth. The report shall include the following at a minimum: 
i.  Soil texture; 
ii.  Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table; 
iii.  pH; 
iv.  Total soluble salts; 
v.  Sodium; 
vi.  Percent organic matter; and 
vii.  Recommendations. 
In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments), a soil sampling rate of one in seven lots or approximately fifteen percent will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven lots. 
d.  Detailed Irrigation Plan shall contain all of the following: 
i.  Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system (e.g., controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices). Each hydrozone shall be on a separate valve; 
ii.  Water flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station; 
iii.  Irrigation schedule; an annual irrigation program with monthly irrigation schedules shall be required for the plant establishment period, for the established landscape, and for any temporary irrigated areas. The irrigation schedule shall: 
(1)  Include run time (in minutes per cycle), suggested number of cycles per day, and frequency of irrigation for each station; and 
(2)  Provide the amount of applied water recommended on a monthly and annual basis. 
iv.  Location and size of separate water meters for landscape if applicable. 
e.  Grading and Drainage Plan shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other local agency permits satisfies this requirement. The grading and drainage plan shall bear the signature of licensed professional and indicate finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including: 
i.  Height of graded slopes; 
ii.  Drainage patterns; 
iii.  Pad elevations; 
iv.  Finish grade; and 
v.  Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable. 
f.  Water Budget Worksheet (17.40.040 F) showing Maximum Applied Water Allowance and Estimated Total Water Usage must be completed by a landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, certified landscape irrigation auditor, landscape contractor, licensed professional engineer or other person who is authorized by the State of California to complete a water budget worksheet. 
g.  Statement of Compliance. The following statement should be included on the plans "I (We) have complied with the criteria of the Town of Mammoth Lakes Water Efficient Landscape Regulations." 
h.  Certification of Substantial Completion. Refer to Section 17.40.060.A.1. 
i.  Comprehensive Survey and Report. Refer to Section 17.40.060.A.3. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 4(Exh. A), 9-21-2016)  
17.40.060 - Installation and Completion. 
A.  Documents for Project Completion. 
1.  Certification of Substantial Completion. For Options A, B, C and D, upon completion of the installation of the landscaping and irrigation system a Certificate of Substantial Completion shall be submitted to the town as noted below. The certificate shall include the following statement: "The landscape and irrigation system has been installed as specified in the landscape and irrigation plan and complies with the criteria of the Town of Mammoth Lakes Water Efficient Landscape Regulations and the permit(s) issued by the Town for the project." 
2.  Irrigation Survey and Report. For projects demonstrating compliance under Options A, B, or C (17.40.050 A, B, or C) a report shall be provided that includes, but is not limited to: inspection of pressure at the emission devices, ability to eliminate overspray, and installation of appropriate controller. A report shall be provided and shall document any problems encountered, and shall identify and explain any discrepancies between the plan and installation. The irrigation survey shall be performed by an irrigation auditor who is either a local agency landscape irrigation auditor or a third party certified landscape irrigation auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person who designed the landscape or installed the landscape. 
3.  Comprehensive Survey and Report. For projects demonstrating compliance under Option D (17.40.050.D): A report or reports shall verify all contents of the Landscape Documentation Package were installed as specified. The report(s) shall document any problems encountered, and shall identify and explain any discrepancies between the Landscape Documentation Package and installation. A certified irrigation auditor shall conduct an audit report for any spray or overhead irrigation system. A distribution uniformity (catch can) analysis must achieve a DU of seventy-five percent or better for spray sprinklers and eighty percent for rotary sprinklers. 
B.  Project Completion. Approval of the Documents of Project Completion is required prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the project. For projects served by MCWD, approval of the Documents of Project Completion by the Town shall be marked as preliminary until MCWD confirms in writing that the preliminary approved documents have been received regardless of meter requirements. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 4(Exh. A), 9-21-2016)  
17.40.070 - Maintenance. 
A.  The landscape and irrigation system shall be maintained to ensure successful establishment following installation, and to ensure water use efficiency remains equal to or below Maximum Applied Water Allowance, consistent with submitted plans and requirements of this chapter. Irrigation systems shall be tested, adjusted and repaired following the manufacturers' specification and the recommendations of the landscape professional. 
B.  A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes. 
C.  Whenever possible, repair of irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally specified materials or their equivalents, or with components of greater efficiency. 
D.  Failed plants shall be replaced with the same or functionally equivalent species that may be size-adjusted as appropriate for the stage of growth of the overall installation. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 4(Exh. A), 9-21-2016)  
17.40.080 - Reporting. 
The town shall comply with all reporting requirements outlined in the CA Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (CA MWELO), Section 495. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 4(Exh. A), 9-21-2016)  
Chapter 17.44 - Parking and Loading Standards 
 
17.44.010 - Purpose. 
The requirements of this chapter are intended to: 
A.  Reduce environmental, economic, and social impacts associated with parking, 
B.  Reduce the amount of land devoted to parking, 
C.  Reduce inefficient, dispersed, and single-use reserved parking, 
D.  Provide on-street parking opportunities as appropriate, 
E.  Encourage the use of feet-first alternative transportation modes and reduce vehicle use, 
F.  Improve community livability, walkability, and character, and 
G.  Provide flexibility in accommodating changes in demand and use. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.44.020 - Applicability. 
Each building and land use, including a change or expansion of a building or land use, shall provide parking in compliance with this chapter. No building shall be occupied and no land use shall be commenced until improvements required by this chapter are completed and approved by the review authority. All roadways shall comply with Public Works Street Standards and MLFPD standards. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.44.030 - Number of Parking Spaces Required. 
Each land use shall provide the required number of parking spaces established in this chapter, unless a reduction is approved by the review authority. 
A.  Residential parking requirements. Parking requirements for residential land uses shall be provided in compliance with Table 17.44.030(A) except where the requirement is modified in compliance with Section 17.44.040 (Alternative Parking Provisions), and except where parking standards have been established through a Master Plan or Specific Plan. Residential uses are described in Chapter 17.20 and are listed in Table 17.20.020 of 17.20.020. 
TABLE 17.44.030(A): REQUIRED PARKING SPACES (RESIDENTIAL USE CLASSIFICATIONS) 
Land Use 	Metric 	Type 	Required Parking Spaces 
Single-family 	Square feet exclusive of garages and decks 	0 - 2,999 	3 
		3,000 - 4,999 	4 
		5,000 - 6,999 	5 
		7,000 or greater 	6 
Multi-Family 	Bedrooms/Unit 	1 	1 
		2 	2 
		3 	2 
		4 or more 	3 
		Guest Parking 	2 spaces for each 4 units up to 12 units 
1 space for each 4 units for the 13th to the 48th units 
1 space for each additional 6 units above the 48th unit 
Spaces shall be accessible to guests and shall not be reserved for individual units. 
Affordable Housing, Senior Housing 	N/A 	N/A 	Parking requirements for affordable housing and senior housing projects shall be provided consistent with the residential requirements of this section or with State Density Bonus Law (Government Code Section 65915) if requested by the Applicant. 
All Other Residential Uses 	Shall be established by special review and approved by the review authority. 
 
B.  Non-residential parking requirements. Parking requirements for nonresidential land uses shall be provided in compliance with Table 17.44.030(B), except where the requirement is modified in compliance with Section 17.44.040 (Alternative Parking Provisions), and except where parking standards have been established through a Master Plan or Specific Plan. Non-residential land uses are described in Table 17.24.020 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for the Commercial Zoning Districts) in Chapter 17.24 and Table 17.28.020 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for the Industrial Zoning District) in Chapter 17.28. Parking requirements for non-residential uses are determined based on the following: 
1.  Parking zones. Where Table 17.44.030(B) expresses parking zones for nonresidential uses, the parking zones shall be defined as follows and as shown in Figure 17.44.030 (B)(1): 
a.  Parking zone 1. Includes the Downtown and Old Mammoth Road Commercial Zoning Districts, which represent the areas of Town with the highest concentration of mixed-use development and multi-modal accessibility, thereby reducing parking demand. Therefore, parking requirements in this zone are the lowest. 
b.  Parking zone 2. Includes the Mixed Lodging/Residential Zoning District and the Lodestar Master Plan area, which represent areas of Town with some mixed-use and/or multi-family development that is served by transit, thereby reducing parking demand moderately. Therefore, parking requirements in this zone are the second lowest. 
c.  Parking zone 3. Represents all other areas within Town, except where parking standards have been established through a Master Plan or Specific Plan. 
2.  Minimum and maximum parking requirements. Where Table 17.44.030B expresses a minimum and maximum parking ratio for non-residential uses, the ratios represent the minimum or maximum number of parking spaces allowed for each land use metric. 
a.  Minimum Parking Ratios. Represents the minimum number of parking spaces required. 
b.  Maximum Parking Ratios. Represents the maximum number of parking spaces allowed. 
TABLE 17.44.030(B): REQUIRED PARKING SPACES (NON-RESIDENTIAL USE CLASSIFICATIONS 
Land Use 	Zone 1 	Zone 2 	Zone 3 
	Minimum 	Maximum 	Minimum 	Maximum 	Minimum 	Maximum 
Industrial, Manufacturing, & Processing Use Classifications (spaces/1,000 sf Gross Leasable Area) 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	1.6 	4.0 
Retail Use Classifications (except restaurant) (spaces/1,000 sf Gross Leasable Area) 	3.0 	7.0 	3.5 	7.5 	4.0 	8.0 
Restaurant (spaces/1,000 sf Gross Leasable Area) 	6.6 	9.0 	11.2 	13.5 	12.5 	15.0 
Service Use Classifications (except lodging) (spaces/1,000 sf Gross Leasable Area) 	3.0 	6.0 	3.5 	6.5 	4.0 	7.0 
Lodging (spaces/room) 	1.0 	1.5 	1.0 	1.5 	1.0 	1.5 
All Other Non-residential Uses 	Shall be established by special review and approved by the review authority. 
 
  
Figure 17.44.030(B)(1): LOCATION OF PARKING ZONES 
  
C.  Disabled (ADA) parking. Parking for the disabled shall be provided on site in compliance with the California Building Standards Code. Parking spaces required for the disabled shall count toward compliance with the number of parking spaces required by this chapter. 
D.  Use with accessory components. A primary use with accessory components shall provide parking for each component. For example, a hotel with a restaurant shall provide the parking spaces required by Table 17.44.030B for a hotel (e.g., the guest rooms), and for a restaurant, except where the requirement is reduced or otherwise changed in compliance with Section 17.44.040 (Alternative Parking Provisions). 
E.  Nonconforming parking. No existing use of land or existing structure, where parking for said use or structure was conforming at the time of establishment or modification, shall be deemed to be nonconforming solely because of the lack of parking facilities prescribed in this chapter, but rather shall retain conforming status for as long as the use or structure remains unmodified. Implications for modification are addressed through 17.44.030F. (Expansion of structure) and 17.44.030G (Change in use). 
F.  Expansion of structure. For additions or enlargements of existing structures or buildings that would increase the number of parking spaces required, the additional parking shall be required only for such addition or enlargement, and not for the preexisting structure or building. However, the review authority may grant a waiver if it is determined that sufficient parking is not available on or near the site to fulfill the minimum requirement. 
G.  Change in use. For any change of use or manner of operation that would increase the number of parking spaces required, no additional parking shall be required unless the review authority determines that the change in use without added parking would create a negative impact for neighboring properties. 
H.  Floor area. Where Table 17.44.030B expresses a parking requirement based on gross leasable area (GLA) (for example: 1 space for each 1,000 GLA), the term "gross leasable area" shall mean gross leasable square footage of floor area measured in square feet, including balconies, basements, mezzanines, or upper floors, but excluding common areas such as elevators, stair wells, bathrooms, shared hallways, and lobbies. This shall apply to single and multiple occupant/tenant structures. 
I.  Rounding of calculations. If a fractional number is obtained in calculations performed in compliance with this chapter, one additional parking space shall be required for a fractional unit of 0.50 or above, and no additional space shall be required for a fractional unit of less than 0.50. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), 1-21-2015; Ord. No. 17-10, § 4(Exh. A), 11-1-2017)  
17.44.040 - Alternative Parking Provisions. 
The number of parking spaces required by Table 17.44.030B may be modified through the following measures or combination of measures as approved by the review authority. Documentation to support the requested modification must be provided in a form acceptable to the review authority. 
A.  Shared parking. Two or more non-residential uses shall be allowed to meet the parking requirements of this chapter by sharing the same off-street parking facilities, subject to the approval of the review authority. 
1.  Trip capture and staggered peak demand. Shared parking may occur between two or more on-site or off-site uses and shall be demonstrated through a parking demand study in a form acceptable to the review authority. The parking demand study may provide data based upon the following: 
a.  Internal capture. Where two or more uses are present on-site and trips between those on-site uses are captured on-site. For example, a hotel with a restaurant on-site captures vehicle trips that may otherwise leave the site to visit a restaurant, thereby reducing on-site parking demand. 
b.  External capture. Where trips between nearby off-site uses are captured. For example, a restaurant across the street from a hotel may capture external trips from the hotel that would otherwise be made by vehicle, thereby reducing parking demand. 
c.  Staggered peak demand. Where two or more uses utilizing the same parking have distinct and different hours of peak parking demand (e.g., a theater and a bank), the required minimum number of parking spaces may be satisfied by providing the number of required spaces for the most intensive use alone. 
2.  Off-site shared parking. The use of off-site parking to satisfy the requirements of Section 17.44.030. (Number of Parking Spaces Required) shall be provided in compliance with the following standards: 
a.  Guarantee of continued availability. Required parking spaces that are off-site shall be committed by a recorded deed, parking easement, or other agreement acceptable to the Town Attorney. The parties to the deed, easement, or agreement shall include the owners, and if applicable, the lessees of the off-site parking spaces and the owners, and if applicable, the lessees of the subject site, and the Town for notification purposes, with covenants reflecting the conditions of approval and the approved off-site parking plan. 
b.  Location of parking. Approved off-site parking, except valet-serviced spaces, shall be located within 800 feet of non-residential uses, as measured from the primary entrance to the site, or other distance determined by the review authority to be appropriate. Where approved by the review authority, off-site parking may be located at a more remote site. 
c.  Evaluation of proposal. In considering a request for off-site parking at a distance of greater than those listed in Section 17.44.040A.2.b., the review authority shall consider whether adequate provisions, such as shuttle service and street crossings, have been provided to bring drivers from the parking to the site. 
d.  Identification of a facility. The review authority shall require the parking lot to be clearly marked and conspicuously identified as the exclusive or shared parking for the sites it serves, unless the parking can only be used by a valet. 
e.  Loss of off-site spaces. 
i.  Notification to the Town. The owner or operator of a business that uses approved off-site spaces to satisfy the parking requirements of this section shall immediately notify the Director of any change of ownership or use of the property for which the spaces are required, and of any termination or default of the agreement between the parties. 
ii.  Effect of termination of agreement. Upon notification that a lease for required offsite parking has terminated, the Director shall determine a reasonable time in which one of the following shall occur: 
(1)  Substitute parking is provided that is acceptable to the Director; 
(2)  The size or capacity of the use is reduced in proportion to the parking spaces lost; or 
(3)  A parking in-lieu fee shall be paid for each space eliminated. 
B.  Reduction of parking. The review authority may reduce the minimum number of parking spaces required based on quantitative information provided by the applicant that documents the need for fewer spaces and where reasonable parking efficiencies can be created. Reductions may be made based on the following: 
1.  Parking standards required for the proposed land use by other cities. 
2.  Use of a valet parking program that reduces the physical space needed for parking. 
3.  Demonstration of reduction for a land use that has a peak parking demand that does not coincide with the general peak parking demand (generally considered the evening peak period). 
4.  Implementation of transportation demand management measures (see Section 17.44.050). 
C.  Parking in-lieu fee. Upon the adoption of a parking district(s) and in-lieu fee program by the Council, the review authority may reduce or eliminate the minimum number of required on-site parking spaces for projects where the applicant executes an agreement with the Town to pay a parking in-lieu fee. The parking in-lieu fee agreement shall be recorded on the property as approved by the review authority through the use permit process. The in-lieu fee shall be determined through the adopted in-lieu fee program and shall consider current construction costs for parking (surface, understructure, underground). The funds shall be paid prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for the project. The funds shall be deposited with the Town in a special fund and shall be used and expended for the purpose of acquiring and developing off-street parking facilities located within the general vicinity of the structures for which in-lieu payments were made, as well as for meeting parking needs through strategies to reduce parking demand, or to improve access to parking. 
D.  Spaces in excess of maximum allowed. The provision of parking spaces in excess of the maximum allowed as provided in Section 17.44.030 (Number of Parking Spaces Required) may be permitted subject to approval by the review authority and if the following conditions are met: 
1.  The excess parking spaces are available for use by the public or any on- or off-site tenant, business, or use (i.e. not reserved exclusively for that tenant, business, or use). 
2.  The provision of excess parking spaces does not cause adverse impacts as determined by the review authority. 
3.  A Town-approved covenant is recorded that includes a description of the excess parking arrangement and a requirement that all current and future tenants are notified of and shall adhere to the operational conditions of approval. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.44.050 - Transportation Demand Management. 
Development that seeks to reduce parking requirements per Section 17.44.040B.4 through the implementation of travel demand management measures shall do so in accordance with this section. A trip reduction plan shall be submitted and approved by the review authority. 
A.  Renting or selling parking separately. All off-street parking spaces for new multi-family projects, may be leased or sold separately from the rental or purchase fees for the life of the units if approved by the review authority, such that potential renters or buyers have the option of renting or buying at a price lower than would be the case if there were a single price for both the built space and the parking space. 
B.  Provision of multimodal transportation improvements. Local transportation infrastructure to improve multimodal transportation and encourage "feet-first" travel (e.g., pedestrian, bicycle, transit, etc.) may be provided on- or off-site. 
C.  Commute trip reduction. The following requirements shall be applied to all new commercial or mixed-use projects in which a parking reduction under Section 17.44.040 (Alternative Parking Provisions) is requested: 
1.  Requirements for employers of 10 to 24 employees: Employers of 10 to 24 employees shall make, at a minimum, the following information available to each employee upon their date of hire: 
a.  Carpooling/vanpooling information if available, 
b.  Transit schedules and route information, 
c.  Information on air pollution and alternatives to driving to work alone, 
d.  Bicycle route and facility information, including local bicycle maps, locations of nearest bicycle racks or locker storage facilities, and bicycle safety information, and 
e.  Information on walking to work, pedestrian safety, and walking shoe information. 
2.  Requirements for employers of 25 or more employees. 
a.  The owner or representative of all new developments or businesses generating 25 or more employees shall prepare and submit to the review authority a trip reduction plan to reduce work-related vehicle trips by twenty percent from the number of trips related to the project as indicated in the most current edition of the Trip Generation Handbook published by the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE). 
b.  Any combination of the following methods may be incorporated into trip reduction plans to achieve the required vehicle reduction targets: 
i.  Alternative work schedules/flex-time; 
ii.  Preferential parking for carpool or vanpool vehicles; 
iii.  Bicycle parking and shower facilities; 
iv.  Information center for transportation alternatives; 
v.  Information on walking to work, pedestrian safety, and walking shoe information. 
vi.  Bus stop improvements; 
vii.  On-site child care facilities; 
viii.  Facilities and equipment to encourage telecommuting, 
ix.  Contributions to funds for regional facilities such as park-and-ride lots, multimodal transportation centers, satellite work centers, etc.; 
x.  On-site amenities such as cafeterias, restaurants, automated teller machines, and other services that would eliminate the need for additional trips; 
xi.  Transit incentives for employees such as additional pay for carpoolers, flexible work times, etc.; 
xii.  Elimination of free parking for employees; 
xiii.  Parking cash-out incentives for employees; 
xiv.  Video-conferencing facilities and equipment (additional credit will be given if policies are included to make facilities available to other businesses); 
xv.  Plans for delivery of goods at off-peak times for applicable businesses; and/or 
xvi.  Plans and facilities for centralized deliveries of goods for multi-tenant facilities. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), 1-21-2015)  
17.44.060 - Motorcycle Parking. 
A parking lot with 50 or more vehicle parking spaces shall provide motorcycle parking spaces conveniently located near the main entrance to the primary structure and accessed by the same access aisles that serve the vehicle parking spaces in the parking lot. 
A.  Number of spaces required. A minimum of one motorcycle parking space shall be provided for each 50 vehicle spaces or fraction thereof. 
B.  Space dimensions. Motorcycle spaces shall have minimum dimensions of four feet by seven feet. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.44.070 - Tour Bus Parking and Loading. 
As determined by the review authority, off-street tour bus parking and loading facility(s) shall be provided for new hotel, motel, and multi-family residential projects intended predominantly for nightly rental use. An electricity hook-up shall be provided for each tour bus parking space. No tour bus engine idling shall be allowed on-site. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.44.080 - Oversize Vehicle Parking. 
As determined by the review authority, oversize vehicle parking shall be provided for new hotel, motel, and multi-family residential projects intended predominantly for nightly rental use as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.44.090 - Bicycle Parking. 
Each multi-family project of four or more units and any non-residential use shall provide bicycle parking in compliance with this section. A bicycle parking and/or storage plan shall be submitted to the review authority for review and approval. Non-residential uses shall provide temporary long-term and short-term bicycle parking on a seasonal basis as approved by the review authority. 
A.  Bicycle facility standards. Bicycle parking shall be designed for both short-term and long-term needs. The bicycle parking requirement may be met on-site or may be exempted as provided in 17.44.090C. Bicycle parking facilities shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Public Works Standards. 
1.  Short-term parking is intended for bicycle trips where bicycles will be left for a short time period (generally less than 8 hours). Short-term parking shall be available to the public and should be located to provide convenient access to destinations. Short-term parking shall not be provided in designated snow-storage areas. Generally, the purpose of short-term parking is to provide for the convenience of commercial customers, employees, and residential visitors. Short-term bicycle parking shall be designed and located to address the needs of these users. 
2.  Long-term parking is intended for bicycle trips where bicycles will be left for a long-period of time (generally all day, overnight, or seasonally). Long-term bicycle parking shall be provided within a building, covered garage, or in bicycle lockers, and shall be secure and protected from weather. Long-term parking should be conveniently located and be accessible 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Long-term bicycle parking spaces may be provided as part of a communal storage area or individually as approved by the review authority. Generally, the purpose of long-term parking is to provide for the keeping of bicycles by residents and overnight visitors in residential and lodging facilities or employees of all businesses. Long -term bicycle parking facilities shall be designed to address these purposes. 
B.  Number of bicycle spaces required. Bicycle spaces shall be provided in the proportions outlined in Table 17.44.090B for short and long-term needs. 
TABLE 17.44.090(B): BICYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS BY LAND USE 
Land Use 	Spaces Required 	Required 
Short-Term 
Spaces 	Required Long-Term 
Spaces 
Residential Use Classifications 
Multi-Family Residential, Live/Work, Single Room Occupancy, and Group Living Quarters 	0.67 per unit 	15% 	85% 
Non-residential Use Classifications 
Lodging 	0.2 per unit 	15% 	85% 
Recreation, Education & Public Assembly 	2, plus 0.4 per 1,000 GLA 	85% 	15% 
Service Use Classifications (except Animal Care and Boarding, Cemeteries and Interment Services, and Warehousing, Storage, and Distribution) 	2, plus 0.4 per 1,000 GLA 	15% 	85% 
Parking Structures 	1.0 per 50 parking spaces 	0% 	100% 
Retail Use Classifications 	2, plus 0.4 per 1,000 GLA 	85% 	15% 
 
C.  Exemptions. Where it can be demonstrated that providing bicycle parking spaces required under this subsection is not physically practical or that the nature of the building use is such that bicycle parking spaces would not be used, the review authority may grant an appropriate exemption or reduced level of compliance in return for alternative, multi-modal investments as deemed appropriate by the review authority. Multi-family residential units with unshared individual garages shall be exempt. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.44.100 - Parking Design and Development Standards. 
A.  Enclosed and unenclosed parking. New development is required to provide the following minimum amounts of enclosed parking. Enclosed parking is encouraged. 
1.  Single-family residential. At least 50 percent of required parking shall be enclosed and at least one space shall be unenclosed, unless otherwise approved by the review authority. 
2.  Multi-family residential. At least 50 percent of required parking shall be enclosed. 
3.  Hotel or motel. At least 50 percent of required parking shall be enclosed. 
4.  Other uses. Enclosed parking is encouraged, but not required. 
B.  On-street parking. On-street parking shall be open to the public and shall not be reserved. On-street parking shall not be counted toward fulfilling parking requirements. On-street parking in commercial and resort zones along street frontage lines may be approved by the review authority and Council. Road widths shall comply with Public Works Standards. 
C.  Tandem parking. Vehicles may be parked in tandem where the parking area is serving a single dwelling (including dwellings in multiple-family developments when both tandem spaces are assigned to the same unit) and where the tandem parking is not more than two cars in depth. The review authority may grant approval of tandem parking for non-residential developments if the applicant demonstrates that it will not interfere with orderly parking and movement of vehicles. 
1.  The Director may also consider interior mechanical parking lifts when an attendant (valet) parking agreement is provided as permitted below. Proposals for mechanical parking lifts shall be reviewed by the Director and the fire marshal on a case-by-case basis to assess their functionality and safety. 
2.  Tandem parking arrangements for non-residential projects and where mechanical lifts are proposed, shall be approved through the use permit process and an attendant (valet) parking agreement shall be executed between the property owner and the Town to assure that valet parking is provided during all days and hours of the use of the tandem parking spaces. The attendant parking agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of each party and their respective successors and assigns. 
D.  Access to parking. 
1.  Parking, including parking garages, shall be accessed from an alley or secondary frontage when possible. The curb opening of a parking lot or garage on a frontage shall not exceed two lanes in width, except commercial uses demonstrating high exiting vehicle volumes that may have two outbound lanes or as otherwise provided in the Public Works Standards. 
2.  No curb cuts into public rights of way for purposes of providing street access to on-site parking spaces on non-primary commercial and residential streets shall be permitted except where a project site meets at least one of the following conditions: 
a.  The site has no side or rear street access having a minimum right of way width for the lanes required for access; 
b.  The topography or configuration of the site or placement of buildings on the site precludes reasonable alley or secondary access to a sufficient number of parking spaces; 
c.  Snow storage or other natural hazards necessitate such access, as approved by Public Works; 
d.  The review authority determines that a curb cut is appropriate due to traffic, circulation or safety concerns. 
i.  If curb cuts are required, curb cut widths shall be kept to the minimum width and distance from adjacent intersections required, consistent with the Public Works Standards. 
ii.  On lots with adequate access, projects with new buildings or substantial remodels shall be required to replace any existing curb cuts or driveway aprons with a new full height curb. 
iii.  Properties with existing nonconforming access driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the current Public Works Standards when the property reconstructs or repaves the project parking area. 
E.  Access to adjacent sites. Applicants are encouraged to provide off-street vehicle access to parking areas on adjacent properties to provide for convenience, safety, and efficient circulation. Pedestrian access between adjacent properties is also strongly encouraged. Where access circulation includes circulation for emergency service or other required access, cross easements shall be recorded for each property. 
F.  Parking space and lot dimensions. Parking lots and stalls shall be designed consistent with the Public Works Standards. 
G.  Maintenance. All off-street parking spaces and driveway areas shall be paved and maintained for the duration of the use requiring such areas in accordance with the requirements of the Lahontan Regional Water Quality Control Board. Snow and ice shall be removed promptly from all required off-street parking and driveway areas. 
H.  Landscaping. Parking areas shall be landscaped in compliance with Chapter 17.40 (Water Efficient Landscape Regulations) and with the following requirements. 
1.  Amount of landscaping. Each use shall provide landscaping within and/or around the parking area at a minimum ratio of 10 percent of the gross area of the parking lot. A minimum of one tree, the species of which shall be consistent with the Town of Mammoth Lakes Recommended Plant List, shall be provided for each five parking spaces. Tree plantings shall have a minimum size of three gallons as described in Section 17.36.050B. 
2.  Location of landscaping. The location of landscaping, including the placement of trees, shall be provided as part of a landscape plan to be reviewed and approved by the review authority prior to issuance of a grading permit. 
3.  Irrigation. Irrigation shall be provided for landscaped areas. 
I.  Snow storage. On-site snow storage shall be provided consistent with Section 17.36.110 (Snow Storage). 
J.  Lighting. Lighting of all parking areas shall be consistent with Section 17.36.030 (Exterior Lighting). 
K.  Striping and identification. 
1.  Vehicle spaces. All required pavement striping shall be maintained in good condition. Parking spaces shall provide understandable markings to indicate where drivers should park. Subtle markings, such as contrasting colors in paving stones, are encouraged. 
2.  Restriping. The restriping of any parking space or lot that substantially changes the existing parking layout or results in a lesser number of parking spaces, shall require the approval of a restriping plan by the review authority. 
L.  Surfacing. 
1.  All parking surfaces shall be paved with an approved material and designed to treat and retain the first flush storm as defined by the Owens River Basin Plan and Lahontan Regional Water Quality Control Board using Best Management Practices substantially in conformance with Phase 2 requirements. 
2.  All grading plans relating to the parking facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the review authority before any work can commence. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.44.110 - Driveways and Site Access. 
Each driveway providing site access from a street or other public right-of-way shall be designed, constructed, and properly maintained in compliance with the Public Works Standards, unless otherwise modified and approved by the Public Works Director. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.44.120 - Delivery Loading Space Requirements. 
Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as required by this section. The Public Works Director may modify these requirements, where it is first determined that the operating, shipping, and delivery characteristics of the use do not require the number or type of loading spaces required by this section. 
A.  Number of loading spaces required. All uses shall provide off-street loading spaces as described in Table 17.44.120. Requirements for uses not listed shall be determined by the review authority based upon the requirements for comparable uses. 
B.  Standards for off-street loading areas. Off-street loading areas shall be provided in compliance with the following: 
1.  Dimensions. Loading spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width, 40 feet in length, with at least 14 feet of vertical clearance and shall accommodate required access and turning radii. 
2.  Lighting. Loading areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety; lighting shall also comply with the requirements of Section 17.36.030 (Exterior Lighting). 
3.  Location. Loading spaces shall be: 
a.  As near as possible to the main structure and limited to the rear two-thirds of the parcel, if feasible; 
b.  Situated to ensure that the loading facility is screened from adjacent streets; 
c.  Situated to ensure that loading and unloading takes place on-site and is not located within a required front setback, adjacent public right-of-way, or other on-site traffic circulation areas; 
d.  Situated to ensure that all vehicular maneuvers occur on-site. The loading areas shall allow vehicles to enter from and exit to a public street in a forward motion only; and 
e.  Situated to avoid adverse impacts upon neighboring residential properties and located no closer than 100 feet from a residential zoning district unless adequately screened, and authorized by the review authority. 
4.  Loading ramps. Plans for loading ramps or truck wells shall be accompanied by a profile drawing showing the ramp, ramp transitions, overhead clearances, and required drainage. 
5.  Screening. Loading areas shall be screened from abutting parcels and streets with a combination of dense landscaping and faced solid masonry walls with a minimum height of six feet. 
6.  Striping. 
a.  Loading spaces shall be striped, and identified for loading only. 
b.  The striping and "loading only" notations shall be continuously maintained in a clear and visible manner in compliance with the approved plans. 
7.  Surfacing. 
a.  All loading areas shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete pavement, or comparable material as determined by the review authority and shall be graded to dispose of all surface water to the satisfaction of the review authority. 
b.  All grading plans relating to the loading facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the review authority before any work can commence. 
TABLE 17.44.120: LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS 
Type of Land Use 	Total Gross Floor Area 	Loading Spaces Required 
General Retail and Lodging 	10,000 to 25,000 square feet 	1.0 
	25,001+ square feet 	1 for each additional 25,000 square feet plus additional as required by review authority. 
Service Use Classifications (except Animal Care and Boarding, Cemeteries and Interment Services, and Warehousing, Storage, and Distribution) 	10,000 to 35,000 square feet 	1.0 
	35,001+ square feet 	1 for each additional 25,000 square feet plus additional as required by review authority. 
Multi-Family Residential, Live/Work, Single Room Occupancy, and Group Living Quarters 	50,000 to 150,000 square feet 	1.0 
	150,001 + square feet 	1 for each additional 150,000 square feet plus additional as required by review authority. 
 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014) 
   
Chapter 17.48 - Signs 
 
17.48.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations that control signage allowed within the Town, including the number, placement, height, size, type, and lighting of signs, to: 
1.  Advance the community design standards and safety standards identified in the General Plan; 
2.  Support the local economy and help nurture businesses; 
3.  Strengthen the identity of the community as a premier, year-round destination resort; 
4.  Encourage creative design that adds character to streets and districts, contributing to an attractive and hospitable streetscape; 
5.  Discourage visual clutter and negative impacts to the public realm; 
6.  Eliminate glare and minimize light pollution to improve public safety and preserve views of the stars and night sky; 
7.  Provide for signs as an effective channel of communication, while ensuring that signs are aesthetically compatible with the structures they identify; 
8.  Safeguard and protect the public health, safety and general welfare; 
9.  Avoid traffic safety hazards to pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists caused by visual distractions and obstructions; 
10.  Maximize public convenience by providing easily visible traffic, directional, informational, and wayfinding signage; and 
11.  Minimize the cost of sign permits through clear and user friendly regulations. 
B.  The regulations of this chapter are not intended to permit any violations of the provisions of any other lawful ordinance or to prohibit the use of any sign required by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.48.020 - Applicability. 
A.  Signs regulated. The regulations provided in this chapter shall apply to all signs in all zoning districts. Only signs authorized by this chapter shall be allowed. 
B.  Applicability to sign content. The provisions of this chapter do not regulate the message content of signs (sign copy), regardless of whether the message content is commercial or non-commercial. Any non-commercial message may be substituted for the copy on any commercial sign allowed by this chapter. 
C.  Applicability to federally registered marks. The provisions of this chapter shall not require alteration of the display of any registered mark, or any trademark, service mark, trade name, or corporate name that may be associated with or incorporated into a registered mark, where such alteration would require the registered mark to be displayed in a manner differing from the mark as exhibited in the certificate of registration issued by the United States Patent and Trademark Office. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish that a proposed sign includes a registered mark. 
D.  Regulatory interpretations. Where a particular type of sign is proposed in a permit application, and the type is not expressly allowed, restricted, or prohibited by this chapter, then the Director or the Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application based on the most similar sign type that is expressly regulated by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.48.030 - Sign Permit Requirements. 
A.  Applicability. A permit is required in compliance with this section to erect, move, alter, replace, suspend, display, or attach a sign, whether temporary or permanent, unless the sign is allowed without a sign permit in accordance with Section 17.48.040. Each business requires a separate sign permit. A permit is required for a change in business name on a sign. 
1.  Minor alterations (e.g., repainting with same colors, routine maintenance, etc.) may be approved without a new permit. 
2.  Permits for temporary signs may be approved on an annual basis provided the applicant submits a plan for the display of all temporary signs for a period of 12 consecutive months, and the plan is approved by the Department. 
B.  Application requirements. An application for a sign permit shall be made to the Department on a form provided for that purpose pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). All required information identified on the form shall be provided by the applicant, together with the required fees. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by Subsection 17.48.030F. 
C.  Other permits required. In addition to the requirements of this Code, all signs shall be in conformance with applicable requirements of the California Building Standards Code. Where required, the applicant shall also obtain a building permit and/or electrical permit from the Building Division. State review and approval, including the issuance of an encroachment permit, is required for signs located within the State right-of-way. Signs located within 660 feet of either State Route 203 or U.S. Highway 395 may require a permit from the Outdoor Advertising Division of Caltrans. 
D.  Review authority. Table 17.48.030D identifies the responsible review authority for each type of sign approval. 
TABLE 17.48.030(D): SIGN REVIEW AUTHORITY 
Type of Permit or Decision 	Procedure is in Section 	Director 2 	Planning and Economic Development Commission 	Town Council 
Master Sign Program 	17.48.030 	- 	Decision 	Appeal 
Sign Permit 	17.48.050 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Notes: 
(1) "Decision" means that the review authority makes the final decision on the matter; "Appeal" means that the review authority may consider and decide upon appeals of an earlier decision, in compliance with Chapter 17.104 (Appeals). 
(2) The Director may refer any matter subject to his/her decision to the Commission, so that the Commission may instead make the decision. 
 
E.  Time line for decision; waiver of time. At each level of review, all sign related decisions, including any hearing when procedurally required, shall be made within 60 calendar days from when the Town determines the project is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act or adopts a negative declaration for the project. The failure of the review authority to render any decision within the time frames established in this Subsection shall be deemed to constitute a denial and the applicant shall have the immediate right to appeal. 
F.  Findings and decision. After a sign permit application is deemed complete, the review authority shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. The review authority may approve a sign permit application, with or without conditions, only after the following findings are made: 
1.  The sign complies with the standards of this chapter, any applicable specific plan or master plan, and any applicable Master Sign Program; and 
2.  The sign is in substantial compliance with the Town's Design Guidelines. 
G.  Post approval procedures. The procedures and requirements in Chapter 17.104 (Appeals) shall apply following a decision on a sign permit. 
H.  Expiration and extension of sign permit approval. 
1.  A sign permit shall expire 12 months from the date of approval unless the sign has been installed or a different expiration date is stipulated in the approval; temporary signs shall comply with time limits identified for temporary signs in this chapter. 
2.  A sign permit shall expire when the activity, product, business, service, or other use which is being advertised or identified has ceased for a period of not less than 90 days or has moved from the location where the sign was permitted. 
3.  A sign permit shall expire when a sign is removed from the approved location for more than 90 days or a new permit is approved for a replacement sign. 
4.  Upon written request by the applicant, the original review authority may extend the sign permit up to an additional 12 months from the original date of expiration based on site specific conditions justifying the original approval and whether or not those conditions have changed, consistent with Subsection 17.64.060B.4 (Action on extension request). The Director may make the extension subject to new conditions of approval should site-specific conditions warrant revised or new conditions. 
5.  The expiration date of a sign permit shall be automatically extended to coincide with the expiration date of the companion building permit or other applicable permits for the project. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), 1-21-2015)  
17.48.040 - Signs Not Requiring a Permit. 
The following signs and sign maintenance and modification activities are allowed without sign permit approval subject to the limitations specified herein; however, any required building permit shall be obtained prior to installation of the sign. These signs shall not be included in the determination of the total allowable number of signs or total allowable sign area for a property or business. However, any deviation from the limitations specified herein shall require a sign permit and may be counted toward the total allowable number of signs or total allowable sign area at the discretion of the Director. 
A.  Nonstructural modifications and maintenance. 
1.  Modifications to changeable copy. Modification or changes to the face or copy of conforming changeable copy signs. A permit shall be required for a change in business name on a sign. 
2.  Maintenance. The normal maintenance of conforming signs, including painting, repairing, or cleaning of a sign. A permit shall be required for a change of color, materials, or design of an existing sign. 
B.  Permanent signs. 
1.  Addresses. Addresses consistent with Chapter 16.32 (Street Name and Address Regulations). 
2.  Informational and directional signs. Informational and directional signage of no greater than an aggregate of four square feet per business and no more than two signs per business, provided that such signage does not contain any advertising, brand, or product information. Additional sign area or number of signs shall be allowed if required by the Town or other public agency for the purpose of public health, safety, and general welfare. 
3.  "Open" signs. One "open" sign of no more than two and one-half square feet is allowed per business. "Open" signs may utilize neon; however, blinking or flashing signs are prohibited. 
4.  Vacancy/no vacancy signs. Each transient rental business is allowed one vacancy/no vacancy sign of no more than two and one-half square feet. Vacancy/no vacancy signs may be internally illuminated and/or utilize neon. 
C.  Temporary signs. 
1.  Community event information. Posters, flyers, and announcements promoting community events, not containing advertisements for products or services not associated with the community event, and removed within two days of the close of the event. 
2.  Directional signs (temporary). Temporary directional signs, in addition to those allowed by Subsection 17.48.040B.2, not to exceed six square feet in total area. 
3.  Garage sale signs. One sign for a garage, yard, rummage, or estate sale of no greater than four square feet and no taller than four feet is allowed to be displayed during the hours of the sale. Garage sale signs shall only be displayed on the private property where the sale is located, and shall not be placed within any State or Town right-of-way. 
4.  Political signs. 
a.  Political signs shall not exceed six square feet and shall not be located within any State or Town right-of-way or on public property. 
b.  A campaign sign may be displayed on a wooden post or wire frame, shall be no taller than four feet, and shall be removed within five days following the election. 
c.  Political signs within 660 feet of a State highway shall comply with the Outdoor Advertising Act. 
5.  Real estate signs. Real estate signs in compliance with California Civil Code Section 713 and subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Residential zones. Properties within residential zones are allowed one real estate sign of no more than four square feet per property. 
b.  Non-residential zones. Properties within non-residential zones are allowed one real estate sign of no more than 12 square feet per property. 
c.  Multi-tenant properties. In addition to the real estate signs listed in Subsection 17.48.040C.5.a. and b., above, multi-tenant properties in all zones are allowed one real estate sign of no more than four square feet, located within each available tenant space, including tenant spaces above the second story. 
d.  Freestanding real estate signs. Freestanding real estate signs shall not exceed four feet in height and may be a portable sign or displayed on a wooden post. Sign structure shall be reasonably durable and clearly incidental to the sign, or otherwise shall be counted towards sign area. 
e.  Open house signs. Open house signs are allowed consistent with regulations for temporary portable signs, Subsection 17.48.090N.3. 
D.  Governmental signs. Signs installed by the Town, County, or a Federal or State governmental agency, because of their responsibilities for the protection of public health, safety, and general welfare. These signs may be internally illuminated if necessary for the protection of public health, safety, and general welfare. 
1.  Emergency and warning signs necessary for public safety or civil defense. 
2.  Traffic signs and devices erected and maintained by an authorized public agency. 
3.  Legal notices, licenses, permits, and other signs required to be displayed by law. 
4.  Signs showing the location of public facilities, destinations, or attractions (e.g., directional, information, and wayfinding signs). 
5.  Any sign, posting, notice, or similar sign placed by or required by a governmental agency in carrying out its responsibilities. 
E.  Signs damaged or destroyed by snow. The replacement of signs substantially damaged or destroyed by snow, snow plows, or other snow management efforts by the Town or public agencies, with the same or substantially similar sign in the same location shall be allowed regardless of structural changes required, provided that any required building permit is obtained and that Section 17.48.120 (Non Conforming Signs) is complied with. 
F.  Miscellaneous signs. 
1.  Flags. United States flags are exempt from these regulations. Official flags of national, State, or local governments, or nationally recognized fraternal, public service, or religious organization; provided that the flag is not used for commercial advertising (i.e., contains no commercial copy) and subject to the following limitations: 
a.  There shall be no more than three such flags per property. 
b.  Maximum flag size shall be three feet by five feet when hung from a building, and five feet by seven feet when hung from a flag pole over 30 feet in height. 
c.  Flags shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet over pedestrian areas and 15 feet over vehicular areas. 
  
2.  Historical items. Historical plaques erected and maintained by the Town or historical agencies, memorials, building cornerstones, and date-constructed stones; provided that none of these exceed four square feet in area. 
3.  Menu display boxes. Menu display boxes of up to three square feet. Menu display boxes may include an area used to communicate daily, weekly, or other "specials." 
4.  Merchandise. Merchandise incorporated as an integral part of an indoor window display, including photographic window display of real estate available for sale, lease, or rent from a licensed real estate broker. 
5.  Residential nameplates. Residential nameplates of not more than two square feet, one per property, that have no commercial message or identification. 
6.  Seasonal displays. Temporary, non-commercial decorations or displays associated with any national, local, or religious celebration. 
7.  Signs on vehicles (including Mobile Businesses). Signs neatly and permanently affixed on a vehicle, one sign per vehicle side, and only identifying the name of a business, generic services, contact information, and location; provided, however, such vehicles shall not be used as parked or stationary outdoor display signs (i.e., Subsection 17.48.060B.11). Such signage shall not be a banner, board, paper, or any temporary sign and shall not substantially project or deviate from the vehicle profile. 
8.  Theater poster cases. Theaters may use glass-enclosed cases to display posters that advertise current or forthcoming programs. One poster case, not exceeding 16 square feet, is allowed for each movie screen or stage. 
9.  Vehicle station fuel price signs. Vehicle station fuel price signs required by State law, one sign per station not to exceed 12 square feet or other size as required by State law. No information other than as required or allowed by local, State, or Federal law shall be displayed. These signs may utilize changeable copy. Vehicle station fuel price signs shall not be internally illuminated. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.48.050 - Master Sign Program. 
A.  Applicability. A Master Sign Program approved by the Commission shall be required for any site with four or more businesses or tenant spaces, regardless of whether the tenant spaces are occupied. A Master Sign Program may be requested by an applicant for a site with less than four businesses or tenant spaces, but is not required. No sign permit shall be approved for a site with four or more businesses or tenant spaces unless and until the Commission has approved a Master Sign Program for the subject site. 
B.  Application requirements. An application for a Master Sign Program shall be made to the Department on a form provided for that purpose pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). All required information identified on the form shall be provided by the applicant, together with the required fees. If the application includes a request for an exception to this chapter, consistent with Subsection 17.48.050D, information shall be provided explaining why the exception is warranted and how the exception is consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by Subsection 17.48.050E. 
C.  Time line for decision; waiver of time. See Subsection 17.48.030E. 
D.  Exceptions to this chapter. As part of a Master Sign Program approval, the Commission may grant exceptions to the standards of this chapter for the maximum number and size of signs, based on site-specific conditions and design features including architectural style, building mass, and site visibility to ensure that signs for a uniquely planned or designed development area are most appropriate for that particular development or area. A Master Sign Program may also be more restrictive than this chapter. 
E.  Findings and decision. After a Master Sign Program application is deemed complete, the Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny a Master Sign Program application. The Commission may approve a Master Sign Program application, with or without conditions, only after the following findings are made: 
1.  The Master Sign Program complies with the standards of this chapter and any applicable specific plan or master plan; or 
2.  If the Master Sign Program does not comply with the standards of this chapter, the Master Sign Program complies with the purpose and intent of this chapter; 
3.  The Master Sign Program is in substantial compliance with the Town's Design Guidelines; and 
4.  The signs within the Master Sign Program are visually related to each other and to the structure and/or developments they identify. 
F.  Post approval procedures. The procedures and requirements in Chapter 17.104 (Appeals) shall apply following a decision on a Master Sign Program. 
G.  No expiration for Master Sign Programs. A Master Sign Program shall have no expiration date, but may be revised consistent with Subsection 17.48.050.I. 
H.  Individual sign permits required. Individual sign permits are required for signs located within a site subject to an approved Master Sign Program. All signs erected or maintained within a site subject to a Master Sign Program shall conform at all times to the approved Master Sign Program. 
I.  Revisions to Master Sign Programs. Minor revisions to a Master Sign Program may be approved by the Director if it is determined that the intent of the original approval, and any conditions attached thereto, are not affected. Major revisions to a Master Sign Program shall be approved by the Commission. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.48.060 - Prohibited Signs. 
A.  Types of prohibited signs. All signs not expressly allowed by this chapter shall be prohibited. 
B.  Examples of prohibited signs. Examples of prohibited signs include the following: 
1.  Abandoned signs; 
2.  Illegal signs; 
3.  Inflatable or tethered signs or devices; 
4.  Internally illuminated signs, except as allowed by this chapter; 
5.  Moving signs, including blinking, chasing, or flashing signs, except as allowed by this chapter, signs that emit a varying intensity of light or color, or signs that contain moving parts; 
6.  Home occupation signs; 
7.  Off-premises signs, except as allowed by this chapter; 
8.  Pole signs, including signs attached to utility poles or snow stakes; 
9.  Pricing signs, except vehicle station fuel price signs, menu display boxes, and drive-up menu boards as allowed by this chapter; 
10.  Roof signs; 
11.  Signs attached to or suspended from any vehicle, boat, mobile home, snowmobile, or other movable object parked within or next to a Town or State right-of-way or in a location on private property that is visible from a Town or State right-of-way, except a sign painted directly upon, magnetically affixed to, or permanently affixed to the body or other integral part of the vehicle (i.e., Subsection 17.48.040F.7, Signs on vehicles); 
12.  Signs burned or cut into a tree, otherwise marked on a tree or otherwise affixed to a tree; 
13.  Signs that simulate in color, size, or design any traffic control sign or signal, or signs that make use of characters, symbols, or words in a manner that interferes with, misleads, or confuses pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
14.  Signs with reflective surfaces, except for street and traffic signs or other signs for public safety; 
15.  Signs within a Town right-of-way, except as allowed by Subsection 17.48.080B.4; 
16.  Statuary signs; 
17.  Temporary signs, except as allowed by this chapter; 
18.  Walking signs, including costumed characters or signs held or supported by human beings, except for non-commercial signs; 
19.  Banner signs, except as allowed by this chapter; and 
20.  Flutter flags. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 10), 1-21-2015)  
17.48.070 - Measurement of Sign Area and Height. 
A.  Measurement of sign area. The measurement of sign area for the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter is defined below. 
1.  Surface area. The surface area of a sign shall be calculated by enclosing the extreme limits of all writing, logo, representation, emblem, or other display within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles with no more than eight perimeter lines, or within a single circle. See Figure 17.48.070A. 
2.  Sign structure. Supporting structure, bracing, and/or framework that are determined by the Director to be clearly incidental to the sign display itself shall not be included in the calculation of total sign area. 
3.  Double-faced signs. The area of a double-faced sign shall be calculated for one face only if the two faces are back-to-back, parallel, and separated by no more than 24 inches, and the copy is identical on both faces. 
4.  Three-dimensional signs. The area of a sign consisting of one or more three-dimensional objects (e.g., balls, cubes, clusters of objects, or sculpture), shall be measured as their maximum projection upon a vertical plane. See Figure 17.48.070A.4. 
  
B.  Measurement of sign height. 
1.  Sign height. Sign height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the lowest point of finished grade adjacent to the sign to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. See Figure 17.48.070B. 
2.  Signs in planters. The height of a sign located in a planter may be measured from the top of the planter, provided that the planter is no greater than 12 inches above finished grade as defined in 17.48.070B. 
3.  Sign frame and lighting. Subject to the Director's approval, sign frame and lighting may exceed the height limit, provided such is a necessary structural design feature. 
  
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.48.080 - General Requirements for All Signs. 
All signs shall be subject to the following requirements, whether or not the sign requires a permit. 
A.  Sign maintenance. The following maintenance standards shall be continually met for all signs. 
1.  Each sign, including the supporting structure and hardware, shall be structurally sound, maintained in good repair, and functioning properly at all times. All signs shall be neatly placed and securely affixed. No sign shall constitute a hazard to safety, health, or public welfare. 
2.  All signs shall be maintained as originally approved in a clean, neat, and undamaged condition. 
3.  Maintenance of a sign shall include periodic cleaning, mending or replacement of any faded, peeled, cracked, rusted, or otherwise damaged or broken parts thereof, replacement of flickering, burned out, or broken light bulbs, and other actions as necessary to comply with the purpose of this chapter. 
4.  When an existing sign is removed or replaced, all brackets, poles, and other supports that are no longer required shall be removed, and any newly exposed portions of a building or structure on which the sign is displayed shall be repaired and repainted as necessary to restore a uniform appearance to the building surface or structure. 
5.  Signs which are not properly maintained and are dilapidated shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in compliance with the Municipal Code. 
B.  Sign location. 
1.  Each sign shall be located on the same site as the subject of the sign, except as otherwise allowed by this chapter. 
2.  Signs shall be located on the business frontage, except as otherwise allowed by this chapter. 
3.  Signs shall be allowed on sides of buildings or businesses not considered as businesses frontage (i.e., where no customer access is available) when the building wall fronts on a public street or faces a plaza, courtyard, pedestrian corridor or walkway, parking lot, or alley. 
4.  No sign shall be placed on or project over public property or into a Town right-of-way, except for the following: 
a.  Governmental signs including bus stop signs, emergency warning signs, signs to direct or regulate pedestrian, bicycle or vehicular traffic, public notices, information signs, and wayfinding signs; 
b.  Community event signs and community information signs, including across the street banners as approved by the Town and/or the State as required for the sign, and allowed by this chapter; 
c.  A sign constructed by a public agency on its property, which is allowed by this chapter; 
d.  A monument sign consistent with Subsection 17.48.090H.5; and 
e.  A portable sign consistent with Subsection 17.48.090N.3.b. 
5.  No sign shall be located in a manner that will impede or obstruct pedestrian, bicycle, or vehicular safety. 
6.  No sign shall be placed so as to interfere with the operation of a door, fire escape, window, or other required exit. 
7.  Signs located within 660 feet of either State Route 203 or U.S. Highway 395 shall comply with the Outdoor Advertising Act and Regulations administered by Caltrans. 
C.  Sign area. 
1.  The aggregate area of all signs displayed on a site shall not exceed total allowable sign area established by this Subsection, unless such sign is specifically exempt from being counted towards total allowable sign area. 
2.  The total square footage of allowable sign area for any business shall not exceed two square feet for each three lineal feet of business frontage (i.e., linear feet of business frontage x 2/3 = maximum allowable sign area in square feet). 
3.  Where a business has two separate frontages, additional signage for the second frontage shall be allowed up to the amount otherwise allowed for the primary frontage alone. The second frontage may or may not include a customer access point to the building. Such additional signage may be allowed for corner units and businesses in a single building. 
4.  Signs are subject to the size restrictions identified in Section 17.48.090. No sign shall exceed 30 square feet, except as specifically provided in this chapter. 
5.  Any business not having the necessary frontage to permit at least 12 square feet of aggregate sign area shall, in any event, be permitted 12 square feet of aggregate sign area. 
6.  The total allowable aggregate sign area may be increased by 20 percent if a sign and business frontage identified by the sign are located 140 feet or more from the centerline of the street on which they face; provided however, that the increase shall only be applied to the sign located 140 feet or more from the centerline of the street on which they face. The increased aggregate sign area shall not increase the maximum sign sizes as allowed by this chapter or by a Master Sign Program approved after the adoption of this chapter. 
7.  The following signs shall not be counted towards the total allowable aggregate sign area or the total allowable number of signs; however, any sign that deviates from the limitations specified herein shall be counted toward the total allowable aggregate sign area: 
a.  Signs Not Requiring a Permit (Section 17.48.040); 
b.  Across the street banners; 
c.  Community event signs including banners, directional, and informational signs for the event; 
d.  Community information signs; 
e.  Copy on an awning that does not exceed six inches in height and consistent with Subsection 17.48.090A; 
f.  Drive-up menu boards; 
g.  Identification signs for multi-tenant centers that do not advertise any particular business or product; 
h.  One pedestrian-oriented business identification sign per business (i.e., a hanging or projecting sign) of no greater than six square feet; 
i.  Temporary banners as approved by the Town in compliance with this chapter; and 
j.  Tenant directory signs of no more than 12 square feet with up to two inch high lettering displayed on the first floor. 
D.  Signs on structures. 
1.  No sign shall be displayed above the second story of any building, except for multi-tenant property real estate signs consistent with Subsection 17.48.040C.5.c. 
2.  No sign shall extend above the top of the wall to which the sign is attached. 
E.  Sign lighting. Sign lighting shall be designed to minimize light and glare on surrounding Town and State rights-of-way and properties in compliance with Section 17.36.030 (Exterior Lighting) and the following standards. 
1.  External light sources shall be directed and shielded to prevent glare and light trespass onto adjacent properties and Town or State rights-of-way. 
2.  Signs with internal light sources (e.g., halo lit, neon, and other signs as allowed by this chapter) shall be designed to prevent glare and light trespass onto adjacent properties and Town or State rights-of-way. 
3.  The light source (e.g., bulb) shall not be visible off-site, including Town or State rights-of-way, except for sign with neon tubing and electronic message signs as allowed by this chapter. 
4.  Sign lighting shall not exceed that necessary for sign legibility and shall not be of an intensity or brightness that will create a visual nuisance. 
5.  Sign illumination shall not blink, flash, flutter, or change light brightness, color, or intensity. 
6.  Signs shall not use colored lights or other design elements that may be confused with or mistaken for traffic control devices. 
7.  Neither the direct nor reflected light from primary light sources shall create hazards for pedestrians, bicyclists, or operators of motor vehicles. 
8.  Light sources shall utilize energy-efficient fixtures to the greatest extent feasible. 
9.  All light fixtures, conduit, and shielding shall be painted in flat dark colors, or painted to match either the building or supporting structure that serves as the background of the sign. 
10.  Where Section 17.36.030 (Exterior Lighting) conflicts with this Chapter 17.48 (Signs), Chapter 17.48 (Signs) will take precedence. 
F.  Sign materials and design. 
1.  Materials. Sign materials shall be durable and capable of withstanding snow, wind, and weathering over the life of the sign with reasonable maintenance. The use of natural materials and materials made to resemble natural materials are encouraged. 
2.  Compatibility. All signs shall be compatible with the theme, visual quality, and overall character of the surrounding area, and appropriately related in size, shape, materials, and character to the function and architectural character of the building or premise on which they will be displayed. In assessing compatibility, sign style, color, material, lighting, support elements, and the buildings, structures, and premises on which they are displayed, shall be considered. 
3.  Design. 
a.  Signs should express individuality, be thoughtfully designed, unique, and creative, especially in non-residential and non-industrial zones. 
b.  Permanent signs should include three-dimensional elements or some sort of relief. "Flat" signs without any relief should not be allowed for permanent signs in non-residential and non-industrial zones. This requirement shall not apply to temporary signs. 
4.  Sites with less than four businesses or tenant spaces. Master Sign Programs are not required for sites with less than four businesses or tenant spaces; however, signs on these sites shall not compete against each other for attention in a manner taking advantage of extreme, disharmonious, or clashing colors, shapes, locations, or materials. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.48.090 - Standards for Specific Types of Signs. 
Proposed signs shall comply with the following standards applicable to the specific sign type. Each sign shall also comply with Section 17.48.080 (General Requirements for All Signs), Section 17.48.100 (Sign Standards by Zoning District), and all other applicable provisions of this chapter. Each sign shall be included in the calculation of the total allowable aggregate sign area and the total allowable number of signs except for those signs identified in Subsection 17.48.080C.7 Sign permits are required for all signs except for those identified in Section 17.48.040 (Signs Not Requiring a Permit). Any non-commercial message may be substituted for the copy on any commercial sign allowed by this chapter. 
A.  Awnings. 
1.  Signs on awnings are limited to ground level businesses only. The minimum clearance between the lowest point of an awning and the grade immediately below shall be eight feet. 
2.  Copy on an awning shall not exceed 50 percent of lineal awning frontage or 30 square feet, whichever is less. 
3.  Translucent awning materials are prohibited. 
4.  No duplication of wording shall be permitted on an awning. 
  
B.  Changeable copy signs. A changeable copy sign shall be allowed for businesses and uses that communicate changing messages such as theaters and vehicle station fuel price signs. Such a sign shall be subject to the limits for the physical type of sign it is (e.g., wall sign); however, it shall not be internally illuminated. 
  
C.  Decorative banners and flags. Decorative banners and flags shall only be allowed if approved by a Master Sign Program under Section 17.48.050. Decorative banners and flags shall not contain or display any commercial or advertising copy. 
D.  Drive-up menu boards. Menu boards of drive-through businesses may either be internally or externally illuminated. Lighting and electrical components shall be such that menu boards are not readily readable or audible from adjacent properties or from Town or State rights-of-way. 
E.  Electronic message signs. 
1.  Electronic message signs shall be located only in the Public and Quasi-Public Zone. 
2.  Electronic message signs shall not flash, blink, flutter, include chasing lights, or display video messages (i.e., any illumination or message that is in motion or appears to be in motion). Electronic messages signs may display changing messages; however, each message shall be displayed for no less than four seconds. 
3.  One electronic message sign may be allowed per property. 
4.  Electronic message signs shall be limited to a brightness level of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light and shall incorporate automatic dimming technology to consistently maintain the required light levels. 
5.  Electronic message signs shall include well-designed opaque roof features to keep light from shining up. Signs and roof features shall be consistent with Subsection 17.48.090F (Sign materials and design). 
6.  A design review permit and Commission approval shall be required for approval of an electronic message sign. 
F.  Halo lit signs. Halo lighting shall be allowed on hanging, monument, projecting, theater, and wall signs only and shall be subject to the maximum size area and the maximum number allowed for each specific sign type, as specified in Section 17.48.090 and Table 17.48.100(B). Halo lit signs are not allowed in any residential zone. 
  
G.  Hanging signs. Hanging signs are limited to ground level businesses only, located on business frontages with customer access. The minimum clearance between the lowest point of a sign and the grade immediately below shall be eight feet. 
1.  No hanging sign shall extend more than six feet from a building wall. 
2.  Hanging signs shall not be larger than eight square feet. 
3.  Sign supports shall be well-designed and compatible with the design of the sign. 
  
H.  Monument signs. 
1.  Number. Generally, one monument sign is allowed per business, property, or multi-tenant center. However, more than one monument sign may be permitted if reasonable identification cannot otherwise be achieved, such as properties where access points are separated by long distances or corner properties with access points on two separate streets. 
2.  Separation. Multiple monument signs shall be separated by a minimum of 75 feet to ensure adequate visibility for all signs. The Director may modify this requirement where the locations of existing signs on adjacent properties would make the 75-foot separation impractical. 
3.  Height. A monument sign shall not exceed eight feet in height except as follows: 
a.  Signs along Main Street and Lake Mary Road shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
b.  Sign structures may extend 12 inches above the allowable height for the purposes of sign structure enhancement or embellishment. See Figure 17.48.090(H). 
c.  In locations where snow removal equipment cannot access the sign area, sign height may be increased subject to the Director's approval; however, no sign shall exceed 16 feet in height. 
d.  In locations where the base of a sign is five feet or more below the centerline of the street on which the sign faces, sign height may be increased subject to the Director's approval; however, no sign shall exceed 16 feet in height. 
4.  Setback. Generally, there shall be a minimum five-foot setback from a Town or State right-of-way to any monument sign. A smaller setback may be approved by the Town to meet the intent of this chapter (Section 17.48.010). 
5.  Encroachment. Monument signs may encroach into a 200 foot or greater two lane right-of-way when the sign will not be closer than 20 feet from the pavement in such right-of-way, the primary access for the subject use is off such right-of-way, and an encroachment permit is obtained from the Public Works Director and/or the State, as required for the sign. 
6.  Durable materials. Monument signs adjacent to Town or State rights-of-way shall be constructed of highly durable materials and designed to withstand the impacts of snow removal operations; materials such as high density polyurethane shall not be allowed unless the sign design is approved by the Public Works Director. 
7.  Sign base. A rock base or similar architectural design is required for the frame and base of all monument signs. The base shall have an aggregate width of at least 40 percent of the width of the sign face. See Figure 17.48.090H.7. The Director may approve a reduction in the width of the sign base if the sign is otherwise consistent with this Chapter. 
  
8.  Landscaped area. Landscaping shall be provided at the base of the supporting structure equal to the area of one face of the sign; for example, a 30 square foot sign shall require 30 square feet of landscaped area. The Director may modify this requirement if necessary to avoid creating or increasing a parking nonconformity or safety hazard. 
9.  Signs for more than one business. Monument signs identifying more than one business shall be designed as one sign. 
10.  Building permits. For monument signs that are less than four feet in height and do not include any electrical work, no building permit shall be required. 
I.  Neon signs. Neon "open" and "vacancy/no vacancy" signs are allowed in compliance with Subsection 17.48.040B.3 and 4 and are not subject to the requirements of this Subsection. The use of neon on other types of signs shall be subject to the following requirements. 
1.  Neon shall only be used for sign details that are intended to provide accessory graphics and artistic elements to a sign (e.g., a sign's copy, background, or border shall not be composed entirely of neon tubing). 
2.  No more than one sign with neon details shall be allowed per business, and shall not be located in any residential zone. 
3.  Neon elements shall not be permitted on any monument sign or any sign larger than 20 square feet. 
4.  Signs with neon details shall incorporate dimming capabilities to the extent feasible (e.g., technologies such as flexible light-emitting diode (LED) neon are capable of being dimmed). 
J.  Projecting signs. 
1.  Projecting signs are limited to ground level businesses only, located on business frontages with customer access. The minimum clearance between the lowest point of a sign and the grade immediately below shall be eight feet. 
2.  No projecting sign shall extend more than six feet from a building wall. 
3.  Projecting signs shall not be larger than 12 square feet and shall be double-sided. 
4.  Sign supports shall be well-designed and compatible with the design of the sign. 
  
K.  Theater signs. Subject to the review and approval of the Director, a theater sign may exceed 30 square feet as necessary to adequately display current or coming programs to the public. Theater signs may utilize changeable copy. Any theater sign greater than 30 square feet shall not utilize an electronic message sign or be internally illuminated. 
L.  Wall signs. 
1.  A wall sign shall not project more than six inches from the surface to which it is attached. 
2.  Wall signs on multi-tenant buildings shall have a minimum four-foot horizontal separation. The Director may approve deviation from this requirement where unusual building design or configuration conditions prevent a reasonably visible sign opportunity. 
  
M.  Window signs (permanent and temporary). 
1.  Placement. Permanent and temporary window signs shall be allowed only on windows located on the ground level and second story of a business frontage. 
2.  Size. Permanent and temporary window signs shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the total window area. No temporary window sign shall exceed six square feet. 
3.  Number. There shall be no more than four window signs per business, including permanent and temporary window signs. Only two window signs may be temporary. 
4.  Application. Permanent window signs shall be permanently painted, mounted, or applied directly to the inside of the glass (i.e., windows and/or doors). Permanent and temporary window signs shall be no more than one inch thick. 
5.  Duration of display for temporary signs. Temporary window signs displayed for up to 15 days not more than once per calendar quarter do not require a permit; temporary window signs displayed for a longer or more frequent period or periods, up to a maximum of 30 consecutive days, require a sign permit. 
6.  Modifications. The Director may authorize modifications to these provisions to allow for additional window signage, number of window signs, or other similar modifications through an administrative permit. 
  
N.  Temporary signs. Except as allowed by this chapter, temporary signs are prohibited. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated unless approved by the Town for public safety. The application for temporary sign permits shall include the dates proposed by the applicant for use or display of the sign. See Table 17.48.090N for a summary of standards and permit requirements for temporary signs. 
1.  Banners. 
a.  Size. Banners shall not exceed 20 square feet except as otherwise provided in this Subsection. 
b.  Design. A banner shall not be overly bright, distracting, or disharmonious with the building to or property on which it is displayed. 
c.  Deposit. A deposit may be required by the Director for a temporary sign permit for a banner. The deposit may be revoked if the temporary banner is not removed within two days following the end of the approved duration of display. 
d.  Grand Opening Banners. Grand opening banners for newly established businesses may be allowed for a period of no longer than 30 consecutive days. 
e.  Across the street banners. 
i.  Banners shall be associated with a civic, community, educational, or cultural event and shall contain no commercial or advertising copy. 
ii.  Banners shall be approved by the State and/or Town through an encroachment permit and/or other necessary permit(s). 
iii.  Across the street banners shall be limited to Main Street/State Route 203, Old Mammoth Road commercial district, and the following street segments in the North Village Specific Plan: Minaret Road north of Main Street and south of Forest Trail, Canyon Boulevard, and Lake Mary Road. 
iv.  Banners shall be displayed for a period of no less than seven days and no more than 21 days. 
v.  Banners shall be installed in an approved location by the State and/or Town. 
vi.  Banners shall be the minimum size necessary to accomplish the intended use and may exceed 30 square feet if approved by the Director. 
vii.  The Town may charge a reasonable fee to cover the cost of installing and removing the banner, as determined by resolution of the Council. 
  
2.  Community event signs. 
a.  Community event signs shall not be subject to sign permit fees. 
b.  Signs may be permitted off-site subject to the approval of the Director and the owner of the property on which the sign would be located. Signs may be permitted within the Town or State right-of-way consistent with Subsection 17.48.080B.4.b. 
c.  Signs may be larger than 30 square feet, subject to the Director's approval. 
d.  Signs may include temporary portable informational and directional signs, banners, or other types of signs as approved by the Director. 
3.  Portable signs. The use of small portable signs is allowed within all zoning districts with the exception of the OMR and D Districts, subject to the following requirements. 
a.  One portable sign may be allowed on-site in addition to all other permanent signs allowed for the business or activity. 
b.  Five additional off-site portable signs for a given business or activity may be located within the Town right-of-way subject to approval of an encroachment permit by the Director and Town Engineer, provided they do not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian movement or wheelchair access to, through, and around the site on which the sign is located. A minimum access width of six feet shall be maintained along all sidewalks and building entrances accessible to the public. The Town Engineer may require additional minimum access width for high-use pedestrian areas. 
c.  Portable signs shall not be located within the State's right-of-way, except where permitted under State law. Signs within 660 feet of a State highway shall comply with the Outdoor Advertising Act. 
d.  Portable signs shall not encroach into required parking areas, shall not obstruct pedestrian traffic, and shall not create traffic hazards. 
e.  There shall be at least 50 feet between portable signs. 
f.  Portable signs are limited to six square feet per side, and shall be no taller than four feet. 
g.  Portable signs are only allowed on Thursdays, Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays, and Federal or State holidays, between 8 a.m. and dusk, for no more than 10 hours per day. However, in no case shall a portable sign be displayed during non-business hours. 
h.  Portable signs located on-site shall be counted towards the maximum cumulative display periods and total sign area allowed for temporary signs. 
i.  All businesses with portable signs shall indemnify and hold harmless the Town from any action or expense that may occur as a result of a portable sign being located on any sidewalk or Town right-of-way, satisfactory to the Town Attorney. Portable signs for any business that fails to indemnify the Town shall be deemed illegal, nonconforming, and shall be removed. 
j.  Portable signs shall be constructed of durable, weather-resistant materials, and shall be professional in appearance at all times. 
k.  A sign permit is not required for a portable sign that is consistent with the requirements of this Subsection, unless the sign would be located within the Town's right-of-way as allowed by Subsection b, above. 
l.  Signs shall be maintained in compliance with Subsection 17.48.080A. 
4.  Real estate development signs. 
a.  One real estate development sign shall be allowed for each development site. 
b.  A real estate development sign shall be removed at or before expiration of the entitlement permits for the site (e.g., use permit, tentative map, etc.). However, if a building permit is issued for the site, the real estate development sign may remain and shall be treated as a site construction sign. 
5.  Site construction signs. 
a.  One site construction sign shall be allowed for each development site. 
b.  A site construction sign may be displayed after the issuance of a building permit for the site and shall be removed at or before final building inspection or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. If the building permit expires, the sign shall be immediately removed. 
TABLE 17.48.090(N): STANDARDS FOR TEMPORARY SIGNS 
Allowed Sign 
Type 	Maximum 
Number 	Maximum 
Sign Area 	Maximum 
Sign Height 	Time Limit 	Permit 
Required? 	Additional 
Requirements 1 
Banner - Across the street 	Not limited by number 	May exceed 30 s.f. if approved by Director 	Limited by supporting structure 	7—21 days 	Yes 	See Subsection 17.48.090 
N.1.e 
Banner - Grand opening 2 	1 per business 	20 s.f. 	Not above the second story 	30 days 	Yes 	For newly established businesses 
Community event sign 	Not limited by number 	May exceed 30 s.f. if approved by Director 	Limited by sign type 	At the discretion of the Director 	Yes 	See Subsection 17.48.090 
N.2 
Community event information 	Not limited by number 	Limited by sign type 	Limited by sign type 	Removed 2 days after event 	No 	See Subsection 17.48.040 
C.1 
Directional sign 	Not limited by number 	6 s.f. 	Limited by sign type 	As deemed necessary by the Director 	No 	See Subsection 17.48.040C.2 
Garage sale sign 	1 per garage sale 	4 s.f. 	4 feet 	Only during hours of sale 	No 	See Subsection 17.48.040 
C.3 
Political sign 	Not limited by number 	6 s.f. 	4 feet 	Removed within 5 days after election 	No 	See Subsection 17.48.040 
C.4 
Portable signs 	1 on-site per property and up to 5 off-site in the Town right-of-way 	6 s.f. per side 	4 feet 	Thursdays, Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays, and Federal or State holidays. between 8 a.m. and dusk for no longer than 10 hours 	No (on-site signs); Yes (off-site signs) 	See Subsection 17.48.090 
N.3 
Real estate signs 	1 per property 3 ; 1 sign for each tenant space on multitenant properties 	Residential zone: 4 s.f. 
Non-residential zone: 12 s.f. Tenant spaces: 4 s.f. 	Freestanding sign: 4 feet; Other: limited by sign type; signs in tenant spaces above the second story are allowed 	When property is available for sale, lease, rent, or other disposition 	No 	See Subsection 17.48.040 
C.5 
Real estate development sign 	1 per development site 	30 s.f. 	Limited by sign type 	After land use permit is approved and until it expires 	Yes 	See Subsection 17.48.090 
N.4 
Site construction sign 	1 per development site 	30 s.f. 	Limited by sign type 	After building permit issued, and until final inspection or certificate of occupancy 	Yes 	See Subsection 17.48.090 
N.5 
Window sign (temporary) 	No more than 2 per business 	25% of window 4 or 6 s.f per sign, whichever is less 	Not above the second story 	30 days 	No (less than 15 days quarterly); Yes (more than 15 days quarterly) 	See Subsection 17.48.090 
M.5 
Notes: 
(1) See Standards for Specific Types of Signs, Temporary Signs (17.48.090N) and Signs Not Requiring a Permit (17.48.040). 
(2) No business shall have more than one banner sign displayed at any one time (17.48.090N. 1). 
(3) Additional signage may be allowed for the second frontage consistent with Subsection 17.48.080C.3. 
(4) Permanent and temporary window signs shall not exceed 25% of window area without the approval of an Administrative Permit (17.48.090M.2). 
 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 11), 1-21-2015; Ord. No. 18-03, § 4(Exh. B, a.), 6-20-2018)  
17.48.100 - Sign Standards by Zoning District. 
In addition to the standards in this section, each sign shall also comply with Section 17.48.080 (General Requirements for All Signs), Section 17.48.090 (Standards for Specific Types of Signs), and all other applicable provisions of this chapter. Temporary signs are addressed in Table 17.48.090N (Standards for Temporary Signs), above. 
A.  Residential zones. Each sign in a residential zone shall comply with the following requirements contained in Table 17.48.100A. 
TABLE 17.48.100(A): SIGN STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONES 
Allowed Sign 
Type 	Maximum 
Number 	Maximum 
Sign Area 	Maximum 
Sign Height 	Lighting 
Allowed? 	Permit 
required? 	Additional 
Requirements 
Residential Uses 
Residential nameplate (17.48. 
040F.5) 	1 per property 	2 s.f. 	Shall conform to the height limits for the type of sign erected 	No 	No 	No commercial message or identification allowed 
Additional Signs for Multi-Family Residential, Assisted Living Facilities, Residential Care Facilities, Subdivisions and Mobile Home Parks 
Monument or wall (17.48. 
090H, 
17.48. 
090L) 	1 monument or wall sign per property 1, 2 	30 s.f. 	Monument: 8 feet 3 
Wall: not displayed above the second story of a building 	Only indirect lighting (no internal illumination, halo, or neon allowed) 	Yes 	Only the name and address of the subdivision or multi-family development allowed 
Non-Residential Uses 
Monument or wall (17.48. 
090H, 
17.48. 
090L) 	1 monument or wall sign per property 1, 2 	30 s.f. 	Monument: 8 feet 3 
Wall: not displayed above the second story of a building 	Only indirect lighting (no internal illumination, halo, or neon allowed) 	Yes 	See Subsections 17.48.090H and 17.48.090L 
Notes: 
(1) Additional signage may be allowed for the second frontage consistent with Subsection 17.48.080C.3. 
(2) More than one monument sign may be allowed consistent with Subsection 17.48.090H.1. 
(3) Additional monument sign height may be allowed consistent with Subsection 17.48.090H.3. 
 
B.  Non-residential zones. Each sign in non-residential zones shall comply with the following requirements contained in Table 17.48.100B 
TABLE 17.48.100(B): SIGN STANDARDS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONES 
Allowed
Sign Type 	Maximum Sign Area 	Maximum Sign Height 	Lighting Allowed? 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Sign Area (Aggregate) 	Additional 
Requirements 1 
Awning (17.48. 
090A) 	Not exceed 50% of lineal awning frontage or 30 s.f., whichever is less 2 	Ground level businesses only 	Only indirect lighting (no internal illumination, halo, or neon allowed) 	2 of any combination of allowed sign types per business frontage; however, only 1 of each sign type is allowed per business frontage 3,4,5 	Total allowable sign area shall not exceed 2 square feet for each 3 lineal feet of business frontage 3 ; each business is allowed a minimum of 12 s.f. of signage regardless of frontage length 	8 foot clearance; translucent material prohibited; see Subsection 17.48.090A 
Changeable copy (17.48. 
090B) 	Limited by sign type 	Limited by sign type 				See Subsection 17.48.090B 
Hanging (17.48. 
090G) 	8 s.f. 	Ground level businesses only 	Indirect lighting, halo lit, and neon details allowed 			Cannot extend more than 6 feet from wall; 8 foot clearance; see Subsection 17.48.090G 
Monument (17.48. 
090H) 	30 s.f. 	8 feet; 12 feet on Main Street and Lake Mary Road 6 	Indirect lighting and halo lit allowed 			See Subsection 17.48.090H 
Projecting (17.48. 
090J) 	12 s.f. 	Ground level businesses only 	Indirect lighting, halo lit, and neon details allowed 			Shall be double-sided; see Subsection 17.48.090J 
Theater (17.48. 
090K) 	May exceed 30 s.f. if approved by Director 	Limited by sign type 	Indirect lighting, internal illumination, halo, and neon allowed; Only indirect lighting allowed if greater than 30 s.f. 			See Subsection 17.48.090K 
Wall (17.48. 
090L) 	30 s.f. 	Not displayed above the second story 	Indirect lighting, halo lit, and neon details allowed 			Cannot project more than 6 inches from wall; see Subsection 17.48.090L 
Window (17.48. 
090M) 	25% of window or 30 s.f., whichever is less 	Ground level and second story only 	No 	No more than 4 per business 		Cannot be more than 1 inch thick; see Subsection 17.48.090M 
Electronic message (17.48. 
090E) 	Limited by sign type, and no greater than 30 s.f. 	Limited by sign type 	Internal illumination (electronic message) 	One per property 7 		Only allowed in the Public and Quasi-Public Zone; requires a design review permit; see Subsection 17.48.090E 
Halo lit (17.48. 
090F) 	Limited by sign type, and no greater than 30 s.f. 	Limited by sign type 	Internal illumination (halo) 	Limited by sign type 7 		Not in any residential zone; see Subsection 17.48.090F 
Neon details (17.48. 
090I) 	20 s.f. 	Limited by sign type 	Internal illumination (neon) 	One per business 7 		Not in any residential zone; see Subsection 17.48.090I 
Other signs: See Standards for Specific Types of Signs (17.48.090) and Signs Not Requiring a Permit (17.48.040) 
Notes: 
(1) See Standards for Specific Types of Signs (17.48.090) and Signs Not Requiring a Permit (17.48.040). 
(2) Copy on an awning that does not exceed six inches in height and consistent with Subsection 17.48.090A is not counted towards total allowable sign area or number. 
(3) Additional signage may be allowed for the second frontage consistent with Subsection 17.48.080C.3. 
(4) More than one monument sign may be allowed consistent with Subsection 17.48.090H.1. 
(5) Signs shall be allowed on sides of buildings or businesses not considered as business frontage consistent with Subsection 17.48.080B.3. 
(6) Additional monument sign height may be allowed consistent with Subsection 17.48.090H.3. 
(7) Signs count towards the maximum number of signs allowed. 
 
C.  Airport Zone. All signs in the Airport Zone shall conform to the Airport Layout Plan and Federal Aviation Administration requirements, as well as this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 12), 1-21-2015; Ord. No. 18-03, § 4(Exh. B, b.), 6-20-2018)  
17.48.110 - Sign Variances and Adjustments. 
A.  Variance. A variance shall be processed in compliance with Chapter 17.72 (Variances). 
B.  Adjustment. An adjustment may allow for an increase of not more than 10 percent of the allowed height or area of a sign. Adjustments to the sign height or area provisions of this chapter shall be processed in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Adjustments). 
C.  Master Sign Program exceptions. A Master Sign Program exception in compliance with Subsection 17.48.050D shall not require a variance or an adjustment. 
D.  Additional Finding. In addition to the findings required by Chapter 17.72 (Variances) or Chapter 17.76 (Adjustments), a finding shall also be made prior to approval of a sign variance or adjustment that the sign meets the purpose and intent of this chapter and any applicable Master Sign Program. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.48.120 - Nonconforming Signs. 
A.  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to any permanent or temporary sign, including its physical structure and/or its supporting elements, which was lawfully erected and maintained in compliance with the provisions of all applicable laws in effect at the time of original installation, but which does not now comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Allowed modifications to nonconforming signs. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided herein, a nonconforming sign may be continued and shall be maintained in good condition as required by this chapter. 
2.  Sign copy and face changes, non-structural modifications, and non-structural maintenance (e.g., painting and rust removal) are allowed so long as there is no alteration to the physical structure or support elements of the sign. Changes to sign copy and face require a sign permit. 
3.  A nonconforming sign may be restored if 50 percent or less of the sign is destroyed, provided that restoration is started within 90 days of the damage occurring and is diligently pursued to completion. 
C.  Prohibited modifications to nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign shall not be: 
1.  Changed to another nonconforming sign; 
2.  Structurally altered to extend its useful life; 
3.  Altered unless required by law or unless the alteration results in the elimination of the nonconformity; 
4.  Enlarged; 
5.  Moved or replaced; or 
6.  Re-installed after façade improvements that required the removal of the sign during construction. 
D.  Exception. The Commission may grant an exception to the requirements of Subsection 17.48.120C only after the following findings are made: 
1.  The new proposed sign or alteration to the existing nonconforming sign is significantly more conforming to the provisions of this chapter than the existing nonconforming sign; and/or 
2.  The nonconforming sign has historic significance apart from its main purpose of advertising, in which case a use permit shall be required for continued use of the nonconforming sign in compliance with Chapter 17.68 (Use Permits). 
E.  Abandoned nonconforming signs. An interruption in the use of a nonconforming sign for a period of 90 days or more shall be deemed to be an abandonment of the sign consistent with and subject to Section 17.48.130 (Abandoned Signs). 
F.  Amortization of nonconforming signs and inventory. All nonconforming signs shall have a useful and legal life of 15 years, after which they may be removed in compliance with the requirements of the California Business and Professions Code. As often as may be desirable, but no less frequently than required by State law, the Director shall authorize an identification and inventory of all illegal and abandoned signs within the Town in accordance with the requirements of State law. 
G.  Removal or modification of nonconforming signs to comply with this chapter. A nonconforming sign shall be removed or modified to comply with this chapter if the following occurs: 
1.  More than 50 percent of the sign is destroyed, and the destruction is other than facial copy replacement. A nonconforming sign shall be deemed to be more than 50 percent destroyed if the estimated cost of reconstruction or repair exceeds 50 percent of the replacement cost as determined by the Director. Destruction may be voluntary or required by law; 
2.  The sign is remodeled or altered in a manner not in compliance with this chapter; 
3.  A structural change is made to the sign or sign structure and/or support elements; 
4.  The sign is temporary; 
5.  The sign is moved or relocated, except where the relocation occurs as a result of a Town public improvement project; 
6.  The sign is or may become a danger to the public or is unsafe; or 
7.  The sign constitutes a traffic hazard not created by the relocation of streets or by acts of the Town. 
H.  Special topographic circumstances. The Town shall not require the removal of any nonconforming sign on the basis of its height or size by requiring conformance with this chapter if special topographic circumstances would result in a material impairment of visibility of the sign or the owner's or user's ability to adequately and effectively continue to communicate with the public through the use of the sign. Special topographic circumstances include but are not limited to terrain, contours, off-site structures, streets, and other off-site impediments as determined by the Director. Under these circumstances, the owner or user may maintain the sign, including change of copy, at the business premises and at a location necessary for continued public visibility at the height or size at which the sign was previously erected consistent with Business and Professions Code Section 5499. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.48.130 - Abandoned Signs. 
A.  Any sign, including the structural support, which was lawfully erected shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located, when for a period of 90 days or more, the activity, product, business, service, or other use which is being advertised or identified has ceased, the premises has been vacated, or the sign is no longer displayed on the sign structure. 
B.  If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, including the structural support, pursuant to Subsection 17.48.130A, the Director shall give the owner 30 days' written notice to comply. Upon failure to comply with the notice, the Director may have the sign removed at the owner's expense consistent with Business and Professions Code Section 5497.b. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.48.140 - Public Nuisance, Violation, and Abatement. 
A sign that fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter, other applicable State statutes, or Town ordinances, or for which a sign permit has not been obtained in compliance with this chapter, shall be declared a public nuisance and subject to abatement consistent with Chapter 17.132 (Enforcement). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.48.150 - Signs illegally erected on public property or right-of-way—Violation—Removal—Costs. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall paint, mark, or write on; post or otherwise affix or erect; or construct, maintain, paste, nail, tack or otherwise fasten or affix any sign, including temporary signs, in the public right-of-way or on any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, street, lamp post, pole, bench, hydrant, tree, shrub, bridge, electric light pole, power pole, or telephone wire pole, or any wire appurtenance thereof, or upon any street sign or traffic sign, or upon any other object located within the public right-of-way which is not maintained for the purpose of communications by signs of the general public. 
B.  Temporary signs posted or erected in the public right-of-way may be summarily removed. Removed signs shall be taken to the corporation yard. After removal of any sign pursuant to this subsection, the Town shall attempt to notify the owner of the sign or other responsible party, if such can be ascertained, if the employee believes in good faith that the sign has monetary value. In cases where a sign contains the name of a printing firm, the employee shall also attempt to notify such firm of the fact that the sign has been removed, the location of the sign, the procedure for retrieving the sign, and the procedure for challenging the removal of the sign. Any person desiring to retrieve a sign may do so upon the payment of all amounts due under this section. Any temporary sign removed by the Town may be considered abandoned if it is not retrieved within ten calendar days after the date of such removal, and may be disposed of by the city without liability to any person. 
C.  The cost of the removal of any sign pursuant to this section shall be borne by the actual responsible party. The cost of removal shall be the actual cost or the standard sign-removal cost set by resolution of the Council. For purposes of this section, any information that appears on a sign that is removed may be used to establish that the person or venue listed on the sign is the actual responsible party including, but not limited to, information identifying the real estate broker, real estate brokerage firm, real estate agent, or other person associated with the firm; the owner or lessee of property used for a commercial activity or event; or the sponsor or promoter of a sporting event, concert, theatrical performance, or similar activity or event. 
D.  Violations of this section may be prosecuted or addressed through any process or procedure established or allowed by this code or applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.52 - Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities 
 
17.52.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This Chapter provides site planning, development, and/or operating standards for certain land uses that are allowed in several or all zones, and for activities that require special standards to ensure their compatibility with site features and existing uses and structures in the site vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.020 - Applicability. 
The land uses and activities covered by this chapter shall comply with the provisions applicable to the specific use, in addition to all other applicable provisions of this Zoning Code. 
A.  Where allowed. The uses that are subject to the standards in this chapter shall be located only where allowed and in compliance with Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). 
B.  Planning permits required. The uses that are subject to the standards in this chapter are allowed only when authorized by the planning permit required by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), except where a planning permit requirement is established by this chapter for a specific use. 
C.  Development standards. The standards for specific uses in this chapter supplement and are required in addition to those in Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and Article III (Site Planning and General Development Standards). In the event of any conflict between the requirements of this chapter and those of Articles II or III, the requirements of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.030 - Accessory Uses and Structures—General Standards. 
A.  Applicability. An accessory use or structure shall be allowed only in conjunction with a main use to which it relates. Accessory uses and structures shall be incidental to and not alter the character of the site from that created by the main use. 
B.  Development standards. Accessory uses and structures shall be subject to the same regulations as the main use or structure in any zoning district, except as otherwise specified in this Title. 
C.  Timing of establishment of accessory use or structure. An accessory use or structure shall only be established at the same time as a main use or structure, or after the main use has been established. 
D.  Compatibility. An accessory structure shall be architecturally compatible with the main structure. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.040 - Accessory Uses and Structures—Residential. 
This Section provides standards for residential accessory uses and structures, where allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). These standards are in addition to the standards of Section 17.52.030 (Accessory Uses and Structures - General Standards). These requirements do not apply to Secondary Residential Units, which are instead regulated by Section 17.52.270 (Second Dwelling Units). 
A.  Attached structures. An accessory structure that is attached to a main structure shall be made structurally a part of the main structure (e.g., share a common wall with the main structure, rely partially on the main structure for structural support, etc.). 
B.  Standards for specific accessory uses and structures. In addition to the above requirements, the following apply to the specific types of accessory structures listed. 
1.  Antennas. Antennas shall comply with the requirements of Section 17.52.280 (Telecommunications Facilities). 
2.  Breezeways. A breezeway may be allowed to provide shelter between a detached accessory structure and the main dwelling when designed and constructed as a covered passageway that does not exceed 10 feet in width and has at least one side open, except for necessary supporting columns or similar supporting structures as required by the California Building Standards Code. 
3.  Detached living areas. Detached living areas include bedrooms, recreation rooms, home offices, and similar habitable areas, in any area where single-family dwellings are allowed in compliance with Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). Detached living areas are allowed in single-family residential zones subject to the following standards. 
a.  Maximum number of structures. Only one detached structure with living area shall be allowed on a single lot. 
b.  Maximum floor area. The gross floor area (i.e. interior habitable area not including garages) shall not exceed 600 square feet. 
c.  Access. The detached living area may have direct access to the main dwelling, and shall be designed to provide practical pedestrian access to the main dwelling. 
d.  Facilities. A detached living area may only include sleeping area, living area, and a single bathroom, but shall not contain a kitchen or cooking facilities. Cooking facilities include any appliances for the preparation or preservation of food, including but not limited to gas and electric ranges, ovens or stovetops, hot plates, kitchen sink, and appurtenant plumbing. 
e.  Utilities. All utilities serving the detached living area shall be common to and dependent on the main dwelling. The detached living area shall not be provided with separate utility meters. 
f.  Rentals prohibited. The detached living area shall not be separately rented or leased from the main dwelling, whether compensation is direct or indirect, except as part of an approved bed and breakfast consistent with Section 17.52.080 (Bed and Breakfast Inns). 
4.  Garages. Garages shall comply with the following standards. 
a.  Attached garage floor area. The floor area of an accessory garage that is attached to a main structure is not limited, except as required by the California Building Standards Code or any other applicable Town Code. 
b.  Detached garage floor area. A detached accessory garage for a single-family residential parcel shall not occupy more than 1,000 square feet of floor area, including any workshop or storage space within the garage, unless a larger area is authorized by the Director through an administrative permit, or the size of the parcel is one acre or greater. The floor area of a secondary residential unit in a detached accessory garage shall not be counted as part of the garage floor area. 
c.  Garages for shared driveways. Garages may be located in side and rear setbacks of properties that share a driveway on the common property line consistent with Subsection 17.36.100.D.5.a (Setback Requirements and Exceptions—Vehicle parking and driveways), provided that adequate snow storage and snow shed is provided and the requirements of the California Building Standards Code are met. 
5.  Home occupations. Home occupations shall comply with the requirements of Section 17.52.140 (Home Occupations). 
6.  Small detached storage sheds and greenhouses. Detached storage sheds or greenhouses not more than 120 square feet and eight feet in height shall comply with the requirements of Subsection 17.36.100G.3 (Setback Requirements and Exceptions - Detached Storage Sheds). 
7.  Swimming pools, spas, or hot tubs. Non-commercial swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs are an allowed accessory use subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Limitation on use. The facility is to be used solely by occupants of the dwelling(s) on the same site and their invited guests; 
b.  Setbacks. At grade facilities, including all accessory structures and equipment shall maintain the setback requirements set forth for the main structure pursuant to Section 17.36.100G.1 (Setback Requirements and Exceptions - Pools and Spas); and 
c.  Security/safety. The facility shall comply with the County's Health Department regulations and the California Building Standards Code. 
8.  Tennis and other recreation courts. Non-commercial outdoor tennis courts and courts for other sports, including basketball and racquetball, accessory to a residential use shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Setbacks. No court shall be located within a required setback, or within 10 feet of a property line; 
b.  Fencing. Court fencing shall be no taller than 16 feet and may be chain link only if painted or coated in a dark green, brown, or black color; and 
c.  Lighting. Court lighting shall require use permit approval, and shall not exceed a maximum height of 20 feet, measured from the court surface. The lighting shall be directed downward, shall only illuminate the court, and shall not illuminate adjacent property, in compliance with Section 17.36.030 (Exterior Lighting). 
9.  Workshops or studios. An accessory structure intended as a workshop or as a studio for artwork, crafts, light hand manufacturing, or hobbies, is subject to the following standards: 
a.  Limitation on use. The use of an accessory structure as a studio shall be limited to solely non-commercial activities: 
i.  Hobbies or amusements; 
ii.  Artistic endeavors, such as painting, photography, sculpture, etc.; 
iii.  Maintenance of the main structure or yards; 
iv.  Maintenance or mechanical work on vehicles owned or operated by occupants of the main structure; or 
v.  Other purposes deemed similar by the Director. 
vi.  Except that an accessory workshop or studio may be employed for a commercial use if such use meets the standards for home occupations, Section 17.52.140 (Home Occupations). 
b.  Floor area. The gross floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet; except where a workshop is combined with a garage. See Subsection 17.52.040B.4 (Garages), above. 
10.  Cannabis—Personal cultivation and use. The personal use and cultivation of cannabis at private residences shall comply with the requirements of Section 17.52.086 (Cannabis—Personal Cultivation and Use). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 17-10, § 4(Exh. A), 11-1-2017; Ord. No. 18-02, § 5(Exh. A, c.), 3-13-2018)  
17.52.050 - Accessory Uses and Structures—Accessory Retail Uses. 
Accessory retail sales and service establishments in conjunction with and accessory to a main commercial or industrial use are allowed where authorized by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), subject to the following requirements. These requirements are in addition to the standards of Section 17.52.030 (Accessory Uses and Structures - General Standards). 
A.  Limited exterior modifications. There will be only minor external evidence of any commercial activity other than the main use of the site (e.g., no signs, window displays, etc. for the accessory use). 
B.  Access. Access to any space used for the accessory retail use shall be from within the main structure. 
C.  Industrial Zone. Accessory retail in the Industrial Zone shall not exceed 15 percent of the main use's floor area or lot area, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.060 - Adult Businesses. 
A.  Purpose. Where allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and Subsection 17.52.050B (Locational Limitations), an adult business shall comply with the provisions of this section. Adult businesses provide products and services of a mature nature capable of violating the standards of safety and well-being set forth by the Town's Municipal Code. The intent of these zoning provisions is to provide special design standards and regulatory guidelines which will direct the time, place, and manner of the operation of adult businesses in order to minimize the associated negative secondary effects. 
B.  Locational Limitations. Subject to the limitations of this subsection, Adult Businesses may be located in the Industrial Zoning District of the Town. Within the Industrial Zone, it is unlawful to establish any such Adult Business if the location is within a 500-foot radius of a Residential Zone, School, Park or Religious Institution. The distance between an Adult Business and any of the protected parcels mentioned shall be measured from the nearest property line of the parcel containing the Adult Use to the nearest property line of any the protected parcels. Distance is to be measured along a straight line extended between the two closest points. 
C.  Development and Operating Standards. In order to maintain the Town's standard for safe business conduct, Adult Businesses must remain in compliance with the following development and operating provisions: 
1.  Hours of Operation. It is unlawful for any Operator or Employee of an Adult Business to allow such Adult Business to remain open for business, or to permit any Employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any day. 
2.  Lighting Requirements. All exterior lighting associated with the Adult Business shall comply with the Town's Zoning Code Section 17.36.030 (Exterior Lighting). 
3.  Access. The Operator shall not permit any doors on the premises to be locked during business hours. 
4.  Inspection. The Operator shall be responsible to see that any room or area on the premises shall be readily accessible at all times and shall be open to view in its entirety for inspection by any Law Enforcement Officer. 
5.  Minors' Access. 
a.  X-Rated Movies. X-rated movies or video tapes shall be restricted to persons over eighteen years of age. If an establishment that is not otherwise prohibited from providing access to persons under eighteen years of age sells, rents or displays videos that have been rated "X" or rated "NC-17" by the Motion Picture Rating Industry (MPAA), or which have not been submitted to the MPAA for a rating, and which consist of images which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas," such videos shall be located in a specific section of the establishment where persons under the age of eighteen shall be prohibited and shall not be visible from outside the premises. 
b.  Other Adult Materials. Access to adult Materials shall be restricted to persons over eighteen years of age. 
6.  Regulation of Closed Booths. No one shall maintain any Arcade Booth or individual viewing area unless the entire interior of such premises wherein the picture or entertainment that is viewed is visible upon entering into such premises; and further, that the entire body of any viewing person is also visible immediately upon entrance to the premises without the assistance of mirrors or other viewing aids. No partially or fully enclosed booths/individual viewing area or partially or fully concealed booths/individual viewing area shall be maintained. No Arcade Booth shall be occupied by more than one patron at a time. No holes shall be permitted between Arcade Booths or individual viewing areas. 
7.  Regulation of Viewing Areas. All viewing areas within the Adult Business shall be visible from a continuous and accessible main aisle in a public portion of the establishment, and not obscured in any manner by any door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror or other device which would prohibit a person from seeing into the viewing area from the main aisle. A manager shall be stationed in the main aisle or video monitoring shall be established at a location from which the inside of all of the viewing areas are visible at all times in order to enforce all rules and regulations. All viewing areas shall be designed or operated to permit occupancy of either one person only, or more than ten persons. "viewing area" means any area in which a person views performances, pictures, movies, videos or other presentations. 
8.  Business Tax Certificate. A person shall not own, operate, manage, conduct or maintain an Adult Business without first having obtained a Town Business Tax Certificate. 
9.  On-Site Manager. All Adult Businesses shall have a person who shall be at least eighteen years of age and shall be on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
10.  Security Measures. The Adult Business shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas, or in the alternative, uniformed security guards to patrol and monitor the parking lot areas during all business hours. A sign indicating compliance with this provision shall be posted on the premises. The sign must be consistent with Chapter 17.48 (Signs). 
11.  Public Advertisements. Advertisements, displays or other promotional Materials depicting or describing "Specified Anatomical Areas" or "Specified Sexual Activities," or displaying instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "Specified Sexual Activities" shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible from other areas open to the general public. 
12.  Screening. All building openings, entries, and windows for an Adult Business shall be located, covered, or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior of an Adult Business from any area open to the general public. Additional screening may be required by the review authority. 
13.  Exterior Signage. All entrances to an Adult Business shall be clearly and legibly posted by a notice indicating that minors are prohibited from entering the premises. All exterior signs must be consistent with Chapter 17.48 (Signs). 
14.  Sound Level Restrictions. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used by an Adult Business for the amplification of sound to a level discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building in which the Adult Business is conducted. 
15.  Employee Clothing. No licensee, manager or Employee mingling with business patrons or serving food or drinks shall be unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose any "Specified Anatomical Areas." It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section that an Employee exposed any "Specified Anatomical Area" only during the Employee's bona fide use of a restroom or during the Employee's bona fide use of a dressing room that is accessible only to Employees. Exception is granted to Employees performing on stage, in Arcade Booths or other private viewing areas. 
16.  Operating Requirements. No person, association, partnership or corporation shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on the operation of an Adult Business unless each and all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  No Employee, Owner, Operator, responsible managing Employee, manager or permittee of an Adult Business shall allow any person below the age of eighteen years upon the premises or within the confines of any Adult Business if no liquor is served, or under the age of twenty-one if liquor is served. 
b.  All Employees of Adult Businesses, other than Performers while performing, shall, at a minimum while on or about the licensed premises, wear an opaque covering which covers their "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
c.  No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an Adult Business except upon a permanently fixed stage which is at least eighteen inches above the level of the floor, separated by a distance of at least six feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons and surrounded with a three-foot-high barrier. No patron shall be permitted within six feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by a Performer. When patrons are present at the establishment, they shall not be allowed to directly touch, fondle or caress, as those terms are defined in Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1986), the Performers while they are performing. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching. Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by signs placed on the barrier and if necessary by Employees of the establishment. 
d.  If patrons wish to tip Performers, receptacles shall be at least six feet from the permanently fixed stage. Patrons shall not throw tips to Performers, hand tips directly to Performers or place tips in the Performers' clothing. 
D.  Adult Use Permit—Requirements. 
1.  No Adult Business may be established or operate within the Town by right-all persons wishing to establish an Adult Business within the Town must apply for and receive an adult use permit under this chapter. The establishment of any Adult Business shall include the opening of such a business as a new business, the relocation of the business, or the conversion of an existing business, or an increase of more than 50 percent of the square footage of an existing business, or of an existing Adult Business to a different type of Adult Business. 
2.  It is the burden of the applicant to supply evidence to justify the grant of an adult use permit. 
3.  Any Person desiring to establish or operate an Adult Business within the Town shall file with the Director an adult use permit application on a form supplied by the Town. 
E.  Adult Use Permit—Contents of Application. 
1.  The application must be signed by the Owner or lessee. If the application is signed by a lessee, a notarized statement signed by the Owner shall accompany the application. Proof of status is required. 
2.  The Adult Use Permit Application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Include the property owner's and the applicant's mailing address, and name and phone number of the person who is responsible for providing access to the proposed use for inspection purposes. 
b.  The legal form of the applicant; e.g., individual, partnership, corporation. If the applicant is an individual, the application shall list his or her legal name, and any aliases. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall list the full and complete corporate name, the legal names, and all aliases used by officers, directors and principal stockholders. 
c.  Whether or not the applicant has had a previous adult use permit for an Adult Business revoked in the Town of Mammoth Lakes or anywhere else and if so, the date and reason of the revocation. 
d.  A detailed description of all proposed uses using the definitions contained in Chapter 17.148 (Definitions) wherever applicable. 
e.  A signed statement and map that the locational regulations of 17.52.050B (Locational Limitations) have been satisfied using the described method of measurement. 
f.  Accurately scaled plot plans indicating the structure in which the Adult Business is to be conducted, identifying and locating all land uses and property lines within a radius of 100 feet of the structure, indicating all structures (existing and proposed), parking areas, landscaping, walls, driveways and curbcuts and signs. The application shall also include a floor plan and any other pertinent information regarding the interiors, including the location of viewing booths (if applicable), necessary to make a permit determination under this section. 
g.  Diagram of the interior uses. 
F.  Adult Use Permit—Application Fee. The Town Council, by Resolution, shall set a reasonable nonrefundable application fee for persons applying for an Adult Use Permit. The fee shall not exceed the reasonable estimated costs of the Town expended in processing the permit application. Processing of the permit application cannot begin until all associated application fees are paid for. 
G.  Adult Use Permit—Decision to Grant or Deny. Chapter 17.96 (Administrative Responsibility) provides Planning and Economic Development Commission (Commission) review authority to grant, conditionally grant or deny an application for an Adult Use Permit in accordance with Chapter 17.68 (Use Permits). Any conditions imposed upon the permit shall be in keeping with the objective development standards of this section and the underlying Zoning District in which the property is located. 
H.  Adult Use Permit Appeal. Procedures for appealing determinations and actions of the Commission can be found in Chapter 17.104 (Appeals). 
I.  Adult Use Permit—Approval Criteria. 
1.  In addition to the standard set of conditions for approval set out in Section 17.68.060, the Commission shall approve or conditionally approve an application for an Adult Use Permit where the information submitted by the applicant substantiates the following findings: 
a.  That the proposed use complies with the objective development and design requirements of Industrial Zoning Districts set out in Chapter 17.28 (Industrial Zoning District); 
b.  That the proposed location of the Adult Business complies with 17.52.050B. (Locational Limitations). 
c.  That the proposed Adult Business complies with 17.52.050C (Development and Operating Standards). 
d.  That neither the applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers or general partners, if a corporation or partnership, has been convicted of a sex-related misdemeanor or any felony. 
e.  That the applicant passes a background check to be administered by the Mammoth Lakes Police Department including but not limited to a fingerprint check. 
f.  That all other information and attachments required in the Adult Use Permit Application Form is found to be satisfactory. 
J.  Adult Use Permit Suspension and Revocation. 
1.  Any Permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the Director on the basis of any of the following: 
a.  That the business or use has been conducted in a manner which violates one or more of the conditions imposed upon the issuance of the permit or which fails to conform to the plans and procedures described in the application, or which violates the occupant load limits set by the Fire Marshal; 
b.  That the permittee has failed to obtain or maintain all required Town, County and State Licenses and Permits; 
c.  That the permit is being used to conduct a use different from that for which it was issued; 
d.  That the permittee has misrepresented a material fact in the application for permit or has not answered each question therein truthfully; 
e.  That the building or structure in which the Adult Business is conducted is hazardous to the health or safety of the Employees or patrons of the business or of the general public under the standards set forth in the California Building Standards Code, California Plumbing, or California Fire Code; 
f.  That the permittee, if an individual, or any of the officers or general partners, if a corporation or partnership has been convicted of a sex-related misdemeanor or any felony; or 
g.  That the use for which the approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for six months or more. 
2.  Provisions for revocation for Use Permits can be found in Chapter 17.128 (Revocations & Modifications). 
3.  In the event a permit is revoked pursuant to this chapter, another Adult Use Permit to operate an Adult Business shall not be granted to the permittee within twelve months after the date of such revocation. 
K.  Penalty. Violations of the provisions of this Chapter shall be enforced pursuant to Chapter 17.132 (Enforcement). 
L.  Applicability to Other Regulations. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to provide exclusive regulation of the regulated Adult Businesses. Such uses must comply with any and all applicable regulations imposed in other chapters of the Zoning Code, other Town Ordinances and State and Federal Law. 
M.  Conduct Constituting a Public Nuisance. The conduct of any business within the Town in violation of any of the terms of this chapter is found and declared to be a Public Nuisance, and the Town Attorney or the District Attorney may, in addition or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by Law; and shall take other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such Adult Business and restrain and enjoin any person from conducting, operating or maintaining an Adult Business contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.070 - Animal Care and Boarding. 
Where allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), Animal Raising and Keeping, Pet Day Care, Veterinary Clinics, and Animal Hospitals shall comply with the requirements of this section. All provisions of Title 6 (Animals) and Chapter 8.16 (Noise Regulation) shall also apply. 
A.  Animal raising and keeping. The requirements of this Subsection shall apply to the raising and keeping of animals, except for household pets (e.g., cats, dogs, and other animals ordinarily kept as household pets). 
1.  Equestrian Overlay Zone. In addition to the standards in this Subsection, the keeping of horses in the E zone shall comply with the standards in Subsection 17.32.030 (Equestrian Overlay Zone). In the event of any conflict between the requirements of this section and those of the Equestrian Overlay Zone, the requirements of the Equestrian Overlay Zone shall control. 
2.  Chickens. The raising and keeping of chickens is permitted, subject to the following regulations: 
a.  The raising of chickens shall conform with Municipal Code Chapter 6.24 (Feeding of Wildlife Prohibited) 
b.  Chickens shall only be kept for egg-laying and composting purposes and shall not be used for commercial purposes, including slaughtering. 
c.  No roosters shall be allowed. 
d.  Maximum number of chickens permitted: 25 per unit in the Rural Residential, Residential Single-family, and Residential Multi-Family 1 Zones. No person shall keep more than 25 chickens on any property except with approval of an Administrative Permit. 
e.  Chickens shall be kept in a secure coop or pen at all times. 
1.  Adequate fencing, walls or other barriers shall be installed or maintained on the premises so that chickens cannot gain access to adjacent properties. 
2.  A chicken coop shall be thoroughly ventilated and designed and constructed in a manner that the chickens can be securely contained. 
3.  All chickens shall be confined in a pen, coop, or cage, or other enclosure at all times. 
f.  Coops or pens shall comply with established building setback regulations. 
g.  Coops or pens must be kept in neat and sanitary condition at all times, and must be cleaned on a regular basis to prevent the attraction of pests and offensive odors. 
h.  Feed must be stored in a bear-proof container if located outdoors and shall comply with Municipal Code Chapter 6.24 (Feeding of Wildlife Prohibited). 
i.  It shall be unlawful to keep chickens for commercial purposes. 
3.  Site slope required. Animals shall not be allowed on slopes exceeding 30%. 
4.  Erosion and sediment control. In no case shall any person allow animal raising and keeping to cause significant soil erosion or to produce sediment or animal waste products transport from the site into waterways, drainage channels, streets, or onto adjoining properties. 
5.  Location requirements. 
a.  The following shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any property line: animals, corrals for the containment of animals, barns, stables, or similar structures, unless otherwise specified. 
b.  Animal containment areas (e.g., corrals, pens, etc.) shall be located at least 50 feet from any permanent lake or stream. 
6.  Site maintenance and animal care. The site and structures shall be maintained and all animals shall be cared for in a manner that does not create a public health problem, or interfere with the public welfare of surrounding properties. An adequate supply of fresh water shall be available to the animals at all times. 
B.  Animal boarding, veterinary clinics, and animal hospitals. Animal boarding, veterinary clinics, and animal hospitals shall comply with the following operational standards: 
1.  All operations must be conducted within a completely enclosed building, except that outdoor dog runs and training activities are permitted during daylight hours. 
2.  The areas within the building where animals are boarded shall be sufficiently soundproofed to prevent a disturbance or become a nuisance to surrounding properties, as determined by the Director; 
3.  Emergency contact phone numbers shall be posted on entry doors to the structure to allow individuals to report any emergency situation or excessive noise to the operators; 
4.  Public access areas shall be provided with a separate ventilation system from the animal boarding and treatment areas; 
5.  The areas used for animal boarding, isolation, and treatment shall be constructed of durable and easily cleaned materials; and 
6.  All areas where animals are present shall be cleaned a minimum of twice daily to provide appropriate odor control and sanitation. 
C.  Pet day care. A pet day care facility is for the supervision and basic care of household pets (e.g., dogs, cats, and other animals normally kept as household pets) that does not normally board animals overnight except for the animals that are household pets of the property owner. A pet day care facility shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  A pet day care facility located within the Rural Residential zoning district, as allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), shall require a use permit and Commission approval. 
2.  A pet day care facility located within the Rural Residential zoning district shall be located on property developed with a single-family residence where the principal residence is occupied by the pet day care provider, and the pet day care use shall be secondary to the use of the property as a residence. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 17-10, § 4(Exh. A), 11-1-2017)  
17.52.080 - Bed and Breakfast Inns. 
Where allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), a bed and breakfast inn shall comply with the requirements of this section. Bed and breakfast inns provide overnight transient lodging for paying guests in a building designed as a single-family dwelling. The intent of these provisions is to ensure that compatibility between the bed and breakfast inn and any adjoining residential use is maintained and enhanced. 
A.  Business Tax Certificate required. A bed and breakfast inn shall require a Town Business Tax Certificate and Transient Occupancy Tax Certificate. 
B.  General requirements. 
1.  Exterior appearance. The exterior appearance of the structure housing the bed and breakfast inn in a residential zoning district shall not be altered from its original single-family residential character except for those structural modifications necessary to comply with the applicable requirements of the California Building Standards Code. 
2.  Fire safety. The bed and breakfast inn shall meet the requirements of the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District and California Building Standards Code. 
3.  Guest rooms. The number of rental guest rooms shall be limited to five rooms. Rental guest rooms shall not contain food preparation facilities. 
4.  Internal access. Main or primary access to guest rooms shall be from within the bed and breakfast inn or the guest room shall be located in an approved detached living area. 
5.  On-site parking. On-site parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space for each guest room plus two spaces for the on-site owner/manager of the bed and breakfast inn. 
6.  On-site management. The bed and breakfast inn shall be the primary residence of the bed and breakfast inn owner or manager. 
7.  Provision of meals. Bed and breakfast inns may serve breakfast to guests only where authorized by the Mono County Environmental Health Department. Meals shall be limited to registered overnight guests only. 
8.  Signs. Signage shall be allowed for bed and breakfast inns in compliance with Chapter 17.48 (Signs). 
9.  Transient occupancy tax. Bed and breakfast inns shall be subject to all applicable provisions of Chapter 3.12 (Transient Occupancy Tax), and shall maintain guest registers to ensure accurate occupancy records. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.085 - Cannabis—Commercial Businesses. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to: (1) protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community; (2) enact strong and effective regulatory and enforcement controls in compliance with state law; (3) protect neighborhood character; and (4) minimize potential for negative impacts on people, the community, and the environment in the town. 
B.  Permits Required. The operation of commercial cannabis activities shall not be allowed in the town without first securing all permits, licenses, or other entitlements required by state and local laws and regulations. 
1.  A use permit shall be required for all commercial cannabis activities and a separate use permit shall be required for each location at which cannabis activities are to occur. Conducting a commercial cannabis activity without a use permit shall be unlawful and considered to be a public nuisance pursuant to Chapter 17.132. The application for a use permit, and for amendments thereto and extensions thereof, shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 17.68 (Use Permits). In addition to the findings and procedures identified in Chapter 17.128 for the revocation and modification of a use permit, additional grounds which warrant the revocation/modification of a use permit specific to commercial cannabis activities are provided in Section 17.52.085.K. 
2.  In addition to a use permit, a commercial cannabis permit pursuant to Chapter 5.38 (Commercial Cannabis Permits) shall be required for all commercial cannabis activities. The commercial cannabis permit shall be renewed on an annual basis and the permittee shall maintain such permit in good standing order to continue operations. 
3.  A valid state license for each commercial cannabis activity that is to be conducted at a location shall be required prior to commencement of the commercial cannabis activity and at all times during operations. 
4.  The owner shall post or cause to be posted on site all required town and state permits and licenses required to operate. Such posting shall be in a central location, visible to the patrons at the operating site, and in all vehicles that transport cannabis or cannabis products. 
5.  The owner and all permittees shall maintain clear and adequate records and documentation demonstrating that all cannabis or cannabis products have been obtained from, and are provided to, other permitted and licensed cannabis operations or individual purchasers. The town shall have the right to examine, monitor, and audit such records and documentation, which shall be made available to the town upon request. 
6.  The owner and all permittees shall conduct commercial cannabis activities in compliance with all required town permits and regulations and state licenses, laws, and regulations. The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all required inspection fees, permit fees, and taxes. 
7.  Existing medical cannabis businesses that were legally established prior to January 1, 2018 may obtain temporary adult-use licenses for the various commercial cannabis activity type(s) from the State of California if all of the following conditions are met and adhered to: 
a.  The business shall only be approved for the state one hundred twenty day temporary adult-use licenses and any permitted extensions by the state of the temporary adult-use licenses for the use types that the business was originally approved for (i.e., retailer, manufacturer, cultivator, etc.). 
b.  The business shall continue to maintain compliance with all conditions of approval of the original use permit, with the exception of those conditions that are no longer applicable (i.e., prohibition of retail sales; prohibition of sales for profit; the requirement to be incorporated as a non-profit, etc.). It shall be at the sole discretion of the town which conditions of approval are no longer applicable during the interim transition period. 
c.  The business shall comply with all regulations listed in Section 17.52.085 and Chapter 5.38 for the commercial cannabis activity type(s) that they are approved for. 
d.  The business may apply for permanent state licenses for adult-use commercial cannabis activities in advance of obtaining a revised use permit for the adult-use component, but are doing so at their own risk and shall acknowledge that the town is under no obligation to approve the revised use permit and/or the permanent state license. Furthermore, the town will deny approval of the permanent state license for adult-use if either of the following occur: (1) a complete application for a use permit amendment to convert to adult-use has not been received prior to contact by the state licensing agency verifying local compliance; or (2) the subsequent use permit amendment to convert to adult-use is denied by the town. 
e.  A signed affidavit acknowledging acceptance of these terms and conditions on a form provided by the town shall be required. 
C.  Prohibited Activities. The following commercial cannabis activities are prohibited within the town: 
1.  Delivery of cannabis or cannabis products to customers in a location other than licensed retail premises. All sales and dispensing of cannabis and cannabis products shall be conducted in-person and entirely within the licensed premises of a cannabis retailer. 
2.  Outdoor cultivation of cannabis. 
3.  Manufacturing of cannabis concentrates and/or products using volatile solvents. 
4.  Operating a commercial cannabis business prior to obtaining all of the following: (1) a town issued use permit pursuant to Section 17.52.085 and Chapter 17.68; (2) a town issued commercial cannabis permit pursuant to Chapter 5.38; and (3) a state license pursuant to Section 26000 of the California Business and Professions Code. Such licenses and permits shall specifically include all commercial cannabis activities that are occurring on the premises. 
D.  Regulations for Cannabis Retailers (Adult-Use and Medicinal). Where cannabis retailers are a land use allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), cannabis retailers shall comply with all the following regulations and operating requirements: 
1.  Cannabis retail facilities shall be located only in zoning districts that specifically allow for this use. 
2.  Cannabis retailers shall be permitted to have on-site cultivation and/or nonvolatile manufacturing uses as accessory uses secondary to the primary retail use, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A new use permit or a use permit amendment is required for the additional uses. 
b.  The cultivation and manufacturing areas are not visible from the public right-of-way and the retail use of the facility remains as the primary use. The cultivation area and manufacturing area shall be located in the rear of the premises and not be accessible to the public. 
c.  The cultivation area and the manufacturing area and equipment shall comply with all applicable state building code regulations including, but not limited to, building, electrical, fire, and plumbing code regulations. 
d.  In addition to the state retailer license, a microbusiness state license or other applicable state license is required for the cultivation and manufacturing uses, and all applicable state laws and regulations shall be adhered to. 
e.  The cultivation and/or manufacturing uses shall be on the same physical premises as the cannabis retailer and all activities shall be held under common ownership that is identical in name, business formation, and ownership as the cannabis retailer. 
f.  In addition to complying with all of the requirements for a cannabis retailer, compliance with all of the requirements for commercial cannabis cultivation facilities (Section 17.52.085.E) and commercial cannabis manufacturing facilities (Section 17.52.085.F) shall be required. 
3.  Cannabis retail facilities shall be subject to the following location requirements: 
a.  Cannabis retail facilities shall not be located on any parcel which is located within six hundred feet of any school providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades one through twelve, day care center, youth center, or public park that is in existence at the time the use is approved. 
b.  Cannabis retail facilities shall not be located within five hundred feet of another cannabis retail facility regardless of the adult-use or medicinal designation. 
c.  The distance between a cannabis retail facility, and the uses described above, shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest property line or a portion of the building or structure if located on a property line in which the retail facility is located, to the boundary or closest property line where the uses described above is located. 
d.  Adult-use and medicinal cannabis retailers shall be permitted to be colocated on the same licensed premises, so long as all of the state regulations pertaining to colocation of license types are adhered to. 
4.  Cannabis retailers shall keep accurate records of all business operations and provide such records for inspection consistent with Section 26160 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
5.  Cannabis retailers shall implement and maintain sufficient security measures to both deter and prevent unauthorized entrance into areas containing cannabis or cannabis products in compliance with Section 26070 of the California Business and Professions Code and any rules enacted by the licensing authority. Security measures shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Take reasonable measures to prevent individuals from loitering on the premises or in the area(s) immediately surrounding the premises, including common area(s) or parking area(s), if they are not engaging in activity expressly related to the operations of the retailer; 
b.  Establish limited access areas accessible only to authorized retailer personnel; 
c.  Store all cannabis and cannabis products in a secured and locked safe room, safe, or vault, and in a manner as to prevent diversion, theft, and loss, except for limited amounts of cannabis and cannabis products used for display purposes, samples, or immediate sale; 
d.  Install a video surveillance system on the premises that, at a minimum, meets the requirements provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 16, Section 5044 and captures all areas of the premises, including the area outside the premises for a minimum distance of twenty feet; 
e.  Install and maintain an alarm system that, at a minimum, meets the requirements provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 16, Section 5047; 
f.  Require all owners, employees, and agents of a cannabis retailer to display an identification badge issued by the permittee at all times while engaging in the permitted commercial cannabis activities and the identification badge shall, at a minimum, meet the requirements provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 16, Section 5043; and 
g.  Provide for on-site security personnel in a manner consistent with the state cannabis retail security personnel requirements provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 16, Section 5045. On-site security shall not carry firearms or other lethal weapons. 
6.  Cannabis retailers shall obtain cannabis and cannabis products from licensed distributors only and shall ensure that all cannabis and cannabis products received came from a licensed cultivator or manufacturer and that all products underwent testing pursuant to state and local regulations. 
7.  Retailers shall not sell any cannabis or cannabis product unless the cannabis and cannabis products are labeled and in a tamper-evident package in compliance with Section 26120 of the California Business and Professions Code. All products sold shall be in an opaque exit package when the products leave the premises. 
8.  Retailers shall notify the town police department within twenty-four hours after discovering any of the following: 
a.  Significant discrepancies identified during inventory; 
b.  Diversion, theft, loss, or any criminal activity involving the retailer or any agent or employee of the retailer; 
c.  The loss or unauthorized alteration of records related to cannabis, customers, or retailer's employees or agents; or 
d.  Any other breach of security. 
9.  No owner, employee, or agent of a cannabis retailer shall allow entry into the premises, or sell or transfer cannabis or cannabis products to another person, without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is twenty-one years of age or older. 
10.  No cannabis retailer shall employ a person who is less than twenty-one years of age or allow a person who is less than twenty-one years of age to be on the premises. 
11.  All employees and agents of a cannabis retailer involved in face-to-face sales of cannabis and/or cannabis products shall complete a responsible cannabis retailing education training program that the town authorizes as meeting the objectives specified below. New employees shall complete the training prior to beginning work on the sales floor. All employees shall participate in an annual refresher course and provide evidence of completion to the town. 
Responsible cannabis retailing education training programs shall, at a minimum, achieve the following objectives: (1) educate employees on state and local regulatory requirements and best practices for cannabis retailing; (2) provide them with the education and ability to verify age requirements and inform customers about the potential effects that various dosages and products may cause; (3) describe practices that can lower any risks associated with cannabis use; and (4) inform customers about best practices for the storage and use of cannabis to prevent access and accidental use by minors under the age of eighteen. 
Evidence that all employees have completed the authorized course and/or the refresher course shall be provided upon request by a town official. 
12.  Alcohol shall not be sold or consumed on the premises or in the area(s) immediately surrounding the premises, including the common area(s) or parking area(s). Cannabis retailers shall prohibit patrons from entering or remaining on the premises if they are in possession of or are consuming alcoholic beverages or are under the influence of alcohol. 
13.  Tobacco and/or tobacco products shall not be sold or consumed on the premises of a cannabis retailer or in any of the public places where smoking is prohibited pursuant to Section 9.26.020. 
14.  Cannabis retail facilities shall not be colocated within a facility permitted as a food facility by the county health department. Food products (i.e., non-cannabis products) shall not be sold on the premises. 
15.  Cannabis and/or cannabis products shall not be smoked, ingested, or otherwise consumed on the premises of the cannabis retailer or in any of the public places where smoking is prohibited pursuant to Section 9.26.020 and shall be compliant with the town "No Smoking in Public Places Ordinance" at all times. Cannabis retailers shall post a sign near their entrances and exits providing notice of this policy. 
16.  Cannabis goods that are packaged in a manner consistent with Section 26120 of the California Business and Professions Code, as it may be amended from time to time, may be visible from outside the premises provided that displays that are visible from outside the premises shall not include the words "cannabis" or "marijuana" nor shall the display include any graphic display of cannabis leaves or plants. 
17.  Bathrooms that are under the direct control of the cannabis retailer and are located within their licensed premises shall remain locked and under control of the management. 
18.  Cannabis retailers shall provide the town police department and all neighbors within three hundred feet of the retail facility with the name, phone number, and email address of an on-site staff person to notify if there are problems with the establishment. 
19.  Cannabis retailers shall not include the words "cannabis" or "marijuana" in any signage nor shall any graphic display of cannabis leaves or plants be displayed on the building signage nor shall any graphics of cannabis leaves or plants be used in advertising collateral materials. 
20.  The cannabis retailer shall not engage in any advertising targeted towards minors or promoting the use of cannabis by minors. 
21.  All sales and dispensing of cannabis and cannabis products shall be conducted in-person and entirely within the licensed premises of the cannabis retailer. The delivery of any cannabis or cannabis products to a consumer is prohibited within the town. 
22.  The maximum hours of operation for a cannabis retailer shall be 9:00 a.m. Pacific time and 9:00 p.m. Pacific time. 
23.  Cannabis retailers and any of the cannabis retailer's agents or employees shall not sell of offer for sale any of the following prohibited product types: 
a.  Any cannabis or cannabis product that is attractive to children or youth or easily confused with commercially sold candy or foods that do not contain cannabis; 
b.  Any edible product that contains more than ten milligrams THC per serving; 
c.  Any edible product that contains more than one hundred milligrams of THC per package for products that contains more than one serving; 
d.  Cannabis or cannabis products that contain any non-cannabinoid additive such as nicotine, caffeine, or alcohol. Minimal amounts of alcohol, in as much as are residual from manufacturing or required solvents for the cannabis containing product, are allowed provided that the alcohol content is ten percent or less, the amount of alcohol in an individual serving would not create alcohol intoxication with ingestion of a single dose, and the product is clearly labeled with both the alcohol content and a statement that reads: "Warning: This Product Contains Alcohol."; and 
e.  Any product that would otherwise be classified as a potentially hazardous food (as defined in Section 113871 of the California Health and Safety Code), including a food that requires time or temperature control to limit pathogenic microorganism growth or toxin formation. 
24.  The cannabis retailer shall use a track-and-trace system that is compatible with the state approved track-and-trace system to track commercial cannabis activity and shall record all transactions in the system including, but not limited to, sales of cannabis goods, receipt of cannabis goods, return of cannabis goods, and destruction and disposal of cannabis goods. 
25.  Parking for cannabis retailers shall be provided in compliance with Table 17.44.030.B and shall use the retail use classification land use metric. 
26.  Cannabis retailers shall adhere to the cannabis waste management regulations provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 16, Section(s) 5054 and 5055. 
27.  Cannabis retailers that are located on the ground level shall maintain transparency into the building pursuant to the requirements specified in Section 17.24.040.C.1 (Design of Required Openings). Any security cages or walls (i.e., accordion security cages or roll down cages) shall not be visible during regular business hours and shall not substantially reduce visibility into the building when closed. The director or designee shall have design review authority over the design and shall approve any such security cages. 
E.  Regulations for Commercial Cannabis Cultivation (Adult-Use and Medicinal). Where commercial cannabis cultivation is a land use allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), commercial cannabis cultivation activities shall comply with all of the following regulations and operating requirements: 
1.  All cultivation of cannabis shall be done indoors using exclusively artificial lighting. Outdoor cultivation of cannabis is prohibited within the town limits. 
2.  Commercial cannabis cultivation facilities shall be located only in zoning districts that specifically allow for this use. 
A cannabis retailer may cultivate cannabis as an accessory use, so long as the activity is on the same physical premises as the cannabis retailer and all activities are held under common ownership that is identical in name, business formation, and ownership and the use complies with all of the requirements identified in Section 17.52.085.D.2. 
3.  No direct sales to the public shall occur at a cultivation facility and all cannabis shall pass through a licensed distributor prior to being sold to customers at a cannabis retail location. 
4.  Commercial cannabis cultivation facilities shall not be open to the public. 
5.  Commercial cannabis cultivation facilities shall not be located on any parcel which is located within six hundred feet of any school providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades one through twelve, day care center, or youth center that is in existence at the time the use is approved. 
6.  Commercial cannabis cultivation facilities shall use a track-and-trace system that is compatible with the state approved track-and-trace system to track commercial cannabis activity and movement. Unique identifiers (UIDs) consistent with the state requirements shall be attached to the base of each plant and shall be traceable through the supply chain back to the cultivation site. All activities shall be documented in the track-and-trace system including, but not limited to, the planting of cannabis seeds, the harvesting of cannabis, the packaging of cannabis, the transportation of cannabis goods to a licensee, and the testing of cannabis. 
7.  Security measures sufficient to restrict access to only those intended and to deter trespass and theft of cannabis shall be provided and maintained. Security measures shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Take reasonable measures to prevent individuals from loitering on the premises or in the area(s) immediately surrounding the premises, including common area(s) or parking area(s), if they are not engaging in activity expressly related to the operations of the cultivation facility; 
b.  Maintain a secured area where the mature and immature cannabis plants are located in order to prevent theft, diversion, and loss; 
c.  Install a video surveillance system on the premises that, at a minimum, meets the requirements provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 16, Section 5044 and captures all areas of the premises, including the area outside the premises for a minimum distance of twenty feet; 
d.  Install and maintain an alarm system that, at a minimum, meets the requirements provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 16, Section 5047; and 
e.  Establish an identification and sign-in/sign-out procedure for authorized personnel, suppliers, and/or visitors. 
8.  Pesticides and fertilizers shall be properly labeled and stored to avoid contamination through erosions, leakage, or inadvertent damage form rodents, pests, or wildlife. A permit from the state department of food and agriculture shall be required for the use of pesticides. 
9.  All scales used by commercial cannabis cultivators shall be registered for commercial use and sealed by the state department of food and agriculture/weights and measures. 
10.  Water conservation measures, water capture systems, or grey water systems shall be incorporated in cannabis cultivation operations in order to minimize use of water where feasible. 
11.  Waste water discharge resulting from the cultivation activities shall be done in accordance with the requirements of the Mammoth Community Water District. 
12.  Cannabis plants shall not be visible from off-site and no visual markers indicating that cannabis is cultivated on the site shall be visible from off-site. 
13.  The permittee shall ensure that the total canopy size of cannabis cultivated at the site does not exceed the cumulative canopy size authorized by their state license. 
14.  Permittees who hold a use permit for commercial cannabis cultivation may transport their own cannabis grown on-site to another permitted and licensed cannabis business at an off-site facility provided the cultivator permittee holds the appropriate state distributor license that allows for the transportation of cannabis. If the cultivator permittee holds a distributor transport-only state license, they shall be prohibited from delivering cannabis and cannabis products to retailers, except for the delivery of immature plants to retailers. 
The distribution use shall be approved in conjunction with the use permit for cultivation or an amendment of the use permit to allow distribution will be required. Failure to adhere to town or state laws and regulations for cannabis transportation shall be grounds for revocation/modification of a use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.128 (Revocations and Modifications) and/or Section 17.52.085.K. 
15.  All cannabis cultivated at a cultivation facility shall undergo quality assurance review and testing by a licensed testing facility prior to distribution to a retailer pursuant to Section 26104 of the California Business and Professions Code and shall adhere to all state testing regulations. 
16.  Pursuant to Section 26053 of the California Business and Professions Code, commercial cannabis cultivators shall only conduct business with other cannabis businesses that hold a state license. 
17.  All structures used for cultivation shall be equipped with odor control, filtration, and ventilation systems that are adequate to prevent humidity, mold, odor, and other related problems. A building permit shall be obtained, as necessary, for the installation of required equipment. 
18.  All structures used for cultivation shall be legally constructed and shall comply with all applicable state building code regulations including, but not limited to, building, electrical, fire, and plumbing code regulations. A building permit from the town shall be required for all tenant improvements to a structure or site. 
19.  Parking for commercial cannabis cultivation facilities shall be provided in compliance with Table 17.44.030.B and shall use the Industrial, Manufacturing, & Processing Use Classification land use metric. Additional parking or the implementation and usage of alternative parking provisions pursuant to Section 17.44.040 may be required by the director if it is determined that the use and the anticipated number of employees will have an adverse effect on the surrounding area. 
20.  All commercial cultivation facilities shall adhere to the cannabis waste management regulations provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 3, Section(s) 8108 and 8308. 
21.  Indoor cultivation facilities may operate seven days a week, twenty-four hours per day as needed. Deliveries and shipping activities shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., unless stated otherwise in the use permit. 
F.  Regulations for Commercial Cannabis Manufacturing (Adult-Use and Medicinal). Where commercial cannabis manufacturing is a land use allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), commercial cannabis manufacturing activities shall comply with all of the following regulations and operating requirements: 
1.  Facilities that manufacture cannabis concentrates and/or products using nonvolatile solvents shall be located only in zoning districts that specifically allow for this use. 
A cannabis product manufacturer may manufacture cannabis products as an accessory use, so long as the activity is on the same physical premises as the cannabis retailer and all activities are held under common ownership that is identical in name, business formation, and ownership and the use complies with all of the requirements identified in Section 17.52.085.D.2. 
"Nonvolatile solvents" means any solvent used in the extraction process that is not a volatile solvent. For purposes of this section, nonvolatile solvents include carbon dioxide and ethanol when used in a closed-loop system. 
2.  No direct sales to the public shall occur at a manufacturing facility and all cannabis products shall pass through a licensed distributor prior to being sold to customers at a cannabis retail location. 
3.  Commercial cannabis manufacturing facilities shall not be open to the public. 
4.  Commercial cannabis manufacturing facilities shall not be located on any parcel which is located within six hundred feet of any school providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades one through twelve, day care center, or youth center that is in existence at the time the use is approved. 
5.  Commercial cannabis manufacturing facilities shall use a track-and-trace system that is compatible with the state approved track-and-trace system to track commercial cannabis activity and all activities shall be documented in the track-and-trace system including, but not limited to, the receiving of raw cannabis materials, the packaging of cannabis products, the transportation of cannabis products to a licensee, and the testing of cannabis product batches. 
6.  Security measures sufficient to restrict access to only those intended and to deter trespass and theft of cannabis and cannabis products shall be provided and maintained. Security measures shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Take reasonable measures to prevent individuals from loitering on the premises or in the area(s) immediately surrounding the premises, including common area(s) or parking area(s), if they are not engaging in activity expressly related to the operations of the manufacturing facility; 
b.  Maintain a secured and locked area where the cannabis and cannabis products are stored in order to prevent theft, diversion, and loss; 
c.  Install a video surveillance system on the premises that, at a minimum, meets the requirements provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 17, Section 40205 and captures all areas of the premises, including the area outside the premises for a minimum distance of twenty feet; 
d.  Install and maintain an alarm system that, at a minimum, meets the requirements provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 16, Section 5047; and 
e.  Establish an identification and sign-in/sign-out procedure for authorized personnel, suppliers, and/or visitor. 
7.  Any employee of a cannabis manufacturing facility operating potentially hazardous equipment shall be trained on the proper use of equipment and on the property hazard response protocols in the event of equipment failure. In addition, employees handling edible products or ingredients shall be trained on proper food safety practices. 
8.  No visual markers indicating that manufacturing of cannabis products is occurring on the site shall be visible from off-site. 
9.  Permittees who hold a use permit for commercial cannabis manufacturing may transport their own cannabis products manufactured on-site to another permitted and licensed cannabis business at an off-site facility provided the manufacturing permittee holds the appropriate state distributor license that allows for the transportation of cannabis products. If the manufacturer permittee holds a distributor transport-only state license, they shall be prohibited from delivering cannabis products to retailers. 
The distribution use shall be approved in conjunction with the use permit for manufacturing or an amendment of the use permit to allow distribution will be required. Failure to adhere to town or state laws and regulations for cannabis transportation shall be grounds for revocation/modification of a use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.128 (Revocations and Modifications) and/or Section 17.52.085.K. 
10.  All cannabis products manufactured at a cannabis manufacturing facility shall undergo quality assurance review and testing by a licensed testing facility prior to distribution to a retailer pursuant to Section 26104 of the California Business and Professions Code and shall adhere to all state testing regulations. 
11.  Pursuant to Section 26053 of the California Business and Professions Code, commercial cannabis manufacturers shall only conduct business with other cannabis businesses that hold a state license. 
12.  All structures used for manufacturing of cannabis products shall be equipped with odor control, filtration, and ventilation systems that are adequate to prevent humidity, mold, odor, and other related problems. A building permit shall be obtained, as necessary, for the installation of required equipment. 
13.  All structures used for manufacturing of cannabis products shall be legally constructed and shall comply with all applicable state building code regulations including, but not limited to, building, electrical, fire, and plumbing code regulations. A building permit from the town shall be required for all tenant improvements to a structure or site. 
14.  Parking for commercial cannabis manufacturing facilities shall be provided in compliance with Table 17.44.030.B and shall use the Industrial, Manufacturing, & Processing Use Classification land use metric. Additional parking or the implementation and usage of alternative parking provisions pursuant to Section 17.44.040 may be required by the director if it is determined that the use and the anticipated number of employees will have an adverse effect on the surrounding area. 
15.  All commercial cannabis manufacturing facilities shall adhere to the cannabis waste management regulations provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 17, Section 40290. 
16.  Waste water discharge resulting from the manufacturing activities shall be done in accordance with the requirements of the Mammoth Community Water District. 
17.  All equipment used in the manufacturing of cannabis products shall be compliant with all applicable state laws and regulations and all building and fire code regulations. Manufacturers spec sheets for all equipment shall be provided and any change of equipment shall require additional review and approval from the town. 
18.  All scales used by commercial cannabis manufacturers shall be registered for commercial use and sealed by the state department of food and agriculture/weights and measures. 
19.  Manufacturing facilities may operate seven days a week, twenty-four hours per day as needed. Deliveries and shipping activities shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., unless stated otherwise in the use permit. 
G.  Regulations for Commercial Cannabis Distribution (Adult-Use and Medicinal). Where commercial cannabis distribution is a land use allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), commercial cannabis distribution activities shall comply with all of the following regulations and operating requirements: 
1.  Commercial cannabis distribution facilities shall be located only in zoning districts that specifically provide for this use. 
2.  Commercial cannabis distribution facilities shall not be open to the public. 
3.  Commercial cannabis distribution facilities shall not be located on any parcel which is located within six hundred feet of any school providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades one through twelve, day care center, or youth center that is in existence at the time the use is approved. 
4.  Commercial cannabis distribution facilities shall use a track-and-trace system that is compatible with the state approved track-and-trace system to track commercial cannabis activity and all activities shall be documented in the track-and-trace system including, but not limited to, the receiving of cannabis and cannabis products, the transportation of cannabis products to a retailer licensee, and the testing of cannabis and cannabis products. 
5.  Prior to transporting cannabis and/or cannabis products, the distributor shall complete an electronic shipping manifest. The shipping manifest shall include the unique identifier (UID) information from the cultivation source. 
6.  A physical copy of the shipping manifest shall be maintained during transportation and shall be made available upon request to law enforcement or any agents of the state, town, or Mono County charged with enforcement. 
7.  Cannabis distribution facilities shall maintain appropriate records of transactions and shipping manifests. An organized and clean method of storing and transporting cannabis and cannabis products shall be provided to maintain a clear chain of custody. 
8.  Security measures sufficient to restrict access to only those intended and to deter trespass and theft of cannabis and cannabis products shall be provided and maintained. Security measures shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Take reasonable measures to prevent individuals from loitering on the premises or in the area(s) immediately surrounding the premises, including common area(s) or parking area(s), if they are not engaging in activity expressly related to the operations of the distribution facility; 
b.  Maintain a secured and locked area where the cannabis and cannabis products are stored in order to prevent theft, diversion, and loss; 
c.  Install a video surveillance system on the premises that, at a minimum, meets the requirements provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 16, Section 5044 and captures all areas of the premises, including the area outside the premises for a minimum distance of twenty feet; 
d.  Install and maintain an alarm system that, at a minimum, meets the requirements provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 16, Section 5047; and 
e.  Establish an identification and sign-in/sign-out procedure for authorized personnel, suppliers, and/or visitors. 
9.  No visual markers indicating that the facility is a cannabis distribution facility shall be visible from off-site. 
10.  Distributors shall ensure that appropriate samples of cannabis and/or cannabis products are tested by a licensed testing facility prior to distribution. 
11.  Prior to distribution, the distributor shall inspect the cannabis and/or cannabis products for quality assurance. 
12.  Cannabis and cannabis products shall be packaged and labeled in accordance with the requirements of state law. 
13.  The driver of a vehicle transporting cannabis and/or cannabis products shall be directly employed by persons that hold all required permits, licenses, and entitlements for a cannabis distributor. 
14.  All vehicles used for transporting cannabis and cannabis products shall meet all of the state regulations and requirements for cannabis transport vehicles. 
15.  Pursuant to Section 26053 of the California Business and Professions Code, cannabis and cannabis products shall only be transported between permitted and licensed commercial cannabis operations. 
16.  All structures used for distribution of cannabis products shall be equipped with odor control, filtration, and ventilation systems that are adequate to prevent humidity, mold, odor, and other related problems. A building permit shall be obtained, as necessary, for the installation of required equipment. 
17.  All structures used for distribution of cannabis products shall be legally constructed and shall comply with all applicable state building code regulations including, but not limited to, building, electrical, fire, and plumbing code regulations. A building permit from the town shall be required for all tenant improvements to a structure or site. 
18.  Parking for commercial cannabis distribution facilities shall be provided in compliance with Table 17.44.030.B and shall use the Industrial, Manufacturing, & Processing Use Classification land use metric. Additional parking or the implementation and usage of alternative parking provisions pursuant to Section 17.44.040 may be required by the director if it is determined that the use and the anticipated number of employees and/or transport vehicles will have an adverse effect on the surrounding area. 
19.  Distribution activities within the town shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., unless stated otherwise in the use permit. 
H.  Regulations for Commercial Cannabis Testing. Where commercial cannabis testing is a land use allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), commercial cannabis testing activities shall comply with all of the following regulations and operating requirements: 
1.  Commercial cannabis testing facilities shall be located only in zoning districts that specifically provide for this use. 
2.  Commercial cannabis testing facilities shall not be open to the public. 
3.  Commercial cannabis testing facilities shall not be located on any parcel which is located within six hundred feet of any school providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades one through twelve, day care center, or youth center that is in existence at the time the use is approved. 
4.  A person that holds a state cannabis testing laboratory license shall not hold a state license for any other cannabis activity and shall not employ an individual who is also employed by any other licensee that does not hold a state cannabis testing laboratory license. 
5.  Security measures sufficient to restrict access to only those intended and to deter trespass and theft of cannabis and cannabis products shall be provided and maintained. Security measures shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Take reasonable measures to prevent individuals from loitering on the premises or in the area(s) immediately surrounding the premises, including common area(s) or parking area(s), if they are not engaging in activity expressly related to the operations of the testing facility; 
b.  Maintain a secured and locked area where the cannabis and cannabis products are stored in order to prevent theft, diversion, and loss; 
c.  Install a video surveillance system on the premises that, at a minimum, meets the requirements provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 16, Section 5044 and captures all areas of the premises, including the area outside the premises for a minimum distance of twenty feet; 
d.  Install and maintain an alarm system that, at a minimum, meets the requirements provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 16, Section 5047; and 
e.  Establish an identification and sign-in/sign-out procedure for authorized personnel, suppliers, and/or visitors. 
6.  No visual markers indicating that the facility is a cannabis testing facility shall be visible from off-site. 
7.  Cannabis testing facilities shall destroy the remains of any samples of cannabis and/or cannabis products tested upon completion of the analysis. Destruction of samples shall be done in a manner consistent with state laws and regulations. 
8.  All testing procedures and operations shall be done in a manner consistent with state laws and regulations. 
9.  All structures used for testing of cannabis products shall be equipped with odor control, filtration, and ventilation systems that are adequate to prevent humidity, contamination of the testing equipment, odor, and other related problems. A building permit shall be obtained, as necessary, for the installation of required equipment. 
10.  All structures used for testing of cannabis products shall be legally constructed and shall comply with all applicable state building code regulations including, but not limited to, building, electrical, fire, and plumbing code regulations. A building permit from the town shall be required for all tenant improvements to a structure or site. 
11.  Parking for commercial cannabis testing facilities shall be provided in compliance with Table 17.44.030.B and shall use the Industrial, Manufacturing, & Processing Use Classification land use metric. Additional parking or the implementation and usage of alternative parking provisions pursuant to Section 17.44.040 may be required by the director if it is determined that the use and the anticipated number of employees will have an adverse effect on the surrounding area. 
12.  Testing facilities may operate seven days a week, twenty-four hours per day as needed. Deliveries and shipping activities shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., unless stated otherwise in the use permit. 
13.  Cannabis testing facilities shall adhere to the cannabis waste management regulations provided in the California Code of Regulations Title 16, Section(s) 5054 and 5055. 
I.  Findings and Conditions of Approval. 
1.  Required Findings. In addition to the use permit findings required by Section 17.68.050, a use permit for a commercial cannabis activity shall be approved only if all of the following additional findings can be made: 
a.  The commercial cannabis business, as proposed, has demonstrated that it can and will comply with all of the requirements of the state and the town for all of the commercial cannabis activities proposed. 
b.  The commercial cannabis business includes adequate measures that minimize, to the extent feasible, nuisance to the immediate neighborhood and community including, but not limited to, minimizing detection of odor from off-site, minimizing the effects of loitering, provision of adequate parking, and provision of adequate security measures. 
c.  For cannabis cultivation facilities, a finding shall also be made that the cannabis cultivation facility includes adequate measures that minimize use of water for cannabis cultivation at the site. 
d.  For cannabis manufacturing facilities, a finding shall also be made that the manufacturing facility does not pose a significant threat to the public or to neighboring uses from explosion or from the release of harmful gases, liquids, or substances. 
e.  For cannabis testing facilities, a finding shall also be made that the owners, permittees, operators, and employees of the testing facility are not associated with any other commercial cannabis activities within the state. 
2.  Required Conditions of Approval. In addition to any other required conditions and mitigation measures imposed, all of the following conditions shall apply to all use permits for commercial cannabis activities: 
a.  The commercial cannabis business shall allow access to its facilities and records if requested by the town, its officers, or agents, and shall pay for annual financial and regulatory compliance audits and submit to inspections from the town or its officers to verify compliance with all relevant rules, regulations, and conditions. 
b.  Any person operating a commercial cannabis business shall obtain a commercial cannabis permit pursuant to Chapter 5.38 prior to commencing operations and must maintain such permit in good standing in order to continue operations. 
c.  The commercial cannabis business shall operate only in accordance with the operating plans reviewed and approved by the town. 
d.  The applicant and its successors of interest shall acknowledge and agree that the town makes no representations or guarantees that operations carried out under the auspices of the use permit or the commercial cannabis permit will comply with federal law, that the applicant's premises and the real property in which the premises are situated will not be raided or closed by law enforcement personnel, and/or that the applicant, its staff, or anyone connected with the applicant's operations will not be criminally prosecuted under the applicable law. 
e.  The applicant and its successors of interest in the commercial cannabis business shall indemnify, defend, and hold the town harmless from and against any and all claims and proceedings, losses, damages, and cause of action relating to the approval of the permit or relating to any damage to property or person stemming from the commercial cannabis activity. 
J.  Application Requirements. All applications for a use permit for a commercial cannabis activity shall be filed in accordance with Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees) and shall include, without limitation, the following documentation: 
1.  Proof of ownership of the premises, or if the premises on which the commercial cannabis operation is to occur is rented or leased, a copy of the lease signed by the property owner. A signed affidavit from all persons and entities having a right, title, or interest in the premises that is the subject of the application consenting to the application and the operation of the proposed commercial cannabis activity on the subject premises is required. 
2.  A complete description of the type, nature, and extent of the commercial cannabis activities to be conducted. 
3.  A description of the type of state license(s) that will be required for the proposed operations pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Sections 26000, et seq., including a description of the proposed total canopy area of any cultivation or nursery operation. 
4.  A scaled site plan that shows, at a minimum, the property lines, all buildings (existing and proposed), adjacent buildings within twenty feet of the property line, impermeable surfaces, parking areas, delivery/truck loading and parking areas, entry and exits to the building(s), propane tank(s), trash enclosures, fences, walls, site lighting, and snow storage area(s). Additional items may be required by the review authority. 
5.  Scaled floor plan(s) showing the layout of the interior space(s) and identifying all areas where commercial cannabis activities will occur. 
6.  Building elevations if any exterior modifications are proposed. 
7.  An operations plan including at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  A security plan outlining the on-site security measures, both physical and operational, that ensure the safety of persons and the protection of the premises from theft. The plan shall include, at a minimum, installation of security cameras, installation of commercial-grade, nonresidential locking mechanisms, continuous operation of a commercial burglary and robbery alarm system that is monitored by a state-licensed operator, use of security guards when required by state regulations, and an annual written security assessment of the site by a qualified professional. The security plan must also include a lighting plan showing exterior and interior lighting that will be implemented to provide adequate security and provide evidence of compliance with all town standards regarding lighting design and installation (see Section 17.36.030—Exterior Lighting). 
b.  Standard operating procedures manual detailing how operations will comply with state and local regulations; how safety and quality of products will be ensured; record keeping procedures for financing, testing, and adverse effect recording; and product recall procedures. 
c.  Proposed hours of operation. 
d.  Waste management plan. 
e.  Product supply chain information including where cultivation occurs, where the product is processed or manufactured, where the testing of cannabis and/or cannabis products will occur, how the product is being transported, and packaging and labeling criteria. 
f.  Record keeping policy. 
g.  Track-and-trace measures. 
h.  Procedures for verifying age of customers and employees and medical recommendations (if applicable). 
i.  Information on the proposed odor control, filtration, and ventilation systems, if required. 
j.  Size, height, colors, and design of any proposed signage at the site. 
k.  Parking plan that shows employee vehicle parking, truck parking, and transport vehicle loading and parking areas. 
l.  Such other information that is deemed necessary by the director. 
8.  Submittal of the commercial cannabis permit application pursuant to Chapter 5.38. The application for the commercial cannabis permit shall include all of the application items listed in Section 5.38.040. 
9.  Additional application items that shall be required based on the type of commercial cannabis activities proposed. 
a.  For commercial cannabis cultivation facilities, the following additional information shall be required: 
i.  A water management plan including the proposed water supply and proposed water conservation measures; 
ii.  Projected energy demand and information on any proposed renewable energy features, such as installation of solar panels; 
iii.  Unique identifier (UID), inventory, and quality control procedures; and 
iv.  A floor plan identifying the location, dimensions, and boundaries of all proposed canopy areas taking into account space needed for ongoing care of plants and a description of the proposed method of physically delineating those boundaries at the site. 
b.  For commercial cannabis manufacturing facilities, the following additional information shall be required: 
i.  Information on products used in the manufacturing process including the cannabis supply chain, liquids, solvents, agents, and processes. Evidence that all cannabis will be obtained from a licensed cultivator or licensed distributor operating in compliance with all local and state laws will be required; 
ii.  Storage protocol and hazard response plan; and 
iii.  Quality control measures. 
c.  For commercial cannabis distribution facilities, the following additional information shall be required: 
i.  An operations plan detailing how, and from where, cannabis and cannabis products will be received; how any storage, distribution, and transportation operations will be secured to prevent theft and trespass; and to whom the product will be distributed; 
ii.  Quality control measures; 
iii.  Truck parking and loading areas plan; and 
iv.  Cannabis storage and handling plans. 
d.  For commercial cannabis testing facilities, the following additional information shall be required: 
i.  An operations plan detailing how cannabis and cannabis products will be received, secured, tested, and destroyed upon completion; 
ii.  Certificate of accreditation from an approved accrediting body or evidence that the accreditation process has begun; and 
e.  Proposed procedures for record keeping, including chain of custody control and certificate issuance. 
K.  Grounds for Revocation or Modification. 
1.  In addition to the findings and procedures identified in Chapter 17.128 for the revocation and modification of a use permit, additional grounds which warrant the revocation/modification of a use permit specific to commercial cannabis activities include: 
a.  Any act or omission by an owner or permittee in violation of the provisions of Section 17.52.085. 
b.  Any act or omission by an owner or permittee that results in the denial, revocation, or suspension of the owner's or permittee's state commercial cannabis activity license(s). 
c.  Any act or omission by an owner or permittee that results in the denial, revocation, or suspension of the owner's or permittee's commercial cannabis permit issued under Chapter 5.38. 
d.  Any act or omission by an owner or permittee in violation of state law or this Code. 
e.  Conduct of the commercial cannabis business in a manner that constitutes a nuisance, where the owner or permittee has failed to comply with town direction to abate the nuisance. 
L.  Procedure for Revocation or Modification. In addition to the procedures identified in Chapter 17.128 for the revocation and modification of a use permit, the following additional procedures shall apply to revoke or modify a use permit specific to commercial cannabis activities: 
1.  If the director determines that grounds for revocation/modification of the use permit exist pursuant to Chapter 17.128 or Section 17.52.085.I, the director, or his or her designee shall issue a written notice of intention to revoke or modify the use permit, as the case may be. The notice of intention to revoke or modify shall be served on the property owner and shall also be served on permittees on the property, as reported on the commercial cannabis permits issued pursuant to Chapter 5.38. The notice of intention shall be served by either personal delivery or by certified U.S. Mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. The notice of intention shall describe the property, the intention to revoke or modify the use permit, the grounds for revocation or modification, the action necessary to abate the violation, and the time limit for compliance. 
2.  Failure to abate the violation prior to the end of the specified time limit for compliance in the notice of intention shall result in proceeding with the revocation or modification of the user permit pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 17.128 (Revocation and Modification). 
M.  Enforcement. The enforcement of Section 17.52.085 shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.132 (Enforcement) and all violations of this section are hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and may be abated by the town through civil proceedings by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 5(Exh. B), 3-13-2018; Ord. No. 18-05, § 4(Exh. A, b., c.), 11-19-2018)  
17.52.086 - Cannabis—Personal Cultivation and Use. 
A.  Purpose. The standards and requirements contained in this section are intended to regulate the personal use and cultivation of cannabis at private residences in a manner that protects the health, safety, and welfare of the community and minimizes the potential nuisance, security, and safety issues associated with cannabis use and cultivation. This section is not intended to interfere with a patient's right to medical cannabis pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act, as may be amended, nor does it criminalize cannabis possession or cultivation otherwise authorized by state law. This section is not intended to interfere with the ability of persons twenty-one years of age or older to grow, possess and use cannabis pursuant to the Adult Use of Marijuana Act, so long as the quantities and use are consistent with state law. This section is not intended to give any person or entity independent legal authority to operate a cannabis business. It is intended simply to impose zoning restrictions regarding personal cultivation of cannabis in the town pursuant to this Code and state law. 
B.  Applicability. No part of this section shall be deemed to conflict with federal law as contained in the Controlled Substances Act, 21. U.S.C. § 800 et seq., nor to otherwise permit any activity that is prohibited under that Act or any other local, state or federal law, statute, rule or regulation. Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow any conduct or activity relating to the cultivation, distribution, dispensing, sale, or consumption of cannabis that is otherwise illegal under local or state law. No provision of this section shall be deemed a defense or immunity to any action brought against any person by the county district attorney's office, the attorney general of the State of California or the United States of America. 
C.  Requirements. The following standards shall apply to the personal use and cultivation of cannabis at private residences. 
1.  Persons Authorized to Cultivate Cannabis for Personal Use. 
a.  A qualified patient, as that term is defined in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code, provided the qualified patient possesses, stores, manufactures, transports, or cultivates cannabis exclusively for his or her personal medical use, and does not provide, donate, sell, or distribute cannabis to any other person. Qualified patients shall, upon request, provide appropriate documentation to law enforcement demonstrating that they have a valid physician's recommendation to use cannabis for medicinal purposes. 
b.  A primary caregiver, as that term is defined in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code, provided the primary caregiver possesses, stores, manufactures, transports, donates, provides, or cultivates medical cannabis exclusively for the personal medical purposes of no more than three qualified patients for whom he or she is the primary caregiver, but who does not receive remuneration for these activities except for compensation in full compliance with subdivision (c) of Section 11362.765 of the California Health and Safety Code. Primary caregivers shall, upon request, provide appropriate documentation to law enforcement demonstrating that they are a primary caregiver for a maximum of three qualified patients. 
c.  For persons other than qualified patients or primary caregivers, all personal cannabis cultivation shall be conducted by persons twenty-one years of age or older. 
2.  Use and Possession Limitations. 
a.  Qualified patients with a valid physician's recommendation, or the designated primary caregiver of that qualified patient or person, may possess and use amounts of cannabis consistent with Section 11362.77 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
b.  Qualified patients and primary caregivers may maintain mature and immature cannabis plants in an amount consistent with Section 11362.77 of the California Health and Safety Code; however, at no time shall the cumulative cultivation area for qualified patients and primary caregivers exceed one hundred square feet of canopy area per qualified patient and primary caregivers shall only be permitted to cultivate for a maximum of three qualified patients at any individual address or on any individual parcel. The cultivation area within a dwelling unit shall not exceed ten percent or one hundred square feet, whichever is greater, of the total floor area of the dwelling unit. For the purposes of this section, total floor area of a dwelling unit does not include garage, attic, or other spaces not customarily used for living purposes. All cultivation areas shall comply with the location requirements specified in Section 17.52.086.C.3. 
c.  Pursuant to Section 11362.1 and 11362.2 of the California Health and Safety Code, persons twenty-one years of age or older may do the following: 
i.  Possess, process, transport, purchase, obtain, or give away to persons twenty-one years of age or older without any compensation whatsoever, not more than twenty-eight and one-half grams (i.e., one ounce) of cannabis (not in the form of concentrated cannabis) and not more than eight grams of concentrated cannabis, including as contained in cannabis products; 
ii.  Possess, plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process not more than six living cannabis plants within a single dwelling unit at any one time, regardless of the number of persons residing in that dwelling unit and the cultivation area shall comply with the location requirements specified in Section 17.52.086.C.3; and 
iii.  Smoke or ingest cannabis or cannabis products pursuant to the regulations in Section 11362.3 of the California Health and Safety Code and Chapter 9.26. 
3.  Location Requirements. Cannabis cultivation for personal use shall be permitted in all zones where accessory residential uses are permitted pursuant to Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and shall be subject to the following requirements and limitations: 
a.  The cultivation of cannabis for personal use is permitted to occur in the following areas: 
i.  If located on a parcel with one single-family residence, the cultivation area shall be located indoors within the dwelling unit or within a fully-enclosed accessory structure. If the cultivation area is located in an accessory structure, the accessory structure shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Be located on the same legal parcel as the single-family residence; 
(2)  Not be located within the front yard setback; 
(3)  Maintain a minimum twenty-foot setback along a street side yard; 
(4)  Maintain a minimum ten-foot setback along the interior side and rear yard; 
(5)  Maintain a minimum distance of thirty feet from the nearest residence which is not located on the same parcel; 
(6)  Maintain the minimum number of required enclosed parking spaces pursuant to Chapter 17.44 if the cultivation area is located within a garage; and 
(7)  "Structure" shall have the same meaning as specified in Section 17.148.020 and does not include cargo containers, recreational vehicles, or any other style of temporary structure. 
ii.  If located on a parcel with multiple dwelling units (e.g., multi-family residential), the cultivation of cannabis for personal use shall only be allowed indoors within the individual dwelling units. Parcels that have a legal secondary dwelling unit along with a single-family dwelling shall be subject to the location requirements specified in Section 17.52.086.C.3(a)(i). 
b.  Outdoor cultivation of cannabis is prohibited within the town limits. 
4.  Safety, Security, and Nuisance Prevention. 
a.  No exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation occurring at the property shall be visible from the public right-of-way. 
b.  Light systems shall be fully shielded, including adequate coverings on windows, so as to confine the light and glare to the interior of the structure. 
c.  All structures used for cultivation shall be legally constructed and shall comply with all applicable state building code regulations including, but not limited to, building, electrical, fire, and plumbing code regulations. Total electrical loads of the lighting equipment used for cultivation shall not exceed one thousand two hundred watts, unless a licensed electrical contractor certifies in a form acceptable to the town's building official, that the additional lighting loads meet the requirements of the currently adopted state electrical code. 
d.  All structures used for cultivation shall be equipped with odor control, filtration, and ventilation systems that are adequate to prevent humidity, mold, odor, and other related problems. A building permit shall be obtained, as necessary, for the installation of required equipment. 
e.  The cannabis plants and any cannabis produced by the plants in excess of twenty-eight and one-half grams shall be kept within a fully enclosed structure and be secured by lock and key or other security device which prevents unauthorized entry and is inaccessible to minors. 
f.  The use of gas products (e.g., CO2, butane, propane, etc.) for cannabis cultivation and/or any other processing or manufacturing of cannabis products is prohibited at private residential dwelling units. 
g.  The use of generators is prohibited, except as emergency back-up systems. 
h.  The cultivation of cannabis shall not adversely affect the health or safety of nearby residents, or cause annoyance or discomfort to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness, by creating glare, heat, noxious gasses, odor, smoke, vibration, or other impacts, or be hazardous due to the use or storage of materials, processes, products, or wastes. 
5.  Accessory Use. Cannabis cultivation for personal use shall be clearly secondary to the full-time use of the property as a residence and the residence shall maintain a fully functional kitchen, bathroom(s), and primary bedroom. These rooms shall not be used for personal cannabis cultivation where such cultivation will prevent their primary use for sleeping, bathing, and/or preparation of meals. 
6.  Prohibited Uses. A private residential dwelling unit shall not be used for the commercial cultivation of cannabis or the operation of any other cannabis business and cannabis cultivation is prohibited as a home occupation. 
7.  Residency Requirement. A full-time resident shall reside on the premises where the cultivation of cannabis is occurring and said resident shall be either twenty-one years of age or older, a qualified patient, or a primary caregiver. 
8.  Landlord Authorization. Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to preclude any landlord from limiting or prohibiting personal cultivation of cannabis by tenants or from requiring tenants to obtain written consent from the landlord prior to any cultivation commencing. 
D.  Enforcement. A violation of this section is unlawful and any person that violates any of the provisions of this section may be prosecuted for an infraction or a misdemeanor pursuant to Title I, Chapter 1.12. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this section does not authorize a criminal prosecution, arrest, or penalty inconsistent with or prohibited by Section 11362.7 et seq. or Section 11357 et seq. of the California Health and Safety Code. In the event of a conflict between the penalties set forth in Title 1, Chapter 1.12 of this Code and any penalties set forth in state law, the maximum penalties allowable under state law shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 5(Exh. C), 3-13-2018)  
17.52.090 - Caretaker Housing—Non-Residential Zones. 
Where allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), caretaker housing shall comply with the standards in this section. 
A.  Eligibility. Caretaker housing shall be allowed only where the principal use of the site involves operations, equipment, or other resources that require 24-hour oversight. 
B.  Occupant(s). The only occupant of a caretaker housing unit shall be a full-time employee of the business, operation, or use that qualifies for caretakers housing pursuant to this section. 
C.  Location of housing unit. A caretaker housing unit shall be located on the same lot as the principal use proposing the caretaker housing unit subject to the following requirements. 
1.  Attached unit. If the caretaker housing unit is to be attached to the main building, the unit shall be located on the second floor or in the rear half of the building. 
2.  Detached unit. A detached caretaker housing unit shall be located behind the main building or on the rear half of the lot. 
D.  Number of housing units. No more than one caretaker housing unit shall be allowed for any principal use. 
E.  Removal of housing unit. A caretaker housing unit shall be used no longer than the existence of the principal use of the site that justifies the housing unit. Upon termination of the principal use, the caretaker housing unit shall be removed or converted to another permitted or approved use. A demolition, remodel, or other building permit shall be required for the removal of the housing unit. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.100 - Child Day Care Facilities. 
Where allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), child day care facilities shall comply with the standards in this section. This Section establishes standards for child day care facilities in compliance with State law (Health and Safety Code Sections 1596.70 et seq. and 1597.30 et seq.), in a manner that recognizes the needs of childcare operators and minimizes the effects on surrounding properties. These standards apply in addition to the other provisions of this Code and requirements imposed by the California State Department of Social Services. Child day care facilities shall meet all requirements of the California Building Standards Code and California Fire Code. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  State licensing. Licensing by the California State Department of Social Services is required for all child day care facilities. 
2.  Noise. Child day care facilities shall comply with interior and exterior noise standards specified in Chapter 8.16 (Noise Regulation). Additionally, child day care facilities in residential zones shall operate only from 6 a.m. to 8 p.m. and may only conduct outdoor activities between the hours of 7 a.m. and 7 p.m. 
3.  Signs. Signs advertising a child day care facility in any residential zone shall be prohibited. Signs advertising a child day care facility in zones other than residential zones shall be consistent with Chapter 17.48 (Signs). 
B.  Standards for large family day care. A large family day care is a facility in a single dwelling where an occupant of the residence provides family day care for seven to 14 children, including children under the age of 10 years who reside in the home. 
1.  Primary use as a residence required. The large family day care home shall be the principal residence of the day care provider, and the child care use shall be secondary to the use of the property as a residence. 
2.  On-site parking. In addition to the minimum on-site parking requirements for the residential use, one additional on-site parking space exclusively for the dropping off and picking up children, and one additional parking space for each employee not residing on the site shall be provided. 
3.  Fire protection. The facility shall meet fire and life safety standards established by the State Fire Marshal for large family day care homes. 
4.  Outdoor activity areas. 
a.  Location. Outside activity areas shall not be located in the front or street side setback area. 
b.  Fencing. Outside activity areas shall be fenced and equipped with a self-closing and latching gate. 
c.  Snowshed. Outside activity areas used during winter conditions must be set back a minimum of 10 feet from snowshed impact areas of buildings on or off-site as defined in Title 15 of the Municipal Code. No permitted reduction of snowshed impact areas will be considered in establishing this setback. 
C.  Standards for small family day care. A small family day care is a facility in a single residence where an occupant of the residence provides family day care for eight or fewer children, including children under the age of 10 years who reside in the home. The following standards shall apply to small family day care facilities. 
1.  Primary use as a residence required. The small family day care home shall be the principal residence of the day care provider, and the child care use shall be secondary to the use of the property as a residence. 
2.  Fire protection. The facility shall meet fire and life safety standards established by the State Fire Marshal for small family day care homes. 
3.  No Town license, tax, or fee required. The Town shall not impose any business license, fee, or tax for the privilege of operating a State licensed small family day care home consistent with State law. 
D.  Standards for child day care centers. The following standards shall apply to child care centers. 
1.  Large family day care standards apply. The standards in Subsection 17.52.100.B. (Standards for large family day care), above, shall also apply to child day care centers. 
2.  Separation. No child care center shall be located within 300 feet of an existing child care center. 
3.  On-site parking. On-site parking provided shall be a minimum of one on-site parking space per each full-time employee equivalent, plus one on-site parking space for each five children authorized by the State license. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.110 - Condominium Conversions. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the standards and requirements contained in this section is to control and regulate the conversion of rental dwelling units to a condominium or common interest development as defined by California Civil Code Section 1351 for the following purposes: 
1.  Assure that the rental housing supply in Mammoth Lakes is not adversely affected by the conversion of apartments to condominiums or other common interest developments; 
2.  Maintain a supply of affordable and workforce housing; 
3.  Ensure that converted housing achieves a high degree or appearance, quality, and safety, and is consistent with the goals of the Town; and 
4.  Provide a reasonable balance of ownership and rental housing and a variety of choices of tenure, type, price, and location of housing. 
B.  Existing rental unit. For the purpose of this section, "existing rental unit" shall mean any rental apartment or similar rental unit constructed and used for or intended to be used for residential occupancy for periods of 30 or more consecutive days in any one calendar year. This shall include any dwelling on a multi-unit property that has been leased for residential purposes for a period or periods in excess of 30 consecutive days for more than five months per year within the last two years. This shall not apply to projects that are under construction but have not received a certificate of occupancy. 
C.  Existing supply report. 
1.  The Director, or designee, shall conduct an occupancy survey of apartment developments in the town by January 31st of each year. If the vacancy rate in apartment developments for the month of January, averaged over the last three years, is shown to be five percent or below, all applications for conversion to condominiums or other use making the apartment unavailable for long-term rental during that year shall be denied except as provided in Subsection 17.52.110C.2. For the purposes of this chapter, vacancy rate is defined as the number of apartments advertised for rent divided by the total number of apartments available for rent as determined through occupancy certificates. 
2.  Where existing rental units are demolished, voluntarily or involuntarily, and the property is reconstructed in accordance with current development requirements, a condominium conversion shall be subject to any mitigation requirements in this code pertaining to the loss of rental housing stock in addition to the requirements of Article VI (Affordable and Workforce Housing). This section shall not apply to existing rental units created for interim use within an existing structure on property with an active entitlement for condominium or common interest development. Upon the expiration of the condominium or common interest development entitlement, any subsequent demolition of the rental units shall be subject to the requirements of the first sentence of this Subsection C.2. 
3.  The Director, or designee, shall verify to the Commission, the average number per year of apartment units constructed during the previous two calendar years. Fifty percent of the certified annual average will then be the maximum number allowable for conversion for the next calendar year. If fewer units were converted than the maximum number allowable, the surplus will not be carried over to the next calendar year. 
D.  Permit requirements. Use permit and subdivision approval (i.e., tentative map and final map) are required for the conversion of an existing apartment unit for sale, transfer, or conveyance as a condominium. 
E.  Application requirements. An application for conversion of an apartment shall include a use permit and tentative map consisting of all materials normally required by the Town for a use permit and tentative map, in addition to the following: 
1.  General conditions report. A general conditions report shall be prepared by an independent registered structural engineer, licensed architect, or licensed general contractor and shall include: 
a.  The condition of all elements of the property including: foundations, framing, structural elements, walls, roofs, windows, utilities and utility connections, ventilation, heating and cooling systems, mechanical systems and equipment, electrical systems, plumbing systems, sewer systems, fire sprinkler systems, alarm systems, standpipe systems, trash disposal facilities, appliances that will be sold with the units, common facilities (e.g., recreational facilities, landscaped areas, storage areas, etc.), parking facilities, paved surfaces, and interior and exterior wall coverings and treatments (e.g., paint). 
b.  Identification of the date of construction, the condition, and the estimated useful life of each element listed in Subsection 117.52.110E.1.a. 
c.  A building code analysis that identifies all defective or unsafe elements or those that may impair the use and enjoyment of the property, and explain the proposed corrective measures to be used. The report shall include the cost and schedule for replacement of any elements that do not meet current Town standards or would have a useful life of less than five years. 
2.  Building history report. A report detailing the uses of the development site since construction and the date and description of all structural repairs and/or renovations, operating system upgrades, major repairs requiring a building permit, and construction of structures, fences, walls, landscaping, etc. The report shall also include a statement of current ownership of all improvements and underlying property. 
3.  Pest report. A report from a licensed pest-control operator describing the presence and effects of any wood-destroying organisms, and recommending work required to render the structure free of infestation, if applicable. 
4.  Mobile home park conversion impact report. If a mobile home park is being converted to another use, the application shall also include the report required by Government Code Section 66427.4. 
5.  Verification of vote. If a stock cooperative or community apartment project is being converted to condominiums, the application shall also include verification of the vote required by Government Code Section 66452.10. 
6.  Existing tenant information. Information on the existing tenants in the apartment units to be converted, including: 
a.  The names and the mailing and physical addresses of each tenant; 
b.  The size and rental rate of each unit; and 
c.  The number and description of any units occupied under any federal or state assistance program. 
7.  Tenant notification. Copies of all written notices required by the Subdivision Map Act, a complete list of all tenants served with the notice, and the dates and methods by which the notice was served. 
8.  Public notice materials. Stamped envelopes addressed to each tenant of the property being converted consistent with the Town's requirements for public notice packets. 
9.  Relocation plan. A relocation plan for existing tenants as required by Government Code Section 66427.5. 
10.  Other information. Any other information the Director determines to be necessary to assist in determining whether the proposed project will be consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
F.  Inspections. After the application has been deemed complete, the Building Official and Fire Marshal shall review general conditions and building history reports, and inspect the subject property to verify the accuracy of the reports and identify any health and safety hazards. 
G.  Physical standards for conversion. Conversions shall conform to all applicable requirements of the Town's Municipal Code in effect at the time of the tentative map approval. 
1.  Nonconforming structures. All nonconformities shall be corrected prior to the approval of a final map. 
2.  Life and fire safety. All life and fire safety issues, including but not limited to emergency egress, emergency vehicle access, fire walls between dwelling units, and fire suppression equipment (e.g., smoke detectors, alarm systems, fire extinguishers, etc.), shall comply with the California Building Standards Code regulations and Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District Fire Code in effect at the time of conversion. 
3.  Sound transmission. 
a.  Shock mounting of mechanical equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment, including domestic appliances, shall be shock mounted in a manner approved by the Building Official. 
b.  Noise standards. The structure shall conform to all interior and exterior sound transmission standards as specified in the California Building Standards Code regulations in effect at the time of conversion. 
4.  Utility metering. Each dwelling unit shall be separately metered for gas, water, and electricity. 
5.  Laundry facilities. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with its own laundry facilities, or alternate group facilities that are convenient to all dwelling units and approved by the Commission. 
6.  Parking and driveway facilities. Parking and driveway facilities shall be upgraded and improved to meet current Town standards. 
7.  Additional standards. Additional standards applicable to the site as determined through the use permit and tentative map process. 
H.  Affordable and workforce housing supply. All requirements of Article VI (Affordable and Workforce Housing) shall apply to conversions. 
I.  Staff report. A copy of the public hearing staff report shall be provided to the applicant and each tenant of the subject property consistent with Government Code Section 66452.3. 
J.  Public notice. The following notice shall be provided in addition to the public noticing required by Chapter 17.124 (Public Hearings). 
1.  Tenant notice. The applicant shall give notice as required by the Subdivision Map Act. The applicant shall provide the Town with copies of all required notices, a complete list of all tenants served with the notice, and the dates and methods by which the notice was served. 
2.  Public hearing notice. Notice of the public hearing(s) on the application for a condominium conversion shall be provided by the Town to all tenants of the subject property consistent with Government Code Section 66451.3. 
K.  Findings and decision. The Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the use permit and tentative map applications for a condominium conversion. The Commission may approve the condominium conversion applications, with or without conditions, only after the following findings are made: 
1.  All the provisions and standards for the condominium conversion project as set forth in this section are met; 
2.  All findings required for a use permit and tentative map have been made, and the use permit and tentative map have been approved, or are concurrently being approved, for the condominium conversion project; 
3.  The findings set forth in Government Code Section 66427.1 are met; 
4.  The Building Official finds the building proposed for conversion complies with all applicable provisions of the California Building Standards Code; 
5.  The overall design and physical condition of the condominium conversion achieves a high standard of safety, quality, and appearance; and 
6.  The conversion will not remove a significant number of affordable or workforce rental units from the housing stock or will be adequately mitigated in accordance with Article VI (Affordable and Workforce Housing). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 14), 1-21-2015; Ord. No. 17-10, § 4(Exh. A), 11-1-2017)  
17.52.120 - Fractional/Timeshare Developments. 
A.  Purpose. This Section provides the requirements for the fractional and/or timeshare developments where allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). The intent of this section is to: 
1.  Protect the health, safety, peace, and welfare of the town by providing for financial analysis of fractional-use and timeshare development applications and establishing procedures and standards for local sales practices for these developments consistent with California Business and Professions Code Section 11210 and following; 
2.  Protect and maintain the character of the town as a resort community; 
3.  Promote increased tourism and vitality within the town; 
4.  Preserve and enhance the existing lodging inventory by encouraging fractional and timeshare use; and 
5.  Protect residential neighborhoods by ensuring that the impacts of fractional-use and timeshare developments do not adversely affect the character of these residential neighborhoods. 
B.  Permit requirements. Use permit and subdivision approval (i.e., tentative map and final map) are required for fractional or timeshare developments. 
C.  Application requirements. An application shall be made to the Department on a form provided for that purpose pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees) and Chapter 17.68 (Use Permits) for any fractional or timeshare development. All required information identified on the form shall be provided by the applicant, in addition to a local sales program plan as set forth below: 
1.  The applicant and any licensed marketing entity shall present a local sales program plan to the Department. The program shall include information on proposed local sales practices including: sales packaging and technique, the location of any sales office which may be located on-site or off-site, proposed signage, the estimated number of individuals and vehicles expected during the sales effort, and a parking plan for sales personnel and prospective purchasers. No proposed fractional or timeshare development shall be approved unless the Town also approves a local sales program plan. 
2.  The following marketing and sales practices for fractional and timeshare developments are prohibited: 
a.  The solicitation of prospective purchasers on any public facility. 
b.  Use of anyone other than a licensed California real estate agent or broker for solicitation of prospective purchasers of fractional-use units. 
c.  Off-site sales offices other than within a fully enclosed building on a property zoned to allow commercial activity or other suitable structure approved by the Commission. 
d.  Unethical sales or marketing practices which result in Town verified complaints from prospective purchasers regarding such practices. 
D.  General requirements. Fractional and timeshare developments shall be subject to the development standards and procedures that apply to the permitted uses of each zone, which most closely resemble the fractional and/or timeshare development proposal, plus the additional development standards and procedures as set forth in this section. 
1.  Mixed use projects. A fractional or timeshare development may include other uses normally allowed by the applicable zoning if authorized by the use permit approval with a finding by the Commission that such uses will not detrimentally affect the occupants of the development. 
2.  Hotels and motels. Hotels and Motels, including condo-hotels and hotels that are part of a Fractional/Timeshare Development, shall include the following: 
a.  Central front desk, lobby, and phone connections to all hotel rooms with staff available 24-hours a day; 
b.  Check-in spaces for arriving vehicles; 
c.  Amenities supportive of lodging uses (e.g., concierge/guest services on site; conference/meeting space, with food and beverage support, flexible room configuration, industry-standard audiovisual, telecom, and conferencing infrastructure; food and beverage operations in the form of a restaurant or room service; ski and luggage storage; and recreation facilities such as spas, swimming pools, and/or fitness room facility open to all hotel users); 
d.  Standardized furniture, fixtures, and equipment in all rooms; 
e.  Centralized management and standards for guest reservations, daily housekeeping service, and maintenance services, for all units; 
f.  Space for a rental management operation; 
g.  Management by a qualified entity with at least five years' experience in the hotel management business, including a "flag" hotel or company with equivalent experience; and 
h.  Inclusion of hotel amenities in common areas through condominium Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&Rs). 
3.  Taxing district. A fractional or timeshare development shall, as a condition of development approval, be required to be included within the boundaries of a Mello-Roos Community Facilities District and be subject to a special tax to pay for Town services related to the project. The applicant shall be required to pay all costs associated with the annexation of the project into such district, and the approval and imposition of the special tax. A project satisfies this requirement if it is subject to a tax that is at the same rate as (and apportioned in the same manner as) the tax approved by the Council in connection with town of Mammoth Lakes Community Facilities District No. 2004-01, by Ordinance No. 05-01. A project may also satisfy this requirement by being subject to a special tax that, in the sole judgment of the Council, will defray the cost of Town services and facilities necessitated by the project, as determined by the Council. 
4.  Transient occupancy tax. A fractional or timeshare development shall be subject to all applicable provisions of Chapter 3.12 (Transient Occupancy Tax). 
5.  Subdivision approval required. A fractional or timeshare development shall require subdivision approval. 
E.  Non-residential use. The owners and users of the parcels constituting a fractional or timeshare development shall not maintain such parcels as their permanent residences, shall maintain primary residences elsewhere, and shall use the fractional or timeshare development only for temporary accommodations while visiting the town as a resort destination. For the purposes of the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act (Section 53311 and following of the California Government Code) the Council finds that parcels of real property in use as fractional or timeshare developments do not constitute property in residential use. 
F.  Conversion of existing facilities to fractional use. In addition to other requirements in this section, the following shall apply to the conversion of existing facilities into a fractional or timeshare development. 
1.  In the event an existing rental property is proposed to be converted in whole or in part to a fractional or timeshare development, that conversion is subject to Section 17.52.110 (Condominium Conversions). 
2.  In the event an existing condominium property is proposed to be converted in whole or in part to a fractional or timeshare development, the applicant shall submit written proof that the condominium declaration allows time-sharing, that the percentage of owners of the condominium units as required by the current covenants, conditions, and restrictions have approved the proposed fractional or timeshare development including any improvements to the common amenities that the applicant may propose, that all mortgage holders and lien holders of all the condominium units have approved the proposed fractional or timeshare development, and that all condominium units in the proposed fractional or timeshare development will be included in the same local sale program plan. 
3.  Only those applications for conversion which demonstrate substantial upgrade of the visual, aesthetic, and recreational qualities of the property shall be approved. The Commission shall impose reasonable standards and procedures for such conversions. At a minimum, standards and procedures shall include the following: 
a.  Landscaping, lot coverage, and density meeting current Town requirements; 
b.  Interior and exterior remodel costing not less than 50 percent of the appraised value of the existing building or unit, unless a lower amount is approved by the review authority; 
c.  Parking and traffic circulation meeting all current Town requirements; 
d.  Installation of bicycle trails, walkways, and other pedestrian amenities, if not already provided; 
e.  Sign meeting all current Town requirements; and 
f.  Mitigation measures related to transportation and transit. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.130 - Gates on Private Streets. 
A gate on a private street may be allowed subject to the following standards. 
A.  Permits required. A gate on a private street shall require a use permit approved by the Commission, a building permit approved by the Building Official, and a permit approved by the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District. 
B.  Pedestrian access. The gate improvements shall include pedestrian access and/or easement as determined by the Commission. 
C.  Operational requirements. The gate shall adequately operate for emergency response vehicles, snow removal equipment operators, utility service providers, deliveries, and guests, including adequate turn-around space and vehicle queuing. 
D.  Design. The gate design shall be consistent with the Town's Design Guidelines. 
E.  Findings. The Commission may approve a gate on a private street, with or without conditions, only after all of the following findings are made: 
1.  The gate is consistent with the General Plan and any other applicable Town policy or plan, including the Trails System Master Plan; 
2.  There is a demonstrated need for public safety or security that will be satisfied by the gate; 
3.  The requirements of this section are met; and 
4.  All other findings required for use permit approval are met. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.140 - Home Occupations 
The following standards for home occupations are intended to provide reasonable opportunities for employment within the home that are incidental to and compatible with surrounding residential uses, where allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and/or this chapter. 
A.  Business Tax Certificate required. A home occupation shall require a Town Business Tax Certificate. 
B.  Limitations on use. Home occupations shall be limited to activities carried on by the occupants of a dwelling as an accessory or incidental use to the principal use of the site as a dwelling. 
1.  Uses allowed as home occupations. The following and other uses determined by the Director to be similar may be allowed as home occupations in compliance with this section: 
a.  Art and craft work (e.g., ceramics, painting, photography, etc.); 
b.  Barber shops, beauty salons, and massage establishments; 
c.  Cottage food operations as defined in Section 113758 of the Health and Safety Code provided it complies with all applicable provisions of this section. 
d.  Electronic commerce and computer programming; 
e.  Office-only uses, including an office for an architect, attorney, consultant, counselor, insurance agent, licensed therapist, planner, tutor, writer, etc.; 
f.  One-on-one art, music, and similar fine art related lessons; and 
g.  Tailors, sewing, etc. 
2.  Uses prohibited as home occupations. The following are examples of business activities that are not incidental or compatible with residential activities, and are, therefore, prohibited as home occupations: 
a.  Adult business activities or businesses; 
b.  Automotive and other vehicle repair and service (body or mechanical), painting, storage, or upholstery; 
c.  Dance club or night club; 
d.  Dismantling, junk, or scrap yards; 
e.  Medical clinics, laboratories, or doctor's offices; 
f.  Mini self-storage; 
g.  Retail sales; 
h.  Welding and machine shop operations; 
i.  Wood cutting and processing businesses; or 
j.  Other similar incompatible uses as determined by the Director. 
C.  Operating standards. Home occupations shall comply with all of the following operating standards. 
1.  Accessory use. The home occupation shall be clearly secondary to the full-time use of the property as a residence. 
2.  Location of home occupation activities. The home occupation activities shall be contained entirely within the main residence. 
3.  Visibility. The use shall not require any modification to the structure not customarily found in a dwelling, nor shall the home occupation activity or storage of materials be visible from a public right-of-way or from neighboring residential properties. 
4.  Signs prohibited. Signs advertising a home occupation are prohibited consistent with Chapter 17.48 (Signs). 
5.  Safety. The use shall not employ the storage of explosive, flammable, or hazardous materials beyond those normally associated with a residential use. The home occupation shall comply with all applicable provisions of the California Building Standards Code and MLFPD requirements. 
6.  Off-site effects. No home occupation activity shall create dust, electrical interference, fumes, gas, glare, light, noise, odor, solid waste, smoke, toxic/hazardous materials, vibration, or other hazards or nuisances, nor any other negative effect that may be felt, heard, or otherwise sensed on adjoining parcels, as determined by the Director. 
7.  Outdoor display or storage. There shall be no window display or outdoor storage or display of equipment, materials, or supplies associated with a home occupation. No outdoor storage of motor or mechanical equipment shall be permitted other than equipment normally incidental to the use of the structure as a dwelling. 
8.  Employees. A home occupation shall have no employees working on the site of the home occupation other than the full-time residents of the dwelling, except as allowed for cottage food operations as defined in Section 113758 of the Health and Safety Code. 
9.  Traffic. The home occupation shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that normal to the neighborhood in which it is located. 
10.  Parking. The conduct of the home occupation shall not interfere with the maintenance of the required parking. 
11.  Motor vehicles. There shall be no motor vehicle used or kept on the premises, except residents' passenger vehicles, and one commercially licensed automobile, pickup truck, or van. 
12.  Utility service modification. The home occupation use shall not have utility service modifications, other than those required for normal residential use. 
D.  Other uses. Other uses not consistent with this section may be approved as a home occupation, subject to approval of a use permit, and provided that the Commission may require conditions of approval limiting hours of operation, noise levels, and/or any other aspect of the operation, to ensure compatibility with on-site and adjacent residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.150 - Live/Work Units. 
A.  Purpose. This Section provides standards for the development of live/work units and for the reuse of existing commercial structures to accommodate live/work opportunities where allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). 
B.  Application requirements. In addition to the information and materials required for a use permit, the review authority may require an application for a live/work unit to include a Phase I Environmental Assessment for the site to determine whether lead based paint and asbestos hazards are present in an existing structure proposed for conversion to live/work. The purpose of this requirement is to assess whether there are any hazardous or toxic materials on the site that could pose a health risk to the residents. If the Phase I Environmental Assessment shows potential health risks, a Phase 2 Environmental Assessment shall be prepared and submitted to the Department to determine if remediation may be required. 
C.  Business Tax Certificate required. A live/work unit shall require a Town Business Tax Certificate. 
D.  Limitations on use. The non-residential component of a live/work unit shall only be a use allowed within the applicable zone. A live/work unit shall not be established or used in conjunction with any of the following activities: 
1.  Adult businesses; 
2.  Vehicle maintenance or repair (e.g., body or mechanical work, including boats and recreational vehicles), vehicle detailing and painting, upholstery, etc.; 
3.  Storage of flammable liquids or hazardous materials beyond that normally associated with a residential use; 
4.  Welding, machining, or any open flame work; and 
5.  Any other activity or use, as determined by the Director to not be compatible with residential activities and/or to have the possibility of affecting the health or safety of live/work unit residents, because of the potential for the use to create dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or would be hazardous because of materials, processes, products, or wastes. 
E.  Occupancy requirement. The residential space within a live/work unit shall be occupied by at least one individual employed in the business conducted within the live/work unit. 
F.  Design standards. 
1.  Floor area requirements. 
a.  Minimum floor area. The minimum square footage of a live/work unit shall be 700 square feet. 
b.  Maximum residential area. No more than 33 percent of the floor area of a live/work unit shall be used or arranged for residential purposes (e.g., sleeping area, kitchen, closet, and bathroom). 
2.  Floor plan. A live/work unit may include a single level floor plan or a multiple level floor plan. Only one residential area per unit shall be allowed. 
3.  Separation and access. 
a.  Each live/work unit shall be separated from other live/work units or other uses in the structure. 
b.  Access to each live/work unit shall be provided from a public street or common access area, corridors, or halls. The access to each unit shall be clearly separate from other live/work units or other uses within the structure. 
c.  Living and work spaces which are independently accessible from one another are not considered live/work units, but rather a separate dwelling and a separate work space. 
4.  Open space. Each live/work unit shall have a minimum of 50 square feet of common and/or private open space in addition to the minimum floor area requirement of 700 square feet. 
5.  Limitations on outdoor uses. Only activities related to the residential component of a live/work unit are allowed outside of the confines of the building. 
6.  Parking. Live/work units shall comply with all the requirements contained in Chapter 17.44 (Parking and Loading Standards). 
G.  Operating requirements. 
1.  Sale or rental of portions of unit. No portion of a live/work unit may be separately rented or sold as a commercial or industrial space for any person not living in the premises or as a residential space for any person not working in the same unit. 
2.  On-premises sales. On-premises sales of goods are limited to those produced within the live/work unit; provided, the retail sales activity shall be incidental to the primary production work within the unit. These provisions shall allow occasional open studio programs and gallery shows consistent with Chapter 17.56 (Temporary Uses and Events). 
3.  Nonresident employees. No more than one person other than residents of the live/work unit shall be employed in the conduct of the work, except that additional employees may be allowed subject to Commission approval of a use permit. 
4.  Client and customer visits. Client and customer visits are allowed subject to any applicable conditions of use permit approval to ensure compatibility with adjacent commercial or industrial uses, or adjacent residentially-zoned areas. 
H.  California Building Standards Code regulations. California Building Standards Code regulations for light and ventilation, sound transmission, and fire suppression in effect at the time of conversion or construction shall be provided and as specified by the Building Official. 
I.  Covenant. A Town-approved covenant shall be executed by the owner of each live/work unit, and shall include statements that the occupant(s) understand(s) and accept(s) he/she is living in a live/work unit and must operate a business from said unit in compliance with this section. Any lease between the owner and a tenant, or between a tenant and a subtenant, shall refer to the fact that the unit is subject to the covenant. 
J.  Changes in use. After approval, a live/work unit shall not be converted to either entirely residential use or entirely business use unless authorized by the use permit approval. No live/work unit shall be changed to exclusively residential use in any structure where residential use is not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.160 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-02, § 5(Exh. A, d.), adopted Mar. 13, 2018, repealed § 17.52.160, which pertained to medical marijuana cooperatives and derived from Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, adopted Mar. 19, 2014.  
17.52.170 - Mixed-Use Development. 
More than one type of use is allowed in a building or on a site provided each use is allowed pursuant to Article II (Zoning District and Allowable Land Uses). 
A.  Applicability. The provisions in this section apply to the conversion of existing buildings to include mixed uses and/or new construction of mixed-use developments, where allowed by the applicable zone in addition to any applicable standard this Code requires in the district where the use is proposed and all other applicable provisions of this Code. 
B.  Permit Requirements. Mixed-use development is subject to the highest permit level required for any individual use. 
C.  Feasibility study. At the Director's discretion, an economic feasibility study evaluating the viability of the proposed commercial uses within the mixed-use development may be required. 
D.  Building entrances. 
1.  Pedestrian entrances directly accessible from the public right-of-way and having direct access from the sidewalk grade shall be provided for all ground floor uses. 
2.  Non-residential uses and residential uses shall have separate exterior entrances, elevators, and lobbies. The Director may waive this requirement based on site constraints. 
E.  Setbacks. In order to provide light and area for residential units, the following minimum setbacks apply to any building wall containing windows and facing an interior side or rear yard. 
1.  For any wall containing windows, a setback of at least 5 feet shall be provided. 
2.  For any wall containing bedroom windows, a setback of at least 7.5 feet shall be provided. 
3.  For any wall containing living room or other primary room windows, a setback of at least ten feet shall be provided. 
4.  The required setbacks apply to that portion of the buildings wall containing and extending three feet on either side of the window. 
  
F.  Open space. A minimum of 60 square feet of residential open space per unit shall be provided as common and/or private open space. Private areas typically consist of balconies, decks, patios, and other similar areas outside the residence. Common areas typically consist of roof gardens, courtyards, decks, patios, swimming pools, barbeque areas, playgrounds, gym/exercise rooms, or other such improvements as are appropriate to enhance the outdoor environment of the development and are acceptable to the review authority. 
1.  Minimum dimensions. Private open space area shall have a minimum dimension of six feet, and common open space area shall have a minimum dimension of 15 feet; except that the review authority may authorize different minimum dimensions where it can be shown that the required open space meets the intent and purpose of this section as determined by the Director. 
2.  Usability. A surface shall be provided that allows convenient use for outdoor living and/or recreation. Such surface may be any practicable combination of turf, ground cover, garden, flagstone, wood planking, concrete, or other serviceable, dust-free surfacing. Slope shall not exceed 10 percent. 
3.  Accessibility. 
a.  Private Open Space. The space shall be accessible to only one residential unit by a doorway to a habitable room or hallway. 
b.  Common Open Space. The space shall be accessible to the residential units on the lot. It shall be served by any stairway or other accessway qualifying as an egress facility from a habitable room. 
G.  Refuse and recycling areas. Areas for the collection and storage of refuse and recyclable material shall be located on the site in locations that are convenient for both residential and commercial uses. 
1.  Refuse and recycling areas shall be consolidated to minimize the number of collection sites. Separate refuse and recycling areas may be provided and clearly marked for the residential and non-residential uses. 
2.  Refuse and recycling areas shall be located so as to reasonably equalize the distance from the building spaces they serve. The refuse and recycling area serving a residential unit shall be located within 100 feet of the unit. 
3.  Refuse and recycling areas for residential units shall be designed to allow walk-in access without having to open a main enclosure gate. 
H.  Loading areas. Commercial loading areas shall be located away from residential units and shall be screened from view from the residential portion of the development to the maximum extent feasible in compliance with Chapter 17.36 (Standards for All Development and Land Use). 
I.  Performance standards. No commercial use, activity, or process shall be operated in an objectionable manner due to fumes, noxious odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, or vibrations that may be detrimental to any other uses and occupants on the same property. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), 1-21-2015; Ord. No. 17-10, § 4(Exh. A), 11-1-2017)  
17.52.180 - Mobile Businesses. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish regulations governing the time, place, and manner of mobile vending operations on private property and within the public right-of-way, in order to preserve the peace, safety, and welfare of the Town and its residents and visitors by: 
1.  Preventing safety, traffic, and health hazards; 
2.  Preventing the unregulated proliferation of too many vendors near one location, thus negatively impacting traffic and pedestrian safety; and 
3.  Establishing standards to ensure that mobile vendors are compatible with their surroundings and aesthetics of the Town. 
B.  Mobile Vendor Permit Required. 
1.  The provisions of this Section identify and prescribe specific procedures and requirements for the filing, processing, and consideration of a mobile vendor permit. These provisions shall be used in conjunction with the general requirements and procedures outlined in Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). 
2.  No person shall operate a mobile vendor vehicle unless a mobile vendor permit issued pursuant to this Chapter is in effect for that mobile vendor vehicle, except that the following mobile vendors shall not be required to obtain a permit: 
a.  A mobile vending vehicle owned or operated by any public agency. 
b.  Persons delivering goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables, or foodstuffs upon order of, or by agreement with, a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution. 
c.  Persons performing vehicle winter-chain installation on public roadways in accordance with applicable local and State regulations. 
d.  Vendors participating in farmers markets or other special events as permitted by the Town. 
e.  An event at a school facility or an assembly use facility, if the vendor is operating in partnership with the organization conducting the event and is located on the site of the event (i.e. not in the public right-of-way). 
f.  Mobile vendors that only sell, display, solicit, or offer for sale, barter or exchange any of the following: newspapers, leaflets, pamphlets, bumper stickers, buttons, or other items that are inherently communicative and have nominal utility apart from its communication. Although an item may have some expressive purpose, it will be deemed to have more than nominal utility apart from its communication if it has a common and dominant non-expressive purpose. Examples of items that have more than nominal utility apart from their communication and thus may not be vended under the provisions of this section, include, but are not limited to, the following: Housewares, appliances, articles of clothing, sunglasses, auto parts, oils, incense, perfume, lotions, candles, jewelry, toys, stuffed animals, foodstuffs and beverages. 
3.  Every permittee, upon receipt of a mobile vendor permit, shall maintain the permit with the vehicle for which it is issued at all times the mobile vendor vehicle is operated. The permit shall be displayed at all times. 
C.  Mobile Vendor Permit Application Requirements. 
1.  An application for a mobile vendor vehicle permit shall be filed with the Director and shall contain the following: 
a.  The individual and business name, address, and telephone number of the permit applicant. 
b.  Written evidence that the applicant is an owner, lessee or holder of a similar interest in the mobile vendor vehicle. 
c.  The name and address of all legal and registered owner(s) of the mobile vendor vehicle, and each person with a financial interest in the business that operates the mobile vendor vehicle. 
d.  A copy of a valid Town Business Tax Certificate for the business that operates the mobile vendor vehicle or proof that a Town Business Tax Certificate Application has been submitted. No such business shall commence operations until a Mobile Business Vendor Permit is approved. 
e.  The state vehicle license plate number and the vehicle identification number of the mobile vendor vehicle, if applicable. 
f.  If operating on private property, the mobile vendor shall provide evidence of the property owner's authorization in order to submit an application for a mobile vendor permit. 
g.  The address where the mobile vendor vehicle is stored when not in use. 
h.  For each person with a ten percent or greater financial interest in the business that operates the mobile vendor vehicle, a list, signed under penalty of perjury, of each conviction of such person and whether such conviction was by verdict, plea of guilty, or plea of no contest. The list shall, for each conviction, set forth the date of arrest, the offense charged, and the offense of which the person was convicted. A person who acquires a ten percent or greater financial interest in the business that operates the mobile vendor vehicle during the term of the permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall immediately so notify the Director and comply with this subsection. 
i.  The mobile vendor shall provide an operating plan to the Town demonstrating adherence to the regulations in 17.52.180.F. 
j.  The mobile vendor shall furnish to the Town evidence of insurance, as deemed acceptable in the reasonable discretion of the Town, against liability for death or injury to any person as a result of ownership, operation, or use of its vending vehicles. The Town shall be included as an additional insured for all mobile vendors. 
k.  Mobile food vendors must have a valid permit issued by the Mono County Environmental Health Department. All required County Health permits must be in the possession of the mobile food vendor at all times during which it operates within the Town. 
l.  Mobile food vendors must provide evidence of compliance with Health & Safety Code Section 114315(a). Such evidence may include, but is not limited to, written permission from a private business owner for use of the business's toilet and hand washing facility, a printed or electronic map showing the location of a compliant public toilet and hand washing facility, or similar documented evidence of compliance. 
m.  Mobile food vending vehicles shall provide fire protection equipment required by the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District. Mobile food vendors shall receive an inspection and approval from the Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District prior to issuance of a business tax certificate and a mobile vendor permit. 
n.  It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by Subsection 17.52.180.C.2. 
2.  After a mobile vending permit application is deemed complete, the Director shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. The Director may approve a mobile vending application, with or without conditions, only after the following findings are made: 
a.  The mobile vendor permit meets each of the requirements listed elsewhere in this Chapter; 
b.  The operation of the vending vehicle will not result in traffic or pedestrian circulation hazards; and 
c.  The operation of the vending vehicle will not disrupt the neighborhoods or zones in which it will be operated. 
D.  Mobile Vendor Permit Suspension and Revocation. 
1.  In accordance with Chapter 17.128 (Revocations and Modifications), the Director may suspend, revoke, or modify any mobile vendor permit issued pursuant to this Chapter on any of the following grounds: 
a.  The Director determines that any activity authorized by the permit is being carried out in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance, or to be injurious to the public health, safety or welfare. 
b.  The operation of the mobile vendor vehicle is in violation of any conditions imposed upon the permit or in violation of any provision of this code or applicable Town and state laws and regulations. 
c.  There exists any of the grounds that would have been grounds for denial of the permit application. 
E.  Sale or Transfer of Mobile Vending Vehicle. 
In the event the holder of a mobile vendor permit sells or otherwise transfers the mobile vendor vehicle, the purchaser of the vehicle shall be required to obtain a new mobile vendor vehicle license, in accordance with all of the provisions and requirements of this Chapter, including having applied for and obtained all other required certificates and permits. 
F.  Regulations. 
1.  The following time, place, and manner regulations apply to all mobile vending operations: 
a.  Mobile vending operations shall be in full compliance with all applicable local and State regulations and requirements, including, but not limited to, applicable parking restrictions, the California Vehicle Code, the California Health and Safety Code, and the California Retail Food Code provisions. 
b.  The vending vehicle shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic in any manner. 
c.  No mobile vendor may operate a vending vehicle: 
i.  On any State Highway, including any portion of State Highway 203. 
ii.  Within 50 feet of any fire hydrant. 
iii.  Within 25 feet of any street intersection controlled by a traffic light, crosswalk, or stop sign. 
iv.  Within 25 feet of a bus stop. 
v.  Within 10 feet from the outer edge of any entrance of any business during the hours that such business is open to the public. For purposes hereof, the term "entrance" includes doors and associated vestibules, driveways and walkways serving the business, outdoor dining area entries, and emergency exits on any side of the building that faces a public street. 
vi.  Within 300 feet of the nearest property line of any property in which a public or private school building is located, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any school day. This prohibition may be waived for special events for which the Town issues a permit, or by written permission of the Mammoth Unified School District or any other entity which operates the applicable school. 
vii.  In a Town park, unless consistent with Municipal Code Section 12.20.260, Sales for Profit and Solicitation. 
d.  Vending is prohibited on the exposed street and/or traffic side of the vending vehicle. 
e.  Mobile vending operations occurring on streets with sidewalks shall maintain a space on the sidewalk of at least six feet in width free of customer queuing and/or all portions of the vehicle for the clear movement of pedestrians. The Director may require additional minimum access width for high-use pedestrian areas. 
f.  The mobile vendor shall keep the vending area litter free. The mobile vendor shall carry a refuse receptacle on board at all times and must remove litter caused by its products from any public and private property within a twenty-five foot radius of the vending vehicle's location. 
g.  The mobile vendor shall not discharge any liquid (e.g., water, grease, oil, etc.) onto or into Town streets, storm drains, catch basins, or sewer facilities. All discharges shall be contained and properly disposed of by the mobile vendor. 
h.  All merchandise shall be completely contained within the vending vehicle, (i.e., the exterior of the vehicle shall not be used to display merchandise; merchandise displays may not be set up adjacent to a parked vehicle). 
i.  The mobile vendor shall be subject to the noise provisions set forth in Chapter 8.16 (Noise Regulation) of the Town Municipal Code. 
j.  The mobile vendor shall have adequate lighting to ensure customer safety either on the vehicle or at the location of the vehicle during business hours. Lighting shall comply with the provisions set forth in Chapter 17.36.030 (Exterior Lighting). 
k.  The mobile vendor shall be subject to the sign provisions set forth in Chapter 17.48 (Signs). 
l.  Ice cream trucks shall also adhere to the regulations established by California Vehicle Code Section 22456. 
m.  Mobile vending vehicles operating on private property shall comply with the following requirements: 
i.  The mobile vendor shall not use or permit use of parking spaces on private property if doing so will adversely affect the on-site parking available for the primary use of the site as determined by the Director. 
ii.  The mobile vendor shall not impede the normal use of circulation aisles or driveways or be located in such a manner as to encourage customers to stop in the circulation aisle, driveway or street to obtain vendor service. 
iii.  The mobile vendor shall maintain a copy of the property owner's approval in the vehicle. The person operating the mobile vendor vehicle shall present this proof upon the demand of a peace officer or Town employee authorized to enforce this Section. 
n.  No tables, chairs or other site furniture shall be permitted to be placed within the public right of way, unless an encroachment permit for such use is approved by the Town. Such site furniture may be permitted on private property with permission of the property owner, and must comply with the restrictions set forth for operation of the mobile vendor vehicle in this section. 
o.  Mobile vending vehicles (if more than a two axle vehicle) shall not be stored/parked in a residential zone when not in operation. 
G.  Penalty. Violations of the provisions of this Chapter shall be enforced pursuant to Chapter 17.132 (Enforcement). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, §§ 15, 26), 1-21-2015; Ord. No. 17-10, § 4(Exh. A), 11-1-2017)  
17.52.190 - Mobile Home or Recreational Vehicle—Temporary During Construction. 
A.  Limitation on use. A mobile home, trailer, or recreational vehicle may be used as a temporary residence of the property owner when the property owner is the builder and a valid building permit for a new single-family dwelling is in force, or as a temporary residence for security purposes on the site of an active construction project consistent with Subsection 17.56.030H (Exempt Temporary Uses and Events - Construction Trailers). 
B.  Time limits. A mobile home, trailer, or recreational vehicle that is temporary during construction shall be removed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, expiration of the building permit, or after two years, whichever occurs first. 
C.  Building code and snow management. A mobile home, trailer, or recreational vehicle that is temporary during construction shall either comply with the California Building Standards Code, including Town of Mammoth Lakes Building Code requirements, or the Building Official may consider reduced snow load design standards for such temporary structures provided an alternative means to mitigate snow loads has been provided. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.200 - Mobile Homes and Manufactured Homes. 
A mobile home or manufactured home shall be allowed as a dwelling outside of a mobile home park and where single-family dwellings are permitted consistent with Government Code Section 65852.3, subject to the following standards. 
A.  Zoning district standards. A mobile home or manufactured home shall be installed in compliance with the standards of the applicable zoning district. 
B.  Permanent foundation. A mobile home or manufactured home shall be installed on and secured to an approved permanent foundation system. 
C.  California Building Standards Code. A mobile home or manufactured home shall comply with the California Building Standards Code, including Town of Mammoth Lakes Building Code requirements. 
D.  Architectural standards. Each roof shall have eave and overhangs of not less than one foot measured from the vertical side of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.210 - Multi-Family Residential Projects. 
This Section provides development and operational standards for multi-family residential projects in compliance with Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). 
A.  Accessory structures. Accessory structures and uses (e.g., bicycle storage, garages, laundry rooms, recreation facilities, etc.) shall be designed and constructed with an architectural style, exterior colors and materials similar to the structures in the project containing dwelling units. 
B.  Building facades adjacent to streets. A multi-family project of three or more dwelling units shall be designed so that at least 75 percent of the façade of each building adjacent to a public street is occupied by habitable space with windows. Each façade adjacent to a street shall have at least one pedestrian entry into the structure. 
C.  Common recreation area. Multi-family projects of more than 20 units shall provide 150 square feet of on-site common area/recreation area per unit. Said area may include recreation rooms, swimming/spa facilities, tennis courts, play areas, and other similar facilities. 
D.  Front yard paving. No more than 40 percent of the total area of the front yard setback shall be paved for walkways, driveways, and/or other hardcover pavement. 
E.  Laundry facilities. All multi-family residential developments with five or more dwelling units shall provide common laundry facilities, except where laundry facilities are provided within each unit. 
1.  Keyed access. Laundry facilities shall be provided with keyed access for "tenants only." 
2.  Location. Laundry facilities shall be evenly dispersed throughout the multi-family development and easily accessible to all tenants as approved by the Director. 
F.  Maintenance and control of common area. Required common area space shall be controlled and permanently maintained by a homeowners' association, or by the property owner of a rental project. Provisions for control and maintenance shall be included in property covenants of all common interest developments. 
G.  Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting shall be installed and maintained along all vehicular access ways and major walkways, in compliance with Subsection 17.36.030 (Exterior Lighting). 
H.  Private outdoor open space. All multi-family residential projects shall provide private outdoor open space for each dwelling unit. 
1.  Private outdoor open space shall be at the same level as, and immediately accessible from within the unit (e.g., balcony, deck, patio, etc.). 
2.  Each private outdoor open space area shall have a minimum dimension of six feet and an area of at least 60 square feet; except that the review authority may authorize different minimum dimensions where it can be shown that the required private outdoor open space meets the intent and purpose of this section as determined by the Director. 
3.  Provision of private outdoor open space shall not reduce common recreation area requirements. 
4.  If it is shown to be infeasible to meet these private outdoor open space requirements, the review authority may require an increase in the common recreation area to off-set a reduction in required private outdoor open space. 
I.  Solid waste and recycling. Multi-family residential projects of three or more units shall provide solid waste/recyclable materials storage consistent with Subsection 17.36.130 (Solid Waste/Recyclable Materials Storage). 
J.  Storage. A minimum of 100 cubic feet of lockable storage area shall be provided for each dwelling outside of the unit, with no dimension less than 30 inches. Storage area may be located in a garage associated with the dwelling unit provided that the area required for covered parking is in compliance with Chapter 17.44 (Parking and Loading Standards). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.220 - Outdoor Dining. 
This Section provides location, development, and operating standards for outdoor dining facilities in compliance with Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). 
A.  Accessory use. An outdoor dining area may be allowed accessory and incidental to a restaurant with indoor eating area on site, provided that the number of seats provided outdoors shall not exceed the number provided indoors. 
B.  Alcoholic beverage sales. Outdoor dining areas serving alcoholic beverages shall meet and be in compliance with the requirements of the State Alcohol Beverage Control Board, and the following standards: 
1.  The dining area shall be accessible from the inside of the restaurant only, unless the Director waives this requirement in circumstances where this is not feasible or practical; 
2.  The dining area shall be clearly defined with a physical barrier. It shall clearly be a part of the restaurant it serves; and 
3.  The dining area shall be supervised by a restaurant employee to ensure conformance to laws regarding on-site consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
C.  Design and use compatibility. To ensure compatibility with surrounding uses and a high standard of design quality, the following standards shall be implemented: 
1.  The outdoor dining area shall be located directly adjacent to the food service establishment which it serves; however, if this is impractical or infeasible, the Director may approve an alternate location; 
2.  Outdoor dining areas and associated structural elements, awnings, covers, furniture, umbrellas, or other physical elements shall be compatible with the overall design of the main structure(s); 
3.  The use of awnings, plants, umbrellas, and other human scale elements is encouraged to enhance the pedestrian experience; 
4.  The relationship of outdoor dining areas to churches, hospitals, schools, and residential uses shall be considered by the review authority. Mitigation measures shall be utilized to reduce potential impacts related to glare, light, loitering, noise, and odor; and 
5.  Outdoor dining areas shall not encroach into required parking areas, shall not obstruct pedestrian traffic, and shall not create traffic hazards. 
D.  Setbacks and snow removal. 
1.  Outdoor dining areas may be located in setback areas but shall maintain a minimum five foot setback to property lines or parking lots; however, no outdoor dining area shall encroach into a setback abutting a residential zone. 
2.  When an outdoor dining area is located in a required front and street side yard setbacks area and operated between November 1 and April 30, the subject property shall participate in a snow removal maintenance district and shall have a snow removal plan approved by the Public Works Director. 
E.  Clean-up and maintenance. Outdoor dining areas shall be kept in a clean condition and free of litter and food items that constitute a nuisance to public health, safety, and welfare. 
F.  Parking. The outdoor eating area shall comply with the parking requirements of Chapter 17.44 (Parking and Loading Standards) for restaurants. 
G.  Sidewalk seating in the Town's right-of-way. An outdoor dining area may be allowed within the Town right-of-way subject to approval of an encroachment permit by the Director and Public Works Director, provided the following standards, in addition to those listed above, are met: 
1.  The outdoor dining area does not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian movement or wheelchair access to, through, and around the site on which the outdoor dining area is located; 
2.  A minimum access width of six to eight feet shall be maintained along all sidewalks and building entrances accessible to the public. The Public Works Director may require additional minimum access width for high use pedestrian areas; 
3.  Outdoor dining areas, including those that do not serve alcohol, shall be separated from the clear pedestrian passage area on the public sidewalk and/or pedestrian walkway by a temporary barrier that is removed when not in use; 
4.  All tables, chairs, umbrellas, and other elements located in the Town right-of-way shall be removed when not in use and during snow events; 
5.  All businesses with outdoor dining areas in the Town right-of-way shall, prior to the issuance of an encroachment permit, furnish proof of insurance and shall indemnify and hold harmless the Town from any action or expense that may occur as a result of an outdoor dining area being located on any sidewalk or Town right-of-way, satisfactory to the Town Attorney; and 
6.  All businesses with outdoor dining areas in the Town right-of-way shall enter into a maintenance agreement with the Town for maintenance of all portions of the Town right-of-way used and approved by the Director and Public Works Director for outdoor dining. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.230 - Outdoor Display and Sales Standards. 
This Section provides location, development, and operating standards for outdoor retail displays and sales, where allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). This Section does not apply to special events consistent with Chapter 17.56 (Temporary Uses and Events). 
A.  Temporary outdoor displays and sales. Temporary outdoor commercial sales and displays conducted in conjunction with an established business shall be subject to the following standards. 
1.  An administrative permit shall be required for a temporary outdoor display or sale. 
2.  Only one temporary outdoor sale or display shall be allowed per business at any one time. 
3.  The sale or display shall be directly related to a business occupying a permanent structure on the subject property. 
4.  A business shall be limited to three consecutive days of temporary outdoor displays/sales per calendar year. In addition, businesses are allowed one day for set up of the temporary display or sale and one day to remove the temporary display or sale. 
5.  The temporary outdoor sale area and display shall not exceed 400 square feet. 
6.  An outdoor sale or display shall not be located in a public right-of-way and shall not interfere with emergency vehicular access or pedestrian access. 
7.  Temporary structures associated with the outdoor sale or display shall conform to the applicable building height and setback requirements. 
8.  Hours of operation shall be limited to daylight hours with all outdoor sales and display items and facilities removed from the site at the close of daily business, unless otherwise approved by the Director. 
9.  One sign, not to exceed 20 square feet, is permitted for a temporary outdoor display or sale. Signs shall be in compliance with 17.48.090.N. 
10.  Established business criteria: 
a.  The business location shall be a standalone building or a physically separated suite within a multi-tenant building. Physically separated is defined as an enclosed area with a lockable door; 
b.  The business shall have a point-of-sale for retail transactions and shall conduct sales at the business location (e.g., the location cannot function as merchandise storage); 
c.  The business shall have its own name, provided that any business occupying the same location as a previous business, under the management and control of the same or substantially similar people as that previous business, and engaged in a substantially similar business as that previous business, shall not be considered a new business simply because of a change of name; 
d.  Any sales made by a business shall be made under the business's name and all price tags and receipts shall identify that name; and 
e.  The business shall have a valid business tax certificate. 
B.  Farmer's markets, community outdoor markets, and similar larger-scale outdoor displays and sales. Larger-scale outdoor displays and sales, such as farmer's markets and similar outdoor sales activities, should be encouraged to animate the community and enliven commercial districts. Larger-scale outdoor displays and sales shall be subject to the following standards. 
1.  The review authority shall approve the hours of operation and overall duration of the outdoor display and sale. 
2.  Outdoor sales and display items and facilities may remain on site at the close of business (i.e., overnight), only if approved by the review authority. 
3.  Outdoor displays and sales shall not be located in any residential zone. 
4.  The review authority may apply standards similar to those required for temporary and permanent outdoor display and sales and additional standards to minimize potential adverse effects on surrounding properties and infrastructure or on the public health, safety, and welfare. 
C.  Permanent outdoor displays and sales. Permanent outdoor commercial sales and displays conducted in conjunction with an established business shall be subject to the following standards. 
1.  An administrative permit shall be required for a permanent outdoor display or sale. 
2.  The sale or display shall be directly related to a business occupying a permanent structure on the subject property, and shall only display goods of the subject business. 
3.  An outdoor display or sale area shall occupy a fixed, specifically approved, and defined location that does not disrupt the normal function of the site or its circulation, and does not encroach upon driveways, landscaped areas, required parking spaces, or pedestrian walkways. 
4.  An outdoor sale or display shall not be located in a public right-of-way, shall not encroach into setbacks, and shall not obstruct intersection visibility or otherwise create a hazard for pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
5.  An outdoor display or sale area shall be oriented towards pedestrians. 
6.  The outdoor display of merchandise shall not exceed a height of seven feet above finished grade, unless a greater height is allowed through use permit approval in compliance with Chapter 17.68 (Use Permits). 
7.  The Director may require outdoor sales and display areas be screened from the view of adjoining public rights-of-way by decorative walls, fences, or landscaping. 
8.  Hours of operation shall be limited to business hours with all outdoor sales and display items brought indoors at the close of daily business, unless otherwise approved by the Director. 
9.  Additional signs, beyond those normally allowed consistent with Chapter 17.48 (Signs), shall not be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, §§ 16, 17), 1-21-2015)  
17.52.240 - Outdoor Storage and Work Areas. 
This Section establishes standards for the location, screening, and operation of outdoor storage and work areas in compliance with Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). 
A.  General requirements. The outdoor storage of any materials or equipment not accessory to the primary use of the property, including lumber, inoperable vehicles, auto parts, appliances, pipe, drums, machinery, furniture, recycling, or trash which is readily visible from off-site is prohibited, unless otherwise allowed consistent with Chapter 17.28 (Industrial Zoning District). The storage of firewood to be used on the premises shall be allowed. 
1.  Location. The outdoor storage shall not be located within a front yard setback or any required parking or loading area consistent with Chapter 17.44 (Parking and Loading Standards). 
2.  Enclosure required. The outdoor area used for storage shall be entirely enclosed and screened by a solid wall and solid gate with a minimum height of six feet. The Director may allow the substitution of a different six foot tall screening material, or a solid fence or a wall with a height of less than six feet after determining that the substitution would adequately comply with the provisions of this section. 
3.  Operations. All raw materials, equipment, finished products, and other materials stored shall: 
a.  Not be placed outside the enclosed storage area; 
b.  Not be stored above the height of the enclosure, except for mechanical equipment; and 
c.  Be stored in a manner that they cannot be blown by wind from the enclosure. 
4.  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be installed, wherever possible, to lessen the visual impact of an outdoor storage area in compliance with Chapter 17.40 (Water Efficient Landscape Regulations). 
5.  Temporary storage. For temporary storage requirements see Chapter 17.56 (Temporary Uses and Events). 
B.  Cargo containers. A cargo container is a metal or similar rectangular shipping container that is otherwise carried on rail cars, truck beds, and/or cargo ships, and is used as a temporary storage container consistent with Chapter 17.56 (Temporary Uses and Events). Unless otherwise allowed consistent with Chapter 17.28 (Industrial Zoning District), a cargo container shall: 
1.  Only be allowed if unusual circumstances exist that require the use of a temporary storage container, as determined by the Director. Unusual circumstances include, but are not limited to, construction, business relocation, and natural disasters; 
2.  Shall be painted or otherwise treated to match or blend with the surrounding environment if authorized for more than 30 days per Subsection 5 below; 
3.  Not be visible from a public street; 
4.  Not be located in a required parking or landscape area; 
5.  Not be located on site more than 30 days during any calendar year, unless otherwise authorized by the Director; and 
6.  Not be allowed any signage other than operating company identification which shall include phone number. 
7.  Storage containers authorized for more than six months shall have a stable foundation (i.e. compacted base or similar material) and be protected from wind or secured from wind movement. 
C.  Commercial vehicles. 
1.  Commercial vehicles, consistent with California Vehicle Code Section 22507.5 (i.e., commercial vehicles having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more in a residential district), shall not be parked on any public or private property unless they are in the process of making an immediate pickup or delivery of goods, making service calls to the occupants of the premises, or are on the site of the business owning or operating the vehicle. 
2.  Except when making delivery or service calls, or except allowed consistent with Mobile Businesses Section 17.52.180, commercial vehicles or vehicles advertising a business pursuant to Chapter 17.48 (Signs), shall be parked on the site of the business and shall not be parked in areas adjacent and highly visible from a street property line. The Director may authorize an alternate location that meets the objectives of this section. 
D.  Residential zones. 
1.  Vehicles - Transportation. Only operable vehicles used primarily for noncommercial transportation may be kept on a driveway. One commercially licensed automobile, pickup truck, or van may be allowed for a home occupation consistent with Section 17.52.140 (Home Occupations) or when the vehicle is also used as the primary vehicle of the resident. There shall be no other vehicle storage between any structure and an adjacent street. 
2.  Vehicles - Recreational. Items such as boats, trailers, snowmobiles, and other like recreational vehicles shall be subject to the following standards. 
a.  Recreational type vehicles may be kept outdoors for any period of time, provided that the following standards are met: 
(1)  The required on-site parking is provided; 
(2)  The recreational vehicle parking area is paved; and 
(3)  All other applicable standards, including setbacks and lot coverage, are met. 
b.  Recreational type vehicles not meeting the above standards may be kept outdoors for a period not exceeding seven days in any calendar month. Such vehicles may be kept longer than seven calendar days provided they are not located in a front yard setback and subject to screening by fence, landscaping, or other similar methods as approved by the Director. 
c.  No recreational vehicle shall be used for dwelling purposes. 
E.  Snow removal equipment. See Chapter 17.56 (Temporary Events and Uses). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.250 - Recycling Facilities. 
This Section establishes standards and procedures for the siting and operation of various types and sizes of commercial recycling facilities, where allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). Any recycling facility intending to operate in the town shall comply with the following provisions. 
A.  General standards. All recycling facilities shall comply with the following standards. 
1.  Signs. Facilities shall be provided with identification and information signs as follows, provided the signs are consistent with Chapter 17.48 (Signs). 
a.  Collection containers and reverse vending machines shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material which may be deposited, and display a notice stating that discarded material shall not be left outside of the recycling container or machine; 
b.  The facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the operator and the hours of operation; and 
c.  Additional informational and/or directional signs may be approved by the Director if found necessary to facilitate traffic circulation, or if the facility is not visible from a public right-of-way. 
2.  Refuse disposal. Facilities shall maintain adequate on-site refuse containers for the disposal of non-recyclable and non-hazardous waste materials. 
3.  Noise. Exterior noise shall meet the requirements of Chapter 8.16 of the Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code. 
B.  Reverse vending machines. A reverse vending machine is an automated mechanical device that accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers and issues a cash refund or redeemable credit slip with a value of not less than the container's redemption value, as determined by State law. Reverse vending machines shall comply with the following standards. 
1.  Accessory use only. Each machine shall be installed only as an accessory use to an allowed primary use, and shall not require additional parking. 
2.  Location requirements. 
a.  If located outside of a structure, the machine shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use, and shall be located within 30 feet of a building entrance, and shall be constructed of durable waterproof and rust proof materials. 
b.  If located inside of a structure, the machine shall be within 30 feet of the entrance and shall not obstruct pedestrian circulation. 
3.  Maximum size. When located outdoors, the area occupied by the machines shall not exceed a total of five machines with a maximum area of 50 square feet, including any protective enclosure, or eight feet in height. 
4.  Signs. Signs shall not exceed a maximum of four square feet on each machine, exclusive of operating instructions. 
5.  Hours of operation. The machines shall have operating hours which are the same as the operating hours of the primary use. 
6.  Lighting. Each machine shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if the operating hours are between dusk and dawn. The lighting shall be in compliance with Subsection 17.36.030 (Exterior Lighting). 
C.  Small collection facilities. A small collection facility is a use subordinate to and different from the primary use of property, which subordinate use is established for the acceptance of recyclable materials from the public, occupies an area no larger than 500 square feet, and which involves no permanent habitable structures (e.g., facility may include a roof covering for weather protection). A small collection facility may include the following: 
1.  One or more bulk reverse vending machines (i.e., reverse vending machine(s) larger than 50 square feet, designed to accept more than one container at a time, and issues a cash refund based on a total weight instead of by container); 
2.  A mobile recycling unit (i.e., an automobile, truck, trailer, or van used for the collection of recyclable materials, carrying bins, boxes, or other containers); 
3.  Other deposit-type facilities that may or may not issue a cash refund; or 
4.  A kiosk type unit. 
5.  Development and operating standards. Small collection facilities shall comply with the following standards. 
a.  Location requirements. A small collection facility shall: 
i.  Not be located within 50 feet of any parcel zoned or occupied for residential use; and 
ii.  Be set back at least 10 feet from any public right-of-way, and not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation. 
b.  Maximum size. A small collection facility shall not occupy more than 500 square feet or three parking spaces, not including space that would be periodically needed for the removal of materials or exchange of containers. 
c.  Appearance of facility. Collection containers and any site fencing shall be of a color and design that is compatible and harmonious with the surrounding uses and neighborhoods. 
d.  Operating standards. Small collection facilities shall: 
i.  Not use power-driven processing equipment, except for reverse vending machines; 
ii.  Accept only glass, metal, or plastic containers, paper, and reusable items; 
iii.  Use containers that are constructed with durable waterproof and rust proof materials, secured from unauthorized removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and the collection schedule; 
iv.  Store all recyclable materials in containers; 
v.  Be screened where determined by the review authority to be necessary because of excessive visibility; and 
vi.  Be free of litter and any other undesirable materials. Mobile facilities, at which truck or containers are removed at the end of each collection day, shall be swept at the end of each collection day. 
e.  Signs. Identification signs are allowed with a maximum area of 15 percent for each side of the structure or 12 square feet, whichever is greater. In the case of a wheeled facility, the side shall be measured from the ground to the top of the container. 
f.  Parking requirements. 
i.  No additional parking space shall be required for customers of a small collection facility located in the established parking lot of the primary use. One additional space shall be provided for the attendant, if needed as determined by the Director. 
ii.  Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present. 
iii.  Use of parking spaces by the patrons and the attendant shall not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary use unless a parking study, determined acceptable by the Director, shows that existing capacity is not fully utilized during the time the recycling facility would be on the site. 
D.  Large collection facilities. A large collection facility is larger than 500 square feet and/or is the primary use of a property and may include permanent structures. A large collection facility shall comply with the following standards. 
1.  Location requirements. The facility shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from a parcel zoned or occupied for residential use. 
2.  Container location. Any containers provided for "after hours" donation of recyclable materials shall be permanently located at least 100 feet from any residential zone, constructed of sturdy, rust proof or painted material, have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and be secured from unauthorized entry or removal of materials. 
3.  Screening. The facility shall be located within an enclosed structure or an area enclosed on all sides by a solid masonry wall. The structure or enclosure shall be landscaped or screened on all sides visible from a different zoning designation or from a public street. 
4.  Outdoor storage. Exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers, bales, or enclosures that are secured and maintained in good condition. Storage shall be secure and not be visible above the height of the enclosure, solid masonry walls, or other screening methods. 
5.  Operating standards. 
a.  The site shall be maintained to be clean, sanitary, and free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis. 
b.  Dust, fumes, odor, smoke, or vibration above ambient levels shall not be detectable on adjoining parcels. 
E.  Processing facilities. A processing facility is a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials for efficient shipment, or to an end user's specifications. Processing facilities shall comply with the following standards. 
1.  Location requirements. The facility shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from a parcel zoned or occupied for residential use or noise sensitive receptors (e.g., hospital and schools) and shall be located within an enclosed building except for incidental storage. 
2.  Limitation on activities. Allowed activities are limited to baling, briquetting, compacting, crushing, grinding, shredding, and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials. Materials shall be shipped regularly. Transfer station facilities containing organic food waste shall be shipped daily. 
3.  Container location. See Subsection 17.52.250D.2. 
4.  Screening. See Subsection 17.52.250D.3. 
5.  Outdoor storage. See Subsection 17.52.250D.4. 
6.  Operating standards. Dust, fumes, odor, smoke, or vibration, above ambient levels, shall not be detectable on adjoining parcels. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.260 - Residential Care and Assisted Living Facilities. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure affordable care and housing for the elderly, disabled, and other persons in need of supervision or essential assistance for daily living in Mammoth Lakes that is compatible with surrounding land uses in compliance with Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). 
B.  Density. The density shall comply with Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). A density bonus may be utilized if the project meets the applicable density bonus provisions of Article VI (Affordable and Workforce Housing). 
C.  General requirements. 
1.  Indoor common areas and living units shall be provided with the necessary safety equipment (e.g., safety bars, etc.), as well as emergency signal/intercom and ADA accessibility, subject to the approval of the Director. 
2.  Common entertainment, recreational, and social activity areas shall be provided in a number, size, and scale consistent with the number of living units provided. 
D.  Parking. On-site parking shall comply with Chapter 17.44 (Parking and Loading Standards). 
E.  Transportation services and facilities. The project site shall be designed to adequately accommodate transit services to the satisfaction of the Director. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.270 - Second Dwelling Units. 
A.  Purpose and applicability. This section provides the requirements for the establishment of secondary residential dwelling units where allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and consistent with Government Code Section 65852.2. 
B.  General requirements. All secondary units shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Primary dwelling. A primary dwelling must be in existence on the lot for which the secondary unit is proposed, or a secondary unit may be approved and constructed simultaneously with the approval and construction of the primary dwelling. 
2.  Owner occupancy. Either the primary or secondary dwelling unit on the site shall be occupied by an owner of the property as their permanent or seasonal residence. 
3.  Rental of unit. A secondary unit may be rented for terms of at least thirty days or more, but in no case shall both the primary dwelling and secondary unit be rented. 
4.  Sale of unit prohibited. No secondary unit shall be created for sale or financing through a condominium plan, community apartment plan, housing cooperative, or other subdivision. 
5.  Manufactured home. A manufactured or modular unit placed on a permanent foundation may be used as a secondary unit in compliance with this section. A mobile home, recreational vehicle, or other movable habitable space that does not comply with the California Building Standards Code shall not be used as a secondary unit. 
6.  Deed restriction or covenant. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the secondary dwelling unit, the owner(s) shall record a deed restriction or covenant acknowledging the requirements contained in this Section B. 
C.  Development standards. Secondary residential dwelling units shall comply with the development standards in Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and Article III (Site Planning and General Development Standards), in addition to the following, provided that if a conflict arises between the general development standards of Article II and III and the following development standards applicable to secondary residential dwelling units, the following development standards shall supersede any conflicting development standard of Article II or Article III: 
1.  Number of units allowed. Only one secondary unit shall be permitted on a lot occupied by a single-family dwelling. A secondary residential dwelling unit that conforms to the following development standards is deemed to be an accessory use and/or an accessory structure and will not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located. 
2.  Location on site. The secondary unit shall be attached to the primary dwelling, located within the living area of the primary dwelling, or detached from the primary dwelling and located on the same lot as the primary dwelling. 
3.  Required facilities. A secondary unit shall contain kitchen and bathroom facilities separate from the primary dwelling. 
4.  Floor area limitations. 
a.  Maximum floor area—Attached secondary units. The floor area of an attached secondary unit shall not exceed 50 percent of the primary dwelling living area (i.e., the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit not including garages), with a maximum increase in floor area of 1,200 square feet. 
b.  Maximum floor area—Detached secondary units. The floor area of a detached secondary unit shall not exceed 1,200 square feet. 
c.  Minimum floor area. Regardless of the size of the primary dwelling living area, a secondary unit shall have a minimum gross floor area of 150 square feet or the minimum required for an efficiency dwelling unit as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code. 
5.  Building separation. Building separation shall comply with the California Building Standards Code and Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District Code. 
6.  Setback exceptions. No setback increase is required for an existing garage with a legal nonconforming setback that is converted to a secondary dwelling unit. A reduced setback of no less than five feet from the side and rear property lines is permitted for a secondary dwelling unit that is constructed above a garage that has a legal nonconforming setback. 
7.  Parking. One on-site parking space shall be provided for a secondary unit, in addition to the parking required for the primary dwelling in compliance with Chapter 17.44 (Parking and Loading Standards). If a secondary dwelling unit is within one-half mile of a transit stop no parking is required for the secondary dwelling unit. Although additional parking is not required for second dwelling units within one-half mile of a transit stop, the town encourages the provision of adequate parking for second dwelling units so other uses on site are not impacted. 
8.  Replacement parking spaces. If a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of a secondary dwelling unit, the minimum required number of off-street parking spaces shall be replaced, but may be provided in any configuration on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, as enclosed or covered spaces, uncovered spaces, tandem spaces, or by the use of mechanical automobile parking lifts. 
9.  Architectural review. Each secondary unit shall be constructed so as to be architecturally compatible with the primary dwelling unit or the immediate neighborhood. Compatibility includes the coordination of exterior colors, materials, roofing, other architectural features, and landscaping. 
10.  California Building Standards Code requirements. Each secondary unit shall be constructed in compliance with all applicable California Building Standards Code requirements. Secondary dwelling units are not required to provide fire sprinklers if sprinklers are not required for the primary dwelling unit. 
D.  Illegal secondary units. This section shall not validate any existing illegal secondary units. To convert a non-allowed secondary unit to a legal, conforming unit, the standards and requirements for the conversion shall be the same as for a newly proposed secondary unit. 
(Ord. No. 17-02, § 4(Exh. A), 2-15-2017; Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.280 - Telecommunications Facilities. 
A.  Purpose. This Section provides development standards consistent with Federal law to regulate the placement and design of telecommunications facilities so as to preserve the unique visual character of the town, promote the aesthetic appearance of the town, and to ensure public safety and welfare. 
B.  Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all communications facilities within the town, except the following, which are exempt from this section. 
1.  Replacement or modification of previously permitted facilities or equipment determined by the Director to be minor in nature that does not increase the number or height of antennas or significantly change or enlarge the ancillary related equipment at the site. 
2.  One satellite dish antenna per property or residential unit that is one meter or less in diameter or diagonal measurement (approximately 39 inches). 
3.  Temporary installations for testing for telecommunications purposes only, not to exceed three days duration on any one lot or property for each such purpose. 
C.  Permit requirements. Table 17.52.280C (Telecommunications Facilities Permit Requirements) outlines the permit requirements for telecommunications facilities based on location, type, size, and quantity, consistent with Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). 
TABLE 17.52.280(C): TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 
Location 	Type 1 	Size 	Quantity 	Permit 
Required 	Notes 
Residential Zones 	Satellite dish antenna (building or ground mounted) 	1 meter (39 inches) or less 	1 per lot or residential unit 	None 	No transmitting dish antenna shall be permitted in a residential zone. See 17.52.280E.1 
	Satellite dish antenna (ground mounted) 	40 inches to 8 feet in diameter 	1 per lot or 1 per multi-family residential project 	Design review permit 	
Non-residential Zones 	Satellite dish antenna (building or ground mounted) 	40 inches to 6.5 feet in diameter 	1 per lot 	Design review permit 	Receiving and/or transmitting permitted. Must be ancillary to a primary use. See 17.52.280E.2. 
	Satellite dish antenna (building or ground mounted) 	40 inches to 12 feet in diameter 	1 to 3 per lot 	Use permit 	
	Satellite dish antenna facility 	As determined by use permit, but generally no greater than 12 feet in diameter 	As determined by use permit 	Use permit 	Receiving and/or transmitting permitted. May be a primary use. See 17.52.280E.2. and 17.52.280F. 
	Cellular wireless communications facilities 	As determined by use permit 	As determined by use permit 	Use permit 	
1. Any facility, including supporting structures and appurtenances, installed to not be visually obtrusive as determined by the Director shall require a design review permit rather than a use permit. Facilities that are not visually obtrusive include, but are not limited to, facilities installed entirely within an existing structure so that no exterior modifications to the existing structure are readily visible. 
 
D.  General requirements. All telecommunications facilities shall comply with the following standards. 
1.  State, Federal, and Local laws. All communication facilities, including those exempt from this section, shall comply with all applicable requirements of State, Federal, and local laws including MLFPD requirements. 
2.  Design and development standards. A telecommunications facility, including projections, shall meet the design and development standards for the zone in which it is located, including setbacks and height, unless otherwise specified in this section. 
3.  Height measurement. The height of a telecommunications facility with a moveable or adjustable component shall be measured when actuated to its most vertical position (i.e., measured to the top of its highest potential position). 
4.  Colors and materials. Telecommunications facilities shall have a non-reflective finish and shall be painted or otherwise treated to match or blend with the primary background and minimize visual impacts. 
5.  Advertising and graphics. No advertising, display, or graphic is permitted on any telecommunications facility. A manufacturer's identification label and/or any government required identification or safety labels or signs may be affixed to a facility or site in a discrete manner as feasible. 
6.  Undergrounding required. All power lines and electrical and antenna wiring shall be placed underground whenever possible. 
7.  Effects of development on reception. The Town shall not be liable if subsequent development impairs reception of any telecommunications facility. 
8.  Inoperative facility removal required. A telecommunications facility and all equipment associated with an approved telecommunications facility shall be removed within six months of the discontinuance of the use and the site shall be restored to its original pre-construction condition, subject to the approval of the Director. 
E.  Satellite dish antennas. A satellite dish antenna is a parabolic, dish-like antenna which transmits and/or receives electromagnetic waves by line of sight for television, data, and/or other telecommunication broadcasts from orbiting satellites. 
1.  Residential zoning district standards. In any residential zoning district, antennas shall be subject to the following standards. 
a.  Mounting location. Only ground-mounted antennas shall be allowed, except for non-ground mounted antennas of one meter (approximately 39 inches). Ground-mounted antennas shall be located in the rear portion of the property (i.e., between the dwelling and rear property line). This provision may be modified by the Director if strict compliance would result in no or poor satellite reception, as established by evidence provided by the applicant. 
b.  Size limitations. The diameter of a satellite dish antenna shall not exceed eight feet. This provision may be modified by the Director if strict compliance would result in no or poor satellite reception, as established by evidence provided by the applicant. 
c.  Height limit. The height of an antenna shall not exceed 10 feet. This provision may be modified by the Director to allow an antenna height of up to the maximum permitted height in the applicable zone if strict compliance would result in no or poor satellite reception, as established by evidence provided by the applicant. 
d.  Setbacks. Satellite dishes and antennas shall maintain the setback requirements set forth for the main structure pursuant to Section 17.36.100G.2 (Setback Requirements and Exceptions - Satellite Dish/Antenna). 
e.  Screening. The antenna shall be separated from adjoining properties by at least a six-foot-high solid fence or wall, or by trees and landscaping of equal minimum height approved by the Director. Approval of screening may include reasonable conditions deemed by the Director necessary to minimize the visual impacts of a satellite dish antenna. 
f.  Limitation on use. The antenna shall be used for private, non-commercial purposes only. 
g.  Number of antennas allowed. Only one antenna may be allowed on any lot, parcel, or property. 
2.  Non-residential zoning district standards. In any non-residential zoning district, antennas shall be subject to the following standards. 
a.  Mounting location. 
i.  Antennas shall be located in the rear portion of the property or structure (i.e., not between the face of the main building and any public street). 
ii.  No dish antenna greater than one meter in diameter (approximately 39 inches) shall be permitted on or above that part of a pitched roof sloping towards and having visibility from a street facing property line. 
iii.  These provisions may be modified by the Director if strict compliance would result in no or poor satellite reception, as established by evidence provided by the applicant. 
b.  Size limitations. The diameter of a satellite dish antenna shall not exceed 12 feet; however, the Commission may approve a larger diameter antenna for a satellite dish antenna facility subject to use permit approval. 
c.  Screening. Antennas shall be screened from public view and surrounding parcels. If building-mounted, the antennas shall be screened from ground view by a parapet or other type of screening that blends with the structure. 
d.  Security. Ground mounted dish antenna shall be secured from access to the general public by fencing or other deterring device or means as the Town may approve or require so the antenna is not an attractive nuisance. 
F.  Cellular wireless communications facilities. A cellular wireless communications facility is a type of remote communication installation that includes a grouping or series of antennas that transmit, relay, and receive radio waves, together with equipment that is functionally integrated into a communication system. Cellular wireless communication facilities shall comply with the following requirements. 
1.  Application requirements. In addition to the information required for a use permit by Chapter 17.68 (Use Permits), the application for a cellular wireless communications facility shall include: 
a.  A map showing planned and/or anticipated future needs of wireless communication services and facilities within and throughout the town, including a discussion of existing local network facilities and service gaps; 
b.  An alternative site analysis detailing the specific steps undertaken to determine the applicant's selection of a particular site consistent with Subsection 17.52.280F.2; and 
c.  Microwave interference and radiation data and specifications, including a report to evaluate the potential for interference with Police Department and other emergency service providers' communications. 
2.  Site selection. Sites for cellular wireless communications facilities shall be selected according to the following order of preference: 
a.  On or within existing structures (e.g., church steeple, roof top stairwell or equipment enclosures, etc.). 
b.  Co-location facilities (i.e., locating equipment from more than one provider on a single facility). 
c.  In locations where existing topography, vegetation, or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening. 
d.  On parcels which will not require significant visual mitigation. 
3.  Design standards. Facilities shall be designed, installed, modified, and maintained in compliance with the following standards; except that any standard may be modified or waived by the Commission upon a determination that effective signal reception and transmission will not occur if the facility complies with these standards. 
a.  Location. 
i.  Facilities shall be located either within a structure, underground, in the rear portion of the property (not visible from the public right-of-way), or on a screened roof top area. 
ii.  Facilities shall not be located in a required parking, maneuvering, or vehicular or pedestrian circulation area. 
b.  Screening. 
i.  If new building features or other site improvements are necessary for the support of the antennas, they shall be minimized in scale or be designed to architecturally match or compatibly blend with the structure and site to which they are attached. 
ii.  If a new freestanding tower or monopole is necessary for the support of the antennas, it shall be located near existing utility poles, trees, or other similar objects, and consist of colors and materials that best blend with the background. 
iii.  The facility shall comply with all additional measures deemed necessary to mitigate the visual impact of the facility as determined by the Commission. 
c.  Anti-graffiti. All ground mounted equipment shall be covered with a clear anti-graffiti type material of a type approved by the Director or shall be adequately secured to prevent graffiti. 
d.  Security. Facilities shall be secured from access to the general public by fencing or other deterring device or means as the Town may approve or require so the facility is not an attractive nuisance. 
4.  Operation and maintenance standards. 
a.  Contact and site information. The owner or operator of any facility shall submit and maintain current at all times basic contact and site information. The Department shall be notified by the owner or operator within 30 days of any change, including change of the name or legal status of the owner or operator. 
b.  Facility maintenance. All communications facilities and related equipment, including lighting, fences, shields, cabinets, and poles shall be maintained in good repair, free from trash, debris, litter, graffiti, and other forms of vandalism. Any damage from any cause shall be repaired as soon as reasonably possible. 
5.  Financial security. The Director may require the applicant to post a financial security acceptable to the Director to ensure that approved facilities are properly maintained, and guarantee that the facilities are dismantled and removed from the premises and the site reclaimed if it has been inoperative for a one year period, or upon expiration of the permit. Financial assurance shall be an amount determined by a California licensed engineer, and approved by the Public Works Director, and shall cover the costs associated with the demolition, removal, and reclamation of the facility site in the event the owner or operator abandons operations. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.290 - Transitional and Supportive Housing. 
Transitional and supportive housing constitute a residential use and are subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.52.300 - Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS). 
This Section establishes standards for wind energy conversion systems (WECS) with the intent to take advantage of renewable energy while minimizing potential adverse effects on surrounding properties and infrastructure or on the public health, safety, and welfare. 
A.  Permits requirements. Table 17.52.300(A) (Wind Energy Conversion Systems Permit Requirements) outlines the permit requirements for WECS based on location, type, height, and quantity, consistent with Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). A building permit, issued by the Town, shall be obtained prior to the installation of a WECS. 
TABLE 17.52.300(A): WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS PERMIT REQUIREMENT 
Location 	Type 	Height 	Quantity 	Permit 
Required 	Notes 
Residential Zones 	Private, non-commercial 1 	Shall not exceed the maximum permitted height within the applicable zone 2 	1 per lot 	Use Permit 	Must be an accessory use 
Commercial Zones and All Other Zones Not Specifically Addressed 	Private, non-commercial 1 	Shall not exceed the maximum permitted height within the applicable zone 2 	1 or more per lot 	Use permit 	
Industrial Zone and Public and Quasi-Public Zone 	Private, non-commercial 1 	Shall not exceed the maximum permitted height within the applicable zone 2 	1 per lot 	Design review permit 	
	Windfarm 3 		More than 1 per lot 	Use permit 	May be a primary use 
1. A private, non-commercial WECS is installed on a developed property for the purposes of providing energy for on-site consumption. 
2. The Commission may allow the height of a WECS to exceed the maximum permitted height within the applicable zone if strict compliance to the height limit would result in no or poor productivity, as established by evidence provided by the applicant. The Commission may require larger setbacks if additional height is allowed. 
3. A windfarm is multiple WECS installed at a single property or area for the purpose of generating larger quantities of electrical or mechanical power for transmission to a public or private utility. 
 
B.  Application. An application for a WECS shall be made to the Department on a form provided for that purpose pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). All required information identified on the form shall be provided by the applicant, in addition to the following information: 
1.  Direction of prevailing winds across the project site; 
2.  Manufacturer and model designation, rated kilowatt capacity, overall machine height, total blade diameter, rated maximum rotor rotations per minute, and other manufacture's data sufficient to determine compliance with this section; 
3.  Location and type of security fencing and/or screening; and 
4.  Proof of liability insurance consistent with Subsection 17.52.300C.11. 
C.  General requirements. All WECS shall comply with the following standards. 
1.  Design and development standards. A WECS shall meet the design and development standards for the zone in which it is located unless otherwise specified in this section. 
2.  Height measurement. The height of a WECS shall be measured to the top of the WECS, including any blade when at its highest point. 
3.  Height limit. The height of WECS shall not exceed the maximum permitted height within the applicable zone. This provision may be modified by the Commission if strict compliance would result in no or poor productivity, as established by evidence provided by the applicant. The Commission may require larger setbacks if additional height is allowed. 
4.  Setback measurement. Setbacks shall be measured to the outer edge of a WECS, including any blade when at its maximum horizontal extension. 
5.  Setbacks. A WECS shall maintain the same minimum setbacks required for a primary structure within the applicable zone. 
6.  Colors and materials. A WECS shall have a non-reflective finish and shall be painted or otherwise treated to match or blend with the primary background and minimize visual impacts. 
7.  Advertising and graphics. No advertising, display, or graphic is permitted on any WECS. A manufacturer's identification label and/or any government required identification or safety labels or signs may be affixed to a facility or site in a discrete manner as feasible. 
8.  Undergrounding required. All wiring or any associated and ancillary equipment, batteries, devices, structures, or support(s) for any WECS, shall be placed underground whenever possible. 
9.  Noise. WECS shall comply with Chapter 8.16 (Noise Regulation). 
10.  Security and safety. WECS shall be secured from access to the general public by fencing or other deterring device or means as the Town may approve or require so the WECS is not an attractive nuisance. WECS shall either have tower climbing apparatus located not closer than 12 feet to the ground or be un-climbable by design for the first 12 feet. 
11.  Proof of liability insurance. The owner of any WECS shall provide, as part of the permit application submittal, proof of liability insurance that specifically addresses the installation, use, and maintenance of the WECS. 
12.  Effects of development on productivity. The Town shall not be liable if subsequent development impairs the productivity of any WECS. 
13.  Inoperative facility removal required. Any WECS that is not operated for a continuous period of six months shall be considered abandoned. A WECS and all equipment associated with an approved WECS shall be removed within six months of the discontinuance of the use and the site shall be restored to its original pre-construction condition, subject to the approval of the Director. 
D.  Private, non-commercial WECS. A private, non-commercial WECS shall be subject to the following standards. 
1.  Location. A WECS, including associated and ancillary equipment, batteries, devices, structures, or supports, shall be located in the rear portion of the property (i.e., between the primary structure and rear property line). This provision may be modified by the Commission if strict compliance would result in no or poor productivity, as established by evidence provided by the applicant. 
2.  Screening. The WECS shall be separated from adjoining properties by at least a six foot high solid fence or wall, or by trees and landscaping of equal minimum height approved by the Commission. Approval of screening may include reasonable conditions deemed by the Commission necessary to minimize the visual impacts of a WECS. 
3.  Net-metering. A private, non-commercial WECS may be net-metered with written authorization provided by the utility company. Net-metering is a service to an electric consumer under which electric energy generated by that electric consumer from an eligible on-site generating facility and delivered to the local distribution facilities may be used to offset electric energy provided by the electrical utility to the electric consumer during the applicable billing period. Net-metering does not allow the sale of power back to the electric company or into the wholesale electricity market. 
E.  Windfarm WECS. Windfarm WECS shall be screened from public view and surrounding parcels to the satisfaction of the Commission. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.56 - Temporary Uses and Events 
 
17.56.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This Chapter provides standards for short-term commercial uses and events that may not meet the normal development or use standards of the applicable zoning district, but may otherwise be acceptable because of their temporary nature. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.56.020 - Applicability. 
Temporary uses are short-term activities that might not meet the normal development or use standards of the applicable zoning district, but are acceptable because of their temporary nature. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.56.030 - Exempt Temporary Uses and Events. 
The following temporary uses and events are not subject to the requirements of this chapter, and are also not subject to the permit requirements established by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). 
A.  Approved Public Assembly Sites. A temporary event conducted in an approved place of public assembly, such as a theater, convention center, meeting hall, public school events on school property, or sports facility. 
B.  Garage sales. Garage sales where such are conducted for less than five days in any six month period. Garage or yard sales in excess of this limit shall be prohibited in all residential zones. 
C.  Temporary uses and events on public lands. Temporary uses and events conducted on land or within a structure under the control and ownership of a public agency, provided that all requirements of the public agency and the Police and Fire Department are met. 
D.  Private Parties. Private non-commercial events/parties held at a residence. 
E.  Emergency Facilities. Emergency public health and safety needs/land use activities. 
F.  Emergency Shelters. Temporary emergency shelters shall be permitted in any zoning district for a maximum of 30 days in any 90-day period, provided that the facilities are approved by the Building Department and Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District prior to use. 
G.  Construction Yards and Offices. On-site contractors' construction yards and offices, in conjunction with an approved construction project. 
H.  Construction Trailers. Mobile homes or trailers used as residences for security purposes on the site of an active construction project. 
I.  Cargo/Storage Containers. Cargo containers or semitrailers used for storage purposes not to exceed 15 days in any calendar year. 
J.  Similar Temporary Uses. Similar temporary uses which, in the opinion of the Director, do not require an administrative permit and are compatible with the zoning district and surrounding land uses. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.56.040 - Requirements for Specific Temporary Uses and Events. 
The following temporary uses and events are subject to an administrative permit, and shall comply with the following standards. 
A.  Events. Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement enterprises in any commercial or industrial zone subject to no more than 30 days of site occupation and operation in any calendar year. 
B.  Festivals. Music festivals, outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits, and similar outdoor entertainment activities in any zone except single-family residential and rural residential, subject to a limitation on the number of days of operation as determined by the Director. 
C.  Seasonal Sales Lots. Seasonal sales activities for Thanksgiving, Christmas, or other holidays, on non-residential properties, including temporary residence/security trailers. 
D.  One Day Events. Special one-day events such as local service club breakfasts, bingo, or Monte Carlo nights in any zone except single-family residential. This provision does not apply to events within an approved public assembly site or any other location described in 17.56.030. 
E.  Sports Events. Special sports events such as running races or bicycle races in any zone. 
F.  Commercial filming. Commercial filming may be authorized on properties within residential, commercial/industrial, and special purpose zoning districts. 
G.  Snow Chain Installers. Snow chain installers on commercially zoned parcels. 
H.  Snow Removal Equipment (Residential Zone). Storage of snow removal equipment in a residential zone, pursuant to the following restrictions: 
1.  In any residential zone, one piece of snow removal equipment may be maintained at the home of the business operator from November 1st through April 30th. 
2.  If the vehicle/equipment is maintained at the home of the business owner or primary operator and is stored within a standard garage at all times, this one vehicle/equipment may be stored year round; providing, such equipment is not used for any non-snow removal business from the residential zone. 
I.  Snow Removal Equipment (Commercial Zones). Storage of snow removal equipment in a commercial zone, pursuant to the following restrictions: 
1.  Snow removal vehicles/equipment may be stored outdoors between November 1st and April 30th. 
2.  Snow removal vehicles/equipment may be stored outdoors between May 1st and October 31st only in the Mixed Lodging/Residential District (MLR) zone and only to accommodate the needs of the lodging project with no off-site work being permitted at any time. 
3.  This section applies to snow removal operations only and does not permit the outdoor storage and/or industrial use of other heavy equipment not intended for snow removal. 
4.  Snow removal vehicles/equipment may be permitted within an enclosed building all year in any zone. 
J.  Off-Site Snow Storage. Off-site snow storage is any snow storage that involves the use of public rights-of-way to access snow storage sites. 
K.  Temporary Freestanding Campaign Offices. Campaign offices in any commercial or industrial zone subject to no more than seventy continuous days of site occupation and operation in any calendar year. Temporary campaign offices within an existing suite do not require an administrative permit. 
L.  Similar Temporary Uses. Similar temporary uses which, in the opinion of the Director, require an administrative permit and are compatible with the zoning district and surrounding land uses. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.56.050 - General Requirements for All Temporary Uses. 
A.  Cumulative time limits. Temporary uses shall not be allowed on or within a parcel, shopping center, professional center, or business park for more than 90 days in any calendar year. 
B.  Building Permits. Any new structure or any new electrical service connection shall require a Building Permit unless specifically exempted by the California Building Standards Code. 
C.  County Health Department approval. All temporary uses are, where applicable, subject to the issuance of a Certificate of Operation from the Mono County Health Department for all temporary uses involving the handling of foods. 
D.  Parking. Adequate temporary parking facilities, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, including vehicular ingress and egress and public transportation shall be provided in compliance with the requirements of the Director. The Director may require parking areas to be surfaced with crushed rock or other surface(s). 
E.  Site restoration. 
1.  The subject site shall be restored to its original condition within five days from the date of termination of the permit. 
2.  The Director may require the submission of a performance bond or other surety measures, in compliance with Public Works Performance Guarantee requirements, to ensure that any temporary facilities or structures used will be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event, the property will be cleaned of debris, litter, or any other evidence of the temporary event upon completion or removal of the event, restored to the former condition, and shall continue to be used in compliance with this Zoning Code. 
F.  Operating hours. The Director may regulate operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of the temporary use. 
G.  Nuisance factors. The Director may apply conditions to regulate nuisance factors including prevention of glare or direct illumination on adjoining parcels, dirt, dust, gases, heat, noise, odors, smoke, waste, and vibration. 
H.  Screening required. The Director may require temporary outdoor sales areas to be screened from adjoining public rights-of-way by temporary decorative walls, fences, and/or landscaping. 
I.  Security. Security and safety measures shall be provided in compliance with the requirements of the Police Chief. 
J.  Waste collection and disposal. Provisions shall be made for solid waste collection, recycling and/or disposal, in compliance with the requirements of the Director. 
K.  Other conditions. The Director may impose any other conditions which will ensure the operation of the proposed temporary use or event in an orderly and efficient manner and in full compliance with the purpose/intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Article IV. - Land Use and Development Permit Procedures  
Chapter 17.60 - Applications, Processing, and Fees 
 
17.60.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This Chapter provides procedures and requirements for the preparation, filing and processing of applications for land use permits and other entitlements required by this Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.60.020 - Authority for Land Use and Zoning Decisions. 
Table 17.60.030 (Review Authority) identifies the Town official or body responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of application, land use permit, and other entitlements required by this Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.60.030 - Concurrent Permit Processing. 
When a single project incorporates different land uses or features so that this Zoning Code requires multiple land use permit applications, and/or the project involves a land use permit application and a Tentative Map, all the applications shall be reviewed, and approved or denied, concurrently by the highest level review authority assigned by Table 17.60.030 to any of the required applications. (For example, a project that requires a Zoning Map amendment and a Use Permit shall be reviewed, and approved or denied by the Council, where a Use Permit application by itself would normally be reviewed and acted upon by the Commission.) 
TABLE 17.60.030: REVIEW AUTHORITY 
Type of Permit or Decision 	Refer to Chapter 	Role of Review Authority 1 
		Director 2 	Planning and Economic Development Commission 	Town Council 
Adjustment 	Chapter 17.76 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Administrative Permit 	Chapter 17.84 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Design Review - Minor 	Chapter 17.88 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Design Review - Major 	Chapter 17.88 		Decision 	Appeal 
Film Permit 	N/A 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
General Plan Amendment 	Chapter 17.112 		Recommend 	Decision 
Lot Line Adjustment 	Subdivision Ordinance 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Master Plan 	Chapter 17.120 		Recommend 	Decision 
Master Sign Program 	Chapter 17.48 		Decision 	Appeal 
Sign Permit 	Chapter 17.48 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Specific Plan 	Chapter 17.116 		Recommend 	Decision 
Tentative Parcel Map 	Subdivision Ordinance 		Decision 	Appeal 
Tentative Tract Map 	Subdivision Ordinance 		Decision 	Appeal 
Time Extension 	Chapter 17.64 	Original Review Authority 
Tree Removal Permit 	Section 17.36.050B 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Use Permit 	Chapter 17.68 		Decision 	Appeal 
Variance 	Chapter 17.72 		Decision 	Appeal 
Zoning Code Amendment 	Chapter 17.112 		Recommend 	Decision 
1. "Recommend" means that the review authority makes a recommendation to a higher decision-making body; "Decision" means that the review authority makes the final decision on the matter; "Appeal" means that the review authority may consider and decide upon appeals of an earlier decision, in compliance with Chapter 17.104 (Appeals). 
2. The Director may refer any matter subject to his/her decision to the Commission, so that the Commission may instead make the decision. 
 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014) 
   
17.60.040 - Application Preparation and Filing. 
A.  Application contents. The preparation and filing of applications for land use permits, amendments (e.g., General Plan, Zoning Map, or Zoning Code), and any other matters pertaining to this Zoning Code shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Applications shall include the forms provided by the Department, and all information and materials required by the Application Requirements list provided by the Department for the specific type of application; 
2.  Applications shall be filed with the Department; and 
3.  It is the applicant's responsibility to provide evidence in support of the findings required for the approval of the application by this chapter. 
B.  Eligibility for filing. Applications may be made by the owner of the subject property, by a lessee, or any other person, with the written consent of the property owner. 
C.  Time for filing. Any land use permit required by this Zoning Code shall be filed with the Director, processed and approved before the approval of any Building, Grading, or other construction permit or other authorization required by the Municipal Code or this Zoning Code for the proposed use or structure. 
D.  Concept Review. Prospective applicants and agents are encouraged to request a concept review prior to completion of project design and the formal submittal of a permit application. A request by an applicant for concept review, accompanied by preliminary project plans and designs, will be reviewed by the Planning Division, the Commission, and, in some cases, the Advisory Design Panel. The Planning Division will inform the applicant of Town requirements as they apply to the proposed development project, provide a preliminary list of issues that will likely be of concern during formal application review, suggest possible alternatives or modifications to the project, based on identified development standards and other adopted policies and regulations, and identify technical studies that may be necessary for the environmental review process when a formal application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.60.050 - Application Fees. 
A.  Fee schedule. The Council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for permits, amendments, and other matters pertaining to this Zoning Code. The schedule of fees may be changed or modified only by resolution of the Council. 
B.  Timing of payment. No application shall be deemed complete, and processing shall not commence on any application until all required fees or deposits have been paid. Failure to timely pay required fees and/or deposits shall be a basis for denial or revocation of any permit or other requested entitlement, notwithstanding any other provisions of this Zoning Code. Processing shall not commence on any application until all required fees have been paid. 
C.  Refunds and withdrawals. Recognizing that filing fees cover the costs of public hearings, posting, transcripts, and staff time involved in processing applications, refunds due to a denial are not allowed, except in the case of an appeal hearing by the Council in compliance with Chapter 17.104 (Appeals). In the case of a withdrawal, the Director may authorize a partial refund based upon the Director's determination of pro-rated costs to-date and the status of the application at the time of withdrawal. 
D.  Cost accounted projects. All direct costs of processing, reviewing, reporting, hearing, and acting upon applications shall be borne by the applicant. Costs shall be reimbursed to the Town whether the application is approved, approved in modified form, or denied by the hearing body. An initial deposit shall be required by the Town based upon an estimate of the municipal costs associated with processing, including pre-application meetings. The Town shall then charge its expenses against the deposit. If funds deposited are insufficient to cover the Town's costs, work on the application shall cease until adequate funds are deposited and/or Town expenditures are fully reimbursed. Adequate notice shall be given to the applicant when insufficient funds are remaining to process the application. 
E.  Development agreements. The applicant shall pay the fees and charges established by the Town Council for the filing and processing of a development agreement. Additionally, appropriate fees may be established and collected for periodic reviews conducted by the Town in compliance with State law and Section 17.108.090 (Periodic Review). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.60.060 - Initial Application Review/Environmental Assessment. 
All applications filed with the Department in compliance with this Zoning Code shall be initially processed as follows: 
A.  Completeness review. The Director shall review all applications for completeness and accuracy before they are accepted as being complete for processing. 
1.  Notification of applicant. The applicant shall be informed as required by the Government Code, either that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing, or that the application is incomplete and that additional information, specified in writing, shall be provided before it can be accepted for processing. 
2.  Appeal of determination. Where the Director has determined that an application is incomplete, and the applicant believes that the application is complete and/or that the information requested by the Director is not required, the applicant may appeal the determination in compliance with Chapter 17.104 (Appeals). 
3.  Environmental information. The Director may require the applicant to submit additional information needed for the environmental review of the project in compliance with Subsection C., below. 
4.  Expiration of application. If the applicant does not provide sufficient information to complete an application within 90 days after notification that the application is incomplete, the application shall be deemed withdrawn, unless an extension is granted by the Director. A new application, including fees, plans, exhibits, and other materials that will be required to commence processing of any development project on the same property, may then be filed in compliance with this Article. 
B.  Referral of application. At the discretion of the Director, or where otherwise required by this Zoning Code, State or Federal law, any application filed in compliance with this Zoning Code may be referred to any public agency that may be affected by or have an interest in the proposed land use activity. 
C.  Environmental assessment. 
1.  All development applications shall be reviewed as required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), to determine whether the proposed project is exempt from the requirements of CEQA or is not a project as defined by CEQA, whether a Negative Declaration may be issued, or whether an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) shall be required. 
2.  These determinations and, where required, the preparation of environmental documents shall comply with the CEQA Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.60.070 - Application Review and Decision. 
A.  Project review procedures. Each application shall be analyzed by the Director to ensure that the proposed uses/activities and development are consistent with the content, purpose, and intent of this Zoning Code, any applicable design guidelines, the CEQA Guidelines, the General Plan, and any applicable Specific Plan. Additionally, any application which may involve substantial grading shall require the submittal of preliminary grading plans for review and recommendation by the Town Engineer. 
B.  Notice and hearings. A land use permit application will be scheduled for a public hearing only after the Director has determined the application complete, in compliance with Section 17.60.060A (Completeness Review). Noticing of the public hearing will be given in compliance with Chapter 17.124 (Public Hearings). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.60.080 - Appeals. 
The decision of the Director or Commission, as applicable, shall be considered final unless an appeal is filed in compliance with Chapter 17.104 (Appeals). The decision of the Director or Commission, or any condition of approval, is appealable to the Council. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.60.090 - Post Approval Procedures. 
The following procedures shall apply following the approval of the permit or entitlement. 
A.  Expiration and extensions. Time limits for the expiration of approved land use permits, and procedures for obtaining extensions of time are established by Chapter 17.64 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions). 
B.  Phasing. Requirements for the development of approved projects in multiple phases are established by Chapter 17.64 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions). 
C.  Building Permit. Building permits may be issued after all applicable terms and conditions of the land use permit approval have been satisfied. Any land use permit issued in compliance with this Zoning Code shall conform to all applicable provisions of this Zoning Code. 
D.  Certificate of Occupancy. The Certificate of Occupancy may be issued after all conditions have been fulfilled to the satisfaction of the Director. 
E.  Minor changes. The Director may approve minor changes (e.g., colors, elevations, exterior materials, hours of operation, landscaping, walls/fences, etc.) to required conditions and operating standards of an approved land use permit. The minor changes shall be in compliance with Section 17.64.070 (Changes to an Approved Project). 
F.  Major changes. The original review authority may approve major changes to required conditions and operating standards of an approved permit or entitlement, in compliance with Section 17.64.070 (Changes to an Approved Project). The requirements and procedures contained in this Zoning Code shall apply to any application for a major change, which shall constitute a project requiring environmental review under CEQA. 
G.  Revocation. The original review authority may revoke or modify a land use permit approval in compliance with Chapter 17.128 (Revocations and Modifications). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.64 - Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions 
 
17.64.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This Chapter outlines requirements for the implementation or "exercising" of the permits or entitlements required by this Zoning Code, including time limits and procedures for extensions of time. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.64.020 - Effective Date of Permits. 
A.  Effective after appeal period. 
1.  The approval of a planning permit shall become effective the day after the appeal period has ended and upon receipt by the Community and Economic Development Department of the approval signed by the applicant agreeing to the conditions of approval, provided that no appeal of the approval has been filed in compliance with Chapter 17.104 (Appeals). 
2.  For concurrent applications, the effective date of all permits shall be after the last appeal period associated with any one permit has ended and upon receipt by the Community and Economic Development Department of the approval signed by the applicant agreeing to the conditions of approval, provided that no appeal of the approvals has been filed in compliance with Chapter 17.104 (Appeals). 
B.  Effective date if appeal filed. If the appeal of a decision approving a planning permit is filed in a timely manner, the permit or entitlement shall be placed on hold pending the final decision on the appeal pursuant to Chapter 17.104 (Appeals). If the final decision is to deny the appeal, the permit or entitlement shall become effective following the final decision on the appeal and upon receipt by the Community and Economic Development Department of the approval signed by the applicant agreeing to the conditions of approval. If the final decision is to approve the appeal, the permit or entitlement shall be deemed void. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.64.030 - Applications Deemed Approved. 
A planning permit application that is deemed approved by operation of law in compliance with Government Code Section 65956 shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this Zoning Code, which shall be satisfied by the applicant before any building permit is issued or a land use not requiring a building permit is established. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.64.040 - Permits to Run with the Land. 
Planning permit approvals granted in compliance with Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees) shall run with the land through any change of ownership of the subject site, from the effective date of the permit, unless otherwise stated in the conditions of approval or in any case where a permit expires and becomes void in compliance with Section 17.64.060. All applicable conditions of approval shall continue to apply after a change in property ownership, unless otherwise stated in the conditions of approval. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.64.050 - Performance Guarantees. 
A permit applicant may be required by conditions of approval, action of the Director, or as otherwise provided in the Municipal Code to provide adequate security, in a form specified in the conditions of project approval, to guarantee the faithful performance of any or all conditions of approval imposed on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.64.060 - Time Limits and Extensions. 
A.  Time limits. 
1.  Lapse of permit. Unless conditions of approval or other provision of this Zoning Code establishes a different time limit, any permit or approval, including all phases of the permit or approval, not exercised within two years of the effective date shall expire and become void, except where an extension of time is granted in compliance with Subsection 17.64.060B. 
2.  Permit implementation - Commencement of use. A permit shall not be deemed "exercised" until the permittee has actually obtained a building permit and commenced construction, or where no building permit is required, has actually commenced the allowed use on the subject site in compliance with the conditions of approval; construction shall be diligently pursued toward completion. If a project is to be developed in approved phases, the permit or approval for the phased project shall not be deemed exercised until all project phases are exercised. 
3.  Concurrent applications. For concurrent applications, the longest time limit associated with any one permit shall apply to all of the other concurrent permits. All permits that are associated with the approval of a tentative map shall have the same expiration date as the tentative map; however, no permit approved in conjunction with a tentative map shall expire and become void sooner than one year after the approval of the final map. 
4.  Expiration by nonuse. Any permit shall expire and be deemed void when the use allowed by the permit is discontinued for a continuous period of two years. However, if a certificate of occupancy is issued for the structure associated with the use and all other conditions of approval of the permit are satisfactorily completed, the permit remains in effect even if the structure is vacant for more than two continuous years, provided that no use may be reestablished in the structure and/or on the site unless the use is determined by the Director to be substantially the same as the original permit approval, and there have been no substantial changes in the conditions or circumstances of the site or project. 
B.  Extensions of time. Upon written request by the applicant, the original review authority (e.g., the Director, Commission, or Town Council) may extend the time for an approved planning permit to be exercised. 
1.  Application for extension. The applicant shall file a written request for an extension of time with the Director before the expiration of the permit, together with the filing fee required as established by the Town Council. 
2.  Suspension of expiration. Upon the filing of an extension request in compliance with this chapter, the time limit for expiration of a permit shall be suspended until a decision on the extension request is made by the original review authority. 
3.  Review procedure. The original review authority shall make determinations in compliance with Subsection 17.64.060B.4 prior to taking action on a time extension request. A public hearing is not required for a time extension request. 
4.  Action on extension request. The original review authority shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny a time extension request. The original review authority may approve a time extension request only after all of the following findings are made: 
a.  The applicant has made a good faith effort to exercise the permit and comply with the conditions of approval in a timely manner. The burden of proof is on the applicant to establish, with substantial evidence, that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented exercising the permit; 
b.  The permit is still in compliance with the General Plan, this Zoning Code, and any applicable specific plan; 
c.  The original conditions of approval have been modified or new conditions have been imposed as deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will remain in compliance with the findings required by this Zoning Code for the applicable permit; and 
d.  The original review authority shall make project specific findings to support the decision. 
5.  Length of extension allowed. The original review authority may grant a permit extension for a period or periods not exceeding a total of six years beyond the expiration date of the original approval, not to exceed a total of eight years of life; provided the original review authority first finds the extension consistent with Subsection 17.64.060B4. Time extensions for tentative maps and permits associated with tentative maps shall be consistent with Government Code Sections 66452.6.e, 66452.12, 66452.21, and any other statue extending the life of tentative maps. 
C.  Effect of expiration. After the expiration of a planning permit in compliance with Subsection 17.64.060A, no further work shall be done on the site until a new planning permit and any required building permit or other Town permits are first obtained. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.64.070 - Changes to an Approved Project. 
An approved development or new land use authorized through a planning permit granted in compliance with this Zoning Code shall be established, maintained, or operated only as approved by the Town, and in compliance with any conditions of approval, except when changes to a project are approved in compliance with this section. 
A.  Application. An applicant shall request a proposed change in writing, and shall also furnish appropriate supporting information and materials explaining the reasons for the request. The required filing fee shall also be provided. A change may be requested either before or after construction, or establishment and operation of the approved land use. 
B.  Extent of changes allowed. Generally, minor changes to an approved project may be approved, modified, or denied by the Director, while major changes shall be approved, modified, or denied by the original review authority (e.g., the Director, Commission, or Town Council), unless expressly stated otherwise by the conditions of approval imposed on the project, as follows (also see Subsections 17.60.090E and 17.60.090F - Post Approval Procedures): 
1.  Minor changes. The Director may authorize minor changes to an approved site plan, architecture, or the nature of the approved land use where the Director first finds that the changes: 
a.  Are consistent with all applicable provisions of this Zoning Code, and the approval will remain in compliance with the findings required by this Zoning Code for the applicable permit; 
b.  Do not involve a feature of the project that was a basis for or subject of findings in a negative declaration or environmental impact report for the project; 
c.  Do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically addressed or was a basis for conditions of approval for the project or that was a specific consideration by the review authority in the project approval; and 
d.  Do not result in an expansion in the scope or intensity of the use. 
2.  Major changes. The original review authority may authorize major changes to an approved site plan, architecture, or the nature of the approved land use subject to the following: 
a.  A new planning permit application or modification of the existing permit has been processed in the same manner as the original permit in compliance with this Zoning Code. 
b.  If the permit for which a change is being requested originally required a noticed public hearing, the review authority shall hold a noticed public hearing on the proposed change(s) in compliance with Chapter 17.124 (Public Hearings). 
c.  If a new land use permit or modification of an existing land use permit is subsequently approved by the review authority, any previously approved land use permit shall be deemed void and superseded by the new land use permit or modification. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), 1-21-2015)  
17.64.080 - Resubmittals. 
For a period of one year following the denial of a discretionary planning permit, entitlement, or amendment, no application for the same or substantially similar discretionary permit, entitlement, or amendment for the same parcel shall be filed, except as otherwise specified at the time of denial. The Director shall determine whether the new application is the same or substantially similar as a previously denied application. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.64.090 - Covenants of Easement. 
A.  Covenant may be required. When necessary to achieve the land use goals of the Town, the Town may require a property owner(s) holding property in common ownership to execute and record a covenant of easement in favor of the Town for parking, ingress, egress, emergency access, light and air access, landscaping, or open space purposes pursuant to Government Code Section 65871. The covenant may be imposed as a condition of approval by the Director, Commission, or Town Council. 
B.  Release of covenant. A covenant may be released by the Town, at the request of any person, in the same manner as a street or highway vacation in accordance with the General Vacation Procedure in the Street and Highway Code (Sections 8320-8325). The town may impose fees to recover the town's reasonable cost of processing a request for a release from those persons requesting the release. The required fees shall be as established by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.68 - Use Permits 
 
17.68.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
A.  This chapter establishes procedures for the review, and approval or denial of Use Permits, which are required by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and/or any other section of this Code which requires a Use Permit for land use activities which may be desirable in the applicable zoning district and compatible with adjacent land uses, but whose effects on a site and surroundings cannot be determined before being proposed for a particular location. 
B.  The process includes the review of the location, design, configuration, and potential impacts of the proposed use, to evaluate the compatibility of the proposed use with surrounding uses and the suitability of the use to the site. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.68.020 - Applicability. 
A use permit is required to authorize proposed land uses and activities identified by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) as being allowable in the applicable zoning district subject to the approval of a use permit and to authorize modifications to previously approved use permits. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.68.030 - Application Filing, Initial Processing. 
An application for a use permit, or modification of an existing use permit, shall be prepared, filed, and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.60 (Applications Processing, and Fees) and shall include all information specified by the Department. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.68.040 - Hearings and Notice. 
Upon a determination that the use permit application is in proper form and deemed complete, the Commission shall hold at least one public hearing, in compliance with Chapter 17.124 (Public Hearings). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.68.050 - Findings and Decision. 
Following a public hearing, the Commission may approve a use permit application, with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings can be made: 
A.  That the proposed use is consistent with all applicable sections of the General Plan and Title 17 and is consistent with any applicable specific plan or master plan; 
B.  That the proposed use and the conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public health and safety nor materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity; and 
C.  The Commission shall make such other findings as deemed necessary to support approval or denial of the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.68.060 - Conditions of Approval. 
A.  Review Authority May Impose Conditions. In approving a use permit, the Commission may impose specific development conditions relating to the construction (both on- and off-site improvements), establishment, maintenance, location, and operation of the proposed activity, as it finds are reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will be in compliance with the findings required by Section 17.68.050 (Findings and Decision). 
B.  Examples of Appropriate Conditions. Appropriate conditions may include but not be limited to buffers, hours of operation, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, off-site improvements, parking, performance guarantees, periodic review of the permit with authority to modify or add new conditions based on the results of the review, property maintenance, signs, specified duration for the permit, surfacing, traffic circulation, etc. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.68.070 - Use Permit to Run with the Land. 
A use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure which was the subject of the use permit application. The applicant shall sign an agreement indicating acceptance of the conditions of approval of the use permit, if any, and willingness to abide by all such conditions. A copy of this agreement shall be recorded in the office of the clerk/recorder of the county. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.68.080 - Changes to a Use Permit. 
Changes to a use permit may be approved in compliance with Section 17.60.090 (Post Approval Procedures) or imposed pursuant to Chapter 17.128 (Revocations and Modifications). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.68.090 - New Applications. 
Following the denial of a use permit application or the revocation of a use permit, no application for a new use permit for the same or substantially the same use or site shall be filed within one year from the date of denial or revocation of the use permit; provided, however, that the Commission may deny or revoke without prejudice, thereby allowing an earlier re-application. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.68.100 - Requirements for Commercial Cannabis Businesses. 
Any use permit issued for a commercial cannabis activity shall, in addition to complying with the requirements of this chapter, comply with all of the requirements and regulations for the intended commercial cannabis activities pursuant to Section 17.52.085. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 5(Exh. A, e.), 3-13-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-02, § 5(Exh. A, e.), adopted Mar. 13, 2018, amended § 17.68.100 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 17.68.100 pertained to requirements for marijuana cultivation and derived from Ord. No. 16-04, § 2c, adopted May 18, 2016.  
Chapter 17.72 - Variances 
 
17.72.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to allow for variances from the development standards of this Zoning Code only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict application of this Zoning Code deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under the identical zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.72.020 - Applicability. 
A.  Variances allowed. The Commission may grant a variance from the requirements of this Zoning Code. The power to grant variances does not extend to use regulations, density regulations, specific prohibitions, or procedural requirements. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.72.030 - Application Filing, Processing, and Review. 
A.  Filing. An application for a variance shall be made to the Community and Economic Development Department on a form provided for that purpose pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). All required information identified on the form shall be provided by the applicant, and any additional information required by the Director in order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed project. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.72.040 (Findings and Decision). 
B.  Notice and public hearing. After a variance application is deemed complete, the Director shall prepare a report to be submitted to the Commission and made available to the applicant. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on an application for a variance. Public hearings shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 17.124 (Public Hearings). Notice of public hearings shall be given in compliance with State law. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.72.040 - Findings and Decision. 
The Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny a variance application. The Commission's decision shall be recorded in writing with the findings upon which the decision is based, in compliance with Government Code 65906. The Commission may approve a variance application, with or without conditions, only after all of the following findings are made: 
A.  There are special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, so that the strict application of this Zoning Code deprives the property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under the identical zoning district; 
B.  The approval of the variance does not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and within the same zone; 
C.  Granting the variance would not authorize a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zone governing the property for which the application is made; 
D.  Granting the variance would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located; 
E.  The variance is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan; 
F.  The variance is the minimum departure from the requirements of this Zoning Code necessary to grant relief to the applicant, consistent with Subsections A and B, above; and 
G.  The approval of the variance is in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.72.050 - Conditions of Approval. 
In approving a variance, the Commission may impose conditions of approval to ensure that the project will comply with the findings required by 17.72.040. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.72.060 - Post Approval Procedures. 
The procedures and requirements in Chapter 17.64 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), Chapter 17.104 (Appeals), and Chapter 17.128 (Revocation and Modifications), shall apply following a decision on a variance. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.76 - Adjustments 
 
17.76.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to allow for minor adjustments to certain development standards of this Zoning Code when such requests constitute a reasonable use of property but is not permissible under the strict application of this Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.76.020 - Applicability. 
The Director may grant an adjustment for only the development standards identified in Table 17.76.020 (Adjustments). The Director may choose to refer any adjustment application to the Commission for review and decision. An adjustment may be granted only once for a specific type of request per parcel. A request which exceeds the limitation identified in Table 17.76.020 (Adjustments) shall require the filing of an application for a variance (Chapter 17.72). 
TABLE 17.76.020: ADJUSTMENTS 
Types of Adjustments Allowed 	Maximum Adjustment 
1. Lot area, width, or depth. A decrease of the required lot area, width or depth. 	10% 
2. Lot coverage. An increase of the maximum allowable lot coverage (e.g., 40% maximum allowable lot coverage increased to 42%). 	5% 
3. Setbacks. A decrease of the required front, side, or rear yard setback. 	20% 
4. Distance between structures. A decrease of the minimum required distance between structures located on the same parcel. 	20% 
5. Projections. An increase of the allowable projections into a required setback, but no closer than three feet to any property line. 	10% 
6. Structure height. An increase in the maximum permitted height. 	10% 
7. Fence or wall height. An increase in the maximum permitted height. 	10% 
8. Parking. A decrease in the number of required parking spaces. 	See Chapter 17.44 (Parking and Loading Standards) 
9. Signs. See Chapter 17.48 (Signs). 	See Chapter 17.48 (Signs) 
10. Vehicle parking in setback areas. An allowance for vehicles to park within a required setback area. See Section 17.36.100D.5.a.vi. 	See Section 17.36.100D. 
5.a.vi 
 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, §§ 18, 26), 1-21-2015) 
   
17.76.030 - Application. 
An application for an adjustment shall be made to the Community and Economic Development Department on a form provided for that purpose pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). All required information identified on the form shall be provided by the applicant, and any additional information required by the Director in order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed project. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.76.040 (Findings and Decision). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.76.040 - Findings and Decision. 
After an adjustment application is deemed complete, the Director shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny an adjustment application. The Director may approve an adjustment application, with or without conditions, only after the following findings are made: 
A.  The findings necessary to grant a variance (Subsection 17.72.040); or 
B.  A significant public benefit will result (e.g., protection of trees or other significant features, enhanced circulation, or improved landscaping or snow storage); or 
C.  Increased safety of occupants or the public would result. 
D.  For adjustments to setbacks or the distance between structures, a finding shall also be made that adequate snow storage and shedding areas are provided. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), 1-21-2015)  
17.76.050 - Post Approval Procedures. 
The procedures and requirements in Chapter 17.64 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), Chapter 17.104 (Appeals), and Chapter 17.128 (Revocation and Modifications), shall apply following a decision on an adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.80 - Reasonable Accommodation 
 
17.80.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to outline the process for reasonable accommodation requests consistent with federal and state fair housing laws. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.80.020 - Applicability. 
The Director may grant a deviation from the development standards of this Zoning Code to accomplish a reasonable accommodation of the needs of a disabled person. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.80.030 - Application Filing, Processing, and Review. 
A.  Application filing. An application for a reasonable accommodation shall be made on a form provided for that purpose pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). The applicant shall also provide information identifying the individual's disability under the Fair Housing Act and why the accommodation is necessary to make the specific housing available to the individual. No fee shall be required for a reasonable accommodation request. 
B.  Processing and review. After the application is deemed complete, the Director shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the reasonable accommodation request based on the findings in Section 17.80.040. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.80.040 - Findings and Decision. 
The Director may approve a reasonable accommodation request only after the following findings are made: 
A.  That the housing that is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation is for a person or people with a disability; 
B.  That the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available in compliance with federal and state fair housing laws; 
C.  That the request will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the Town; 
D.  The request will not result in a fundamental alteration in this Zoning Code and/or procedures of the Town; and 
E.  The reasonable accommodation is the minimum departure from the requirements of this Zoning Code necessary, consistent with Subsections A and B, above. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.80.050 - Post Approval Procedures. 
The procedures and requirements in Chapter 17.64 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), Chapter 17.104 (Appeals), and Chapter 17.128 (Revocation and Modifications), shall apply following a decision on a reasonable accommodation. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.84 - Administrative Permits 
 
17.84.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This Chapter establishes procedures for the review, and approval or denial of administrative permits, which are required by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) for land use activities that may be desirable in the applicable zoning district and compatible with adjacent land uses, but whose effects on a site and surroundings cannot be determined before being proposed for a particular location. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.84.020 - Applicability. 
An administrative permit is required to authorize proposed land uses and activities identified by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and/or any other section of this Code which requires an administrative permit as being allowable in the applicable zoning district subject to the approval of an administrative permit and to authorize modifications to previously approved administrative permits. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.84.030 - Application Filing, Initial Processing. 
An application for an administrative permit shall be made to the Department on a form provided for that purpose pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). All required information identified on the form shall be provided by the applicant, and any additional information required by the Director in order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed project. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.84.040 (Findings). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.84.040 - Findings. 
The Director may approve an administrative permit application, with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings can be made: 
A.  The proposed use is consistent with all applicable sections of the General Plan and this Title and is consistent with any applicable specific plan or master plan; 
B.  The proposed use and the conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public health and safety nor be materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity; and 
C.  Any other findings as the Director deems necessary to support approval or denial of the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.84.050 - Conditions of Approval. 
A.  Review authority may impose conditions. In approving an administrative permit, the Director may impose specific development conditions relating to the construction (both on- and off-site improvements), establishment, maintenance, location, and operation of the proposed activity, as are found reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will be in compliance with the findings required by Section 17.84.040 (Findings). 
B.  Examples of appropriate conditions. Appropriate conditions may include but not be limited to location of buildings and parking areas; the payment of drainage fees; requirement of special yards, open spaces, buffers, fences and walls; installation and maintenance of landscaping; requirement of street dedications and improvements; regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress; regulation of circulation; regulation of signs; regulation of hours of operation and methods of operation; control of potential nuisances; prescription of development schedules and development standards; and other similar conditions. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.88 - Design Review 
 
17.88.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This Chapter is intended to implement the design review procedural requirements of the Town of Mammoth Lakes Design Guidelines. In addition to the objectives outlined in Chapter 17.04 (Purpose and Effect of Zoning Code) and the Town of Mammoth Lakes Design Guidelines, the design review requirements outlined in this chapter are included to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  Implement the goals, policies and objectives of the General Plan related to community design and character; 
B.  Promote excellence in site planning and design and the harmonious appearance of buildings and sites and ensure the man-made environment is designed to complement, not dominate, the natural environment; 
C.  Regulate the design, coloration, materials, illumination, and landscaping of new construction, and renovations within the town in order to maintain and enhance the image, attractiveness, and environmental qualities of the town as a mountain resort community; 
D.  Ensure that new landscaping provides a visually pleasing setting for structures on the site and within the public right-of way and to prevent indiscriminate destruction of trees and natural vegetation, excessive or unsightly grading, indiscriminate clearing of property, and destruction of natural significant landforms; 
E.  Ensure that the architectural design of structures and their materials and colors are appropriate to the function of the project and the high-elevation climate of Mammoth Lakes and are visually harmonious with surrounding development and natural landforms, trees, and vegetation; and 
F.  Supplement other Town regulations and standards in order to ensure control of aspects of design that are not otherwise addressed. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.88.020 - Applicability. 
Design review is required for new construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alteration, or other projects involving improvements to the exterior of a structure, site, or parking area. 
A.  Exempt Projects. The following are exempt from design review. 
1.  Construction, reconstruction, alterations, improvements, and landscaping for a project developed in compliance with a previous design review approval. 
2.  New one-and two-unit residential structures and second units, except those in the Rural Residential Zone above 8,250 feet in elevation, and except where one developer or builder is constructing residential structures on five or more adjoining lots; 
3.  Additions to residential structures with four units or less and second units (except those in the Rural Residential Zone above 8,250 feet in elevation); 
4.  Additions and alterations to existing buildings and structures (except those in the Rural Residential Zone above 8,250 in elevation) that will not increase the gross floor area of the building by more than 10 percent, will not involve exterior alterations along any street-facing façade, and will match the existing or historic design of the building; 
5.  New construction of an emergency shelter or renovation of an existing building to create an emergency shelter; 
6.  Additions of floor area within an existing building envelope; 
7.  Routine maintenance not resulting in change in color or materials; 
8.  Installation of landscaping under 2,500 square feet where no other project is planned; 
9.  Signs are subject to the design review requirements of Chapter 17.48, Signs; and 
10.  Alterations and improvements required in whole or part to meet federal or State requirements to accommodate persons with disabilities. 
B.  Minor Design Review. Minor design review by the Director or designee is required for the following projects: 
1.  New three and four-unit residential structures; 
2.  New single-family residential units in the Rural Residential Zone above 8,250 feet in elevation that are not located within the Snow Deposition Design Zone. 
3.  As required in applicable specific and master plans; and 
4.  All other projects subject to design review that do not meet the criteria for major design review and which are not exempt. 
C.  Major Design Review. Major design review by the Commission is required for the following projects, unless subject to minor design review or exempt: 
1.  All projects that require a permit for new construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alteration, or other projects that require Commission approval, unless subject to minor design review or exempt. 
2.  New single-family residential units in the Rural Residential Zone above 8,250 feet in elevation located within the Snow Deposition Design Zone. 
3.  New residential structures with five or more units, including those where one developer or builder is constructing residential structures on five or more adjoining lots, 
4.  All projects in the Commercial Zoning Districts which are not exempt or subject to minor design review, and 
5.  As required in applicable specific and master plans. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.88.030 - Application Filing, Processing, and Review. 
A.  Applications. An application for design review shall be made to the Department on a form provided for that purpose pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). All required information identified on the form shall be provided by the applicant, and any additional information required by the Director in order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed project. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.88.060 (Findings, Conditions, and Decision). 
B.  Design Guidelines. Design Guidelines adopted by the Town Council provide recommendations to be used in the design review process. They are intended to promote high-quality and thoughtful site and building design; visually interesting, appropriate, well-crafted and maintained buildings and landscaping; the use of durable high-quality, and natural materials that reflect Mammoth Lakes' character and mountain setting; and attention to the design and execution of building details and amenities in both public and private projects. 
C.  Assignment of Design Review Responsibilities. 
1.  Major Design Review. The Commission shall have design review authority for all projects requiring major design review. 
2.  Minor Design Review. 
a.  The Director or designee shall have design review authority for all projects that require minor design review. 
b.  The Director or designee may refer items directly to the Commission when, in their opinion, the public interest would be better served by having the Commission conduct design review. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.88.040 - Scope of Design Review. 
Design review shall be based on consideration of the requirements of this chapter as they apply to the design of the site plan, structures, lighting, landscaping, and other physical features of a proposed project, including: 
A.  Building proportions, massing, and architectural details; 
B.  Site design, orientation, location, and architectural design of buildings relative to existing structures, outdoor areas, walkways, trails, and streets on or adjacent to the property; topography; trees and vegetation, and other physical features of the natural and built environment; 
C.  Size, location, design, development, and arrangement of circulation, parking, pedestrian ways, and other paved areas; 
D.  Exterior colors and materials as they relate to each other, to the overall appearance of the project, the mountain environment, and to surrounding development; 
E.  Height, materials, colors, and variety of fences, walls, and screen plantings; 
F.  Location and screening of mechanical equipment and refuse storage areas; 
G.  Location, design, and compliance of exterior lighting features; 
H.  Location and type of landscaping including selection, size, and water-efficiency of plant materials, design of hardscape, and irrigation; and 
I.  Size, location, design, color, lighting, and materials of all signs. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.88.050 - Design Review Criteria. 
When conducting design review, the review authority shall evaluate applications to ensure that they satisfy the following criteria, conform to the policies of the General Plan and any applicable specific or master plan, the Town's Design Guidelines, and are consistent with any other policies or guidelines the Town Council may adopt for this purpose. To obtain design review approval, projects must satisfy these criteria to the extent they apply. 
A.  The site design and building design elements including the architectural style, size, design quality, use of building materials, and similar elements, combine together in an attractive and visually cohesive manner that is compatible with and complements the desired architectural and/or aesthetic character of the area and a mountain resort community, encourages increased pedestrian activity, and promotes compatibility among neighboring land uses. 
B.  The design of streetscapes, including street trees, lighting, and pedestrian furniture, is consistent with the character of commercial districts and nearby residential neighborhoods. 
C.  Parking areas are located, designed and developed to foster and implement the planned mobility system for the area; buffer surrounding land uses; minimize visibility; prevent conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians and cyclists; minimize stormwater run-off and the heat-island effect; and achieve a safe, efficient, and harmonious development. 
D.  Down-directed and shielded lighting and lighting fixtures are designed to complement buildings, be of appropriate scale, provide adequate light over walkways and parking areas to create a sense of pedestrian safety, minimize light pollution and trespass, and avoid creating glare. 
E.  Landscaping is designed to conserve water resources, promotes a natural aesthetic, and be compatible with and enhance the architectural character and features of the buildings on site, and help relate the building to the surrounding landscape. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), 1-21-2015)  
17.88.060 - Findings, Conditions, and Decision. 
A.  Findings. A Design Review application may only be approved if the review authority finds that the application is consistent with the purposes of this chapter and with the following: 
1.  The applicable standards and requirements of this Code. 
2.  The General Plan and any applicable specific plan or master plan; 
3.  The Town of Mammoth Lakes Design Guidelines and any applicable design guidelines adopted by the Town Council; 
4.  The applicable design criteria in Section 17.88.050, Design Review Criteria; and 
5.  Any approved tentative map, use permit, variance, or other planning or zoning approval that the project required. 
B.  Conditions of Approval. In granting design review approval, the review authority may impose conditions that are reasonably related to the application and deemed necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter and ensure compliance with the applicable criteria and standards established by this Code. The review authority may not impose conditions that require a reduction in the residential density or the Floor Area Ratio (FAR) otherwise allowed by this Code or a valid use permit or variance. 
C.  Decision. Design review decisions are subject to the appeal provisions of Chapter 17.104 (Appeals). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Article V. - Zoning Code Administration  
Chapter 17.96 - Administrative Responsibility 
 
17.96.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This Chapter describes the authority and responsibilities of Town staff and official bodies in the administration of this Zoning Code, in addition to the Council. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.96.020 - Planning Agency Defined. 
The functions of a Planning Agency shall be performed by the Mammoth Lakes Town Council, Planning and Economic Development Commission, Director, and Community and Economic Development Department in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65100), and the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.96.030 - Planning and Economic Development Commission. 
A.  Appointment and Meetings. Appointments to the Commission and the scheduling and conduct of Commission meetings shall be in compliance with Chapter 2.32 of the Municipal Code. 
B.  Duties and authority. The Commission shall: 
1.  Conduct public hearings and approve or deny applications for Use Permits, Tentative Maps, and Variances; and make recommendations to the Council on Development Agreements, Zoning Code and Zoning Map Amendments, General Plan Amendments, Specific Plans, environmental documents, and other applicable policy or ordinance matters related to the Town's planning process; and 
2.  Perform any other responsibilities assigned by the Council. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.96.040 - Community and Economic Development Director ("Director"). 
A.  Appointment. The Director shall be appointed by the Town Manager. 
B.  Duties and authority. The Director shall: 
1.  Head and manage the functions of the Community and Economic Development Department; 
2.  Have the responsibility and authority to approve or deny applications for Zoning Code Interpretations, Lot Line Adjustments, Sign Permits, Design Review, Administrative Permits; and 
3.  Perform any other responsibilities assigned by the Town Manager and/or Council. The responsibilities of the Director may also be carried out by the Department staff under the supervision of the Director. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.100 - Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels 
 
17.100.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This chapter establishes uniform provisions for the regulation of legal nonconforming structures, land uses, and parcels. Within the zoning districts established by this Zoning Code, there exist structures, land uses, and parcels that were lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted differently under the terms of this Zoning Code or future amendments. It is the intent of this chapter to encourage the continuing improvement of the Town by limiting the extent to which nonconforming structures (other than residential structures) and nonconforming uses may continue to be used, expanded, or replaced, while allowing for reasonable improvements for appearance, maintenance, and safety. Generally, this chapter is intended to be administered in a manner that encourages the eventual elimination of these nonconformities, with the exception of nonconforming residential structures, as it is recognized that the nonconforming conditions of residential structures may not be detrimental to adjacent uses or properties or the community in general, and that provisions are needed to allow for expansion and improvement in these cases. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 16-06, § 4(Exh. A), 9-8-2016)  
17.100.020 - Exceptions. 
A.  A structure that is nonconforming due to the lack of compliance with off-street parking standards shall be permitted to undergo changes in use or other improvements in compliance with this Title, and as provided in Section 17.44.030 (Number of Parking Spaces Required). 
B.  No existing use of land or structure shall be deemed nonconforming because of the lack of screening or landscaping required by various chapters of this Code. 
C.  Nothing in this chapter pertaining to nonconforming uses or structures shall be construed or applied so as to require the termination or removal, or so as to prevent the modernization, replacement, repair, alteration or rebuilding of public services or public utility uses, structures, equipment and facilities provided that there is no change of use or increase in the area utilized by the nonconforming use or structure. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.100.030 - Continuation and Maintenance. 
A.  A use lawfully occupying a structure or a site that does not conform with the use regulations or the site area regulations for the zone in which the use is located shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
B.  A structure lawfully occupying a site that does not conform with the standards for front yard, side yards, rear yard, height, coverage, distances between structures, or other development standards for the zone in which the structure is located, shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming structure and may be used and maintained, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
C.  A parcel that was legally created but that does not conform with the property development standards for the zone in which the parcel is located shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming parcel and may be used, developed, and maintained, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
D.  A nonconforming use, structure, and/or parcel may be continued, transferred, or sold, provided that no such use or structure shall be enlarged or increased, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
E.  Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on a structure or site if either the use and/or the structure itself is nonconforming. 
F.  Nonconforming residential and commercial driveways may continue to be maintained and repaired until such a time that the driveway is reconstructed, fully or partially realigned, modified dimensionally, connected to a new structure, or a change is made to any structure on the property that would require that the structure be brought into compliance with current codes and standards. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.100.040 - Additions and Alterations to Nonconforming Uses and Structures. 
A.  Nonconforming Use in a Conforming Structure. 
1.  No structure, the use of which is nonconforming shall be moved, altered or enlarged unless required by law, or unless the moving, alteration, or enlargement will result in the elimination of the nonconformity, except as permitted in this chapter. 
2.  No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or extended in such a way as to occupy any more of the structure or site or occupy another structure or site which it did not occupy at the time it became a nonconforming use, or in such a way as to displace any conforming use occupying a structure or site. 
B.  Changes to a Nonconforming Structure. Alterations and/or additions may be made to a nonconforming structure as follows: 
1.  Additions to nonconforming residential structures may be made provided that the addition complies with all applicable codes and standards. Additions to nonconforming commercial structures may be made provided that the addition is no more than twenty-five percent of the existing building floor area, excluding garages. Additions to nonconforming commercial structures may be made no more than once every three years. All improvements shall comply with California Building Standards Code requirements. 
2.  No nonconforming structure shall be altered or reconstructed so as to increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the standards for front yard, side yards, rear yard, height of structures, distances between structures, or usable open space prescribed in the regulations for the zone in which the structure is located. No nonconforming structure shall be moved or enlarged unless the new location or enlargement shall conform to the standards for front yard, side yards, rear yard, height of structures, and distances between structures, or usable open space prescribed in the regulations for the zone in which the structure is located. 
3.  Alterations that do not impact the exterior of a building, such as an interior remodel, are permitted to occur in a nonconforming structure without limitation, except as otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
C.  Structures Crossing a Property Line. 
1.  If an owner wishes to relocate a structure that is deemed nonconforming because it crosses a property line so that it is within the property lines, that effort shall be subject to all building and zoning code requirements in place at the time of relocation. 
2.  Construction of a new structure on a site containing a building that crosses a property line, or additions to a nonconforming building that crosses a property line, shall not be permitted unless the nonconformity is eliminated. 
3.  Repairs to, or maintenance of, structures crossing a property line, including interior remodels, are permitted, provided that they comply with all building and zoning code requirements in place at the time of work. 
D.  Seismic Retrofitting and California Building Standards Code Compliance. A nonconforming structure may undergo alterations, reconstruction, or repair to improve seismic safety or to comply with California Building Standards Code requirements, provided that the work is exclusively to comply with applicable earthquake safety standards and the California Building Standards Code, and does not change the structure's footprint or height. The extent of these improvements shall not be limited in scope by the building's existing floor area or other requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 16-06, § 4(Exh. A), 9-8-2016)  
17.100.050 - Restoration of a Damaged Nonconforming Structure. 
A.  Whenever a nonconforming structure or a structure housing a nonconforming use is destroyed to the extent of 50 percent of the replacement value or less, the structure may be restored and the nonconforming use may be resumed, provided that restoration is started within one year and diligently pursued to completion. When the destruction exceeds 50 percent of the replacement value or the structure is voluntarily razed or is required by law to be razed, the structure shall not be restored except in full conformity with the regulations of the zone in which it is located and the nonconforming use shall not be resumed. 
B.  Existing legal residential uses in any zone may be reinstated when the structure in which they were located has been destroyed, provided that the new structure meets the property development standards for the zone in which it is located. 
C.  Nonconforming multi-family structures that are destroyed to the extent of more than 50 percent of the floor area of the structure may be rebuilt subject to approval of a use permit and compliance with California Government Code Section 65852.25. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town may prohibit reconstruction pursuant to Government Code Section 65852.25. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.100.060 - Loss of Nonconforming Status. 
A.  Termination by discontinuance. 
1.  If a nonconforming use of land or structure is discontinued for a continuous period of one year or more all rights to legal nonconforming status shall terminate. 
2.  The Director shall determine discontinuance based on evidence including the removal of equipment, furniture, machinery, structures, or other components of the nonconforming use, disconnected or discontinued utilities, or no business records to document continued operation. The one-year period shall not apply if the Director determines that legitimate and continual efforts to reuse the subject property have been made during the one-year period. 
3.  The Director may grant an administrative permit to allow an extension of the one-year period for a period not to exceed an additional one year if the Director finds that circumstances of a significant or unusual nature prevent or have prevented the timely reestablishment of the use or structure. The applicant shall file an application for the administrative permit for the extension request prior to expiration of the original one-year period. 
4.  Without further action by the Town, further use of the site or structure shall comply with all of the current regulations of the applicable zoning district and all other applicable provisions of this Code. 
B.  Termination by destruction. Nonconforming status shall terminate if a nonconforming structure, or a structure occupied by a nonconforming use, is involuntarily damaged or destroyed, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.100.070 - Nonconforming Parcels. 
A.  Legal building site. A nonconforming parcel that does not comply with the applicable access, lot area, buildable area, width, or depth requirements for the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located shall be considered a legal building site if it meets at least one of the criteria specified by this section. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to produce sufficient evidence to establish the applicability of one or more of the following: 
1.  Approved subdivision. The parcel was created by a recorded subdivision map or a certificate of compliance; 
2.  Individual parcel legally created by deed. The parcel is under one ownership and of record, and was legally created by a recorded deed prior to the effective date of the amendment or adoption of the land use regulation that made the parcel nonconforming; 
3.  Variance or lot line adjustment. The parcel was approved through the variance procedure in compliance with Chapter 17.72 (Variances) or resulted from a lot line adjustment as provided by the Town's Subdivision Ordinance; or 
4.  Partial government acquisition. The parcel was created in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Code, but was made nonconforming when a portion of the parcel was acquired by a governmental entity so that the parcel size is decreased not more than 20 percent and the yard facing any public right-of-way was decreased not more than 50 percent. 
B.  Subdivision or adjustment of a nonconforming parcel. No subdivision or lot line adjustment shall be approved that would increase the nonconformity of an existing parcel. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.100.080 - Nonconforming Due to Lack of Required Permit. 
A.  Conformity of uses requiring a use permit. Any use existing at the time of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code, in any zoning district that allows the use subject to the granting of an administrative permit or a use permit, shall be deemed a conforming use if there is no administrative permit or use permit, but only to the extent that it previously existed, including maintaining the same site area boundaries and hours of operation. Any expansion or change in the intensity of the use requires an administrative permit or a use permit. 
B.  Previous planning permits in effect. Any use in existence by virtue of a use permit issued in compliance with the regulations in effect at the time of application for any land use activity which, under the new regulations is not allowable by use permit, may continue, but only in compliance with the provisions and terms of the original administrative permit or use permit. If the use permit specified a termination date, then the use shall terminate in compliance with the original permit. If a use formerly required an administrative permit or a use permit in a particular zoning district and the use has become an allowed use within that district, the prior permit is deemed rescinded. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.100.090 - Nonconforming Signs. 
Nonconforming signs shall be permitted to be continued and maintained, repaired, altered, or may lose their nonconforming status in compliance with Section 17.48.130 (Nonconforming Signs). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.100.100 - Nuisance Abatement. 
In the event that a nonconforming use or structure is found to constitute a public nuisance, appropriate action shall be taken in compliance with Chapter 8.20 (Nuisances). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.104 - Appeals 
 
17.104.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This Chapter provides procedures for appealing determinations and actions made by the Director or Commission. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.104.020 - Allowable Appeals. 
Determinations and actions that may be appealed, and the authority to act upon an appeal shall be as follows. 
A.  Director decisions. Any decision by the Director including administrative permits may be appealed to the Commission by any aggrieved person. 
B.  Commission decisions. Any decision by the Commission may be appealed to the Council by any aggrieved person. 
C.  Council review/appeal. 
1.  Any member of the Council within fifteen calendar days from the date of the review authority's action may request the opportunity to review/discuss any decision rendered by the Director or Commission. 
2.  The Council may conduct an appeal of any decision by the Director or Commission at the next available Council meeting if a member of the Council has requested the opportunity to review the decision within fifteen calendar days from the date of the review authority's action. A majority vote of the Council is required to initiate the appeal. 
D.  Statute of limitations. Any action challenging a decision of the Council shall be filed with the Superior Court of the County of Mono within thirty days after the decision of the Council. Absent such timely and properly filed action, the decision of the Council shall be final on all matters. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 17-10, § 4(Exh. A), 11-1-2017)  
17.104.030 - Filing and Processing of Appeals. 
A.  Timing and form of appeal. 
1.  Appeals shall be submitted in writing, and filed with the Town Clerk, on a Town application form, within fifteen days from the date of the review authority's action except as allowed by Section 17.104.020C. 
2.  The appeal shall state the pertinent facts of the case and the basis for the appeal. 
3.  Appeals shall be accompanied by the filing fee set by the Council's Fee Resolution. 
B.  Scheduling of hearing and Director's report. When an appeal has been filed, the Director shall schedule the matter for consideration by the appropriate appeal body identified in Section 17.104.020 (Allowable Appeals) within 21 days, or as soon thereafter is practicable, and prepare a report on the matter. If the matter originally required a noticed public hearing, the Town Clerk shall give notice in the same manner followed for the original hearing, in compliance with Chapter 17.124 (Public Hearings), provided that notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property in question (if any), to owners of abutting parcels (if any), and to persons who filed written objections to the original application who requested notice of subsequent proceedings or who received notice of the original proceedings. The notice shall set forth a brief summary of the decision appealed and a brief summary of the nature of the appeal. 
C.  Review by Director. 
1.  The Director shall determine if the appeal was filed within the applicable time limits and shall summarily reject any appeal which was filed beyond the time limits. Further, the Director shall determine if the appeal contains sufficient information as required by Subsection A. (Timing and form of appeal), above. 
2.  If the Director determines that the information in the appeal is incomplete, the Director shall immediately notify the appellant of the insufficiency and allow the appellant an additional seven days in which to correct the deficiency. 
3.  If upon the expiration of any additional time, the Director determines that the statement on appeal is still insufficient, the Director shall summarily reject the appeal. 
D.  Town Attorney's authority to summarily reject appeal. Upon presentation of the Notice of Appeal, together with the required statement on appeal, the Town Attorney may summarily reject the appeal if the Town Attorney finds that the matter being appealed is a requirement of law. 
E.  Action. The Director shall forthwith transit to the Commission or Council copies of the staff report and all papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed was made, stating the factual and legal basis on which the Director or Commission made the determination that is the subject of the appeal. At the hearing, the appeal body may consider any issue involving the matter being appealed, in addition to the specific grounds for the appeal and may continue the hearing from time to time as it deems necessary. 
1.  The appeal body may, by resolution, affirm, affirm in part, or reverse the action, the decision, or determination of the original review authority. 
2.  When reviewing an appeal, the appeal body may: 
a.  Deny the permit or entitlement, even though the appeal only requested relaxation or elimination of one or more of the conditions imposed on the permit or entitlement: or 
b.  Impose additional conditions that may address other issues or concerns than the original subject of the appeal. 
3.  The appellant and other interested parties shall not present new evidence and testimony at the appeal hearing unless the party can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the appeal body, that new information: 
a.  Was not previously available to the party, or 
b.  The party could not have participated in the review process because they could not have known about the review process. 
4.  If new or different evidence is presented on appeal, the Commission or Council, may, but shall not be required to, refer the matter to the original review authority for further consideration. 
5.  Within 21 days following the closing of the public hearing on the appeal, or as soon thereafter as it is practicable, the review authority shall render its decision on the appeal. 
6.  In the event of a tie vote by the review authority on an appeal, the decision being appealed shall stand. 
F.  Refund of appeal fees. Appeal fees may be refunded in only the following situations: 
1.  Upon the conclusion of any appeal, where the Council upholds the appeal and overturns the decision of the review authority, the Council may also authorize the return of all, or a portion, of the appeal fees; or 
2.  Upon the conclusion of any appeal, where the Council denies the appeal but finds that the appellant(s) raised issues of substantial merit, the Council may authorize the return of any portion of the appeal fees deemed just. 
G.  Stay pending appeal. On the date a notice of appeal is properly filed with the Town Clerk, or on the date the Council orders a review of the Commission's action, all proceedings in furtherance of the determination, condition or requirement appealed from or ordered to be reviewed by Council, including the effective date of any permit, shall be stayed until the Commission's or the Council's final determination is made, or until 60 days have elapsed, whichever occurs first. If 60 days elapses without a final Council or Commission determination, the original action shall stand. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.108 - Development Agreements 
Sections: 
 
17.108.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and requirements for the review and approval of development agreements, in compliance with Government Code 65864 et seq., and as these sections may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.108.020 - Application. 
A.  Qualified applicant. Only a qualified applicant may file an application to enter into a development agreement. A qualified applicant is a person who has legal or equitable interest in the real property, as determined in the sole discretion of the Town, which is the subject of the development agreement. An applicant shall also include an authorized agent of the property owner. The Town may require an applicant to submit proof of interest in the real property and of the authority of the agent to act for the applicant. 
B.  Contents of application. 
1.  An application for a development agreement shall be made to the Community and Economic Development Department on a form provided for that purpose pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). All required information identified on the form shall be provided by the applicant. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.108.040 (Findings and Decision). 
2.  All lawfully required documents, information, and materials shall accompany the application. The Director may require an applicant to submit such information and supporting data as is necessary to evaluate and process the application. 
C.  Development plan. An application for a development agreement shall be accompanied by a development plan. A development plan may consist of maps, plans, reports, development and performance standards, schematic drawings, or such other documents deemed necessary by the Director. The development plan shall be sufficiently detailed to illustrate intended or permitted uses and their location on the property, the density or intensity of use, and the maximum size and height of structures as appropriate to evaluate the application request. A development plan may be a specific plan, master plan, tentative map, use permit, design review, or other similar type of development plan. 
D.  Fees. The applicant shall pay the fees and charges established by the Town Council for the filing and processing of a development agreement. Additionally, appropriate fees may be established and collected for periodic reviews conducted by the Town in compliance with State law and Section 17.108.090 (Periodic Review). 
E.  Form of agreement. Each application shall be accompanied by the form of development agreement proposed by the applicant. All documents required, whether the agreement or any attachments and exhibits, shall be suitable for recordation. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.108.030 - Review Process and Public Hearings. 
A.  Pre-application procedure. Prior to submitting an application for a development agreement, the applicant should hold preliminary consultations with the Community and Economic Development Department to provide the applicant information and guidance. 
B.  Town Council notification of application. After a development agreement application has been submitted consistent with 17.108.020, the Director shall provide written notification to Town Council of the application. 
C.  Public hearings. 
1.  Planning and Economic Development Commission's action. The Director, upon finding the application for a development agreement complete, shall set the application, together with recommendations, for a public hearing before the Commission. Following conclusion of a public hearing, the Commission shall make a written recommendation to the Council that it approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. 
2.  Town Council's action. Upon receipt of the Commission's recommendation, the Town Clerk shall set the application and written recommendation of the Commission for a public hearing before Town Council. Council may, but need not, refer matters not previously considered by the Commission during its hearing back to the Commission for report and recommendation. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on matters referred back to it by the Council. Following conclusion of a public hearing, the Council shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. 
3.  Rules governing conduct of hearing. Public hearings shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 17.124 (Public Hearings). Each person interested in the matter shall be given the opportunity to be heard. The applicant has the burden of proof at such hearings. 
4.  Irregularity in proceedings. No action, inaction, or recommendation regarding the proposed development agreement shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect, or omission ("error") as to any matter pertaining to application, finding, hearing, notice, petition, recommendation, record, report, or any matters of procedure unless after an examination of the entire case, including the evidence, the court is of the opinion that the error complained of was prejudicial and that by reason of the error the complaining party sustained and suffered substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. There is no presumption that error is prejudicial or that injury was done if error is shown. 
D.  Approval of a development agreement. If the Council approves or conditionally approves a development agreement, it shall do so by the adoption of an ordinance containing the findings required by Section 17.108.040 and the facts supporting them. 
E.  Referendum. The ordinance is subject to referendum in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65867.5). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.108.040 - Findings and Decision. 
The Commission's written recommendation to Council shall include the Commission's findings and determination whether or not the development agreement meets the required findings listed herein. The Council may approve a development agreement, with or without conditions, only after all of the following findings are made: 
A.  That the agreement is consistent with the goals, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the Town's General Plan and any applicable specific plan; 
B.  That the agreement and accompanying development plan are compatible with the uses authorized in, and the performance and development standards prescribed for, the zone classification in which the subject property is located; 
C.  That the agreement is in conformity with and will promote public convenience, general welfare, and good land use and development practices; 
D.  The development agreement shall be shown to be of greater benefit to the community than development under present zoning; and 
E.  The term or duration of the agreement has a commensurate relationship to the benefit(s) provided. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.108.050 - Content of a Development Agreement. 
A.  Mandatory contents. A development agreement shall contain the mandatory provisions specified in Government Code Section 65865.2 and other required terms, including the following: 
1.  The duration of the agreement. 
2.  The permitted uses of the property. 
3.  The density or intensity of uses. 
4.  The maximum height and size of proposed structures. 
5.  Provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes. 
6.  Provisions requiring annual review pursuant to Government Code 65865.1. 
7.  A general phasing plan. 
B.  Permissive contents. A development agreement may contain the permissive provisions (e.g., conditions, requirements, restrictions, and terms) specified by Government Code Section 65865.2, and any other terms determined to be appropriate and necessary by the Council. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 26), 1-21-2015)  
17.108.060 - Execution and Recordation. 
A.  Effective date. The Town shall not execute any development agreement until, on, or after the date upon which the ordinance approving the agreement, enacted in compliance with this chapter, becomes effective, and until it has been executed by the applicant. 
B.  Mutual consent required. A development agreement may be executed only upon the mutual consent of each party to the agreement. 
C.  Recordation. A development agreement shall be recorded with the County Recorder no later than 10 days after it is executed, in compliance with Government Code Section 65868.5. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.108.070 - Environmental Review. 
The approval or conditional approval of a development agreement in compliance with this chapter shall be deemed a discretionary act for purposes of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.108.080 - Amendments to an Approved Development Agreement. 
A development agreement may be amended or canceled, in whole or in part, by mutual consent of the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest in compliance with Government Code Section 65868. The procedure for proposing and adoption of an amendment to or cancellation of a development agreement is the same as the procedure for entering into a development agreement as specified in this chapter. If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the development agreement as provided in Government Code Section 65868, the Town shall have notice of such action recorded with the County Recorder's Office. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.108.090 - Periodic Review. 
A.  Periodic review. Every development agreement approved and executed in compliance with this chapter shall be subject to periodic review every twelve months or less by the Town during the full term of the agreement. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant, contracting party, or successor in interest to demonstrate compliance in good faith to the terms and conditions of the agreement to the full satisfaction of, and in a manner prescribed by, the Town. 
B.  Initiation of periodic review. The applicant, contracting party, or successor in interest shall initiate annual review by submitting a written statement to the Director describing their good faith substantial compliance with the terms and conditions of the agreement for the prior calendar year. 
C.  Fees. Appropriate fees to cover the Town's cost(s) to conduct the periodic reviews shall be collected from the applicant, contracting party, or successor in interest prior to completion of each periodic review. These fees may be established in the development agreement or by Town Council consistent with Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). 
D.  Determination upon review. The Director shall review materials furnished by the applicant, contracting party, or successor in interest to determine upon the basis of substantial evidence whether or not the property owner has, for the period under review, complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement. 
E.  Procedures upon determination. 
1.  If the Director finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the property owner has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement during the period under review, the review for that period is concluded. The Director shall deliver a report of the determination to the Town Council. 
2.  If the Director finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the property owner has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement during the period under review, the Town may modify or terminate the development agreement in compliance with Government Code Section 65865.1. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.108.100 - Modification or Termination of an Approved Development Agreement. 
If, upon a finding under Subsection 17.108.090E.2, the Town determines to proceed with modification or termination of a development agreement, the Town shall give notice to the property owner of its intention to do so. The procedure for modifying or terminating a development agreement is the same as the procedure for entering into a development agreement as specified in this chapter. If the Town modifies or terminates a development agreement in accordance with this chapter, the Town shall have notice of such action recorded with the County Recorder's Office. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.108.110 - Effect of Development Agreement. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, the rules, regulations, and official policies governing permitted uses of the land, density, design, improvement, and construction standards and specifications, applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement, are the rules, regulations, and official policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement. 
B.  Unless specifically provided for in the development agreement, the agreement does not prevent the Town, in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from applying new rules, regulations, and policies which do not conflict with those rules, regulations, and policies applicable to the property under the development agreement, nor does a development agreement prevent the Town from conditionally approving or denying any subsequent development project application on the basis of existing or new rules, regulations, and policies. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.108.120 - Approved Development Agreements. 
Development agreements approved by the Council shall be on file with the Town Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.112 - General Plan, Zoning Map, and Zoning Code Amendments 
 
17.112.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This Chapter provides procedures for the amendment of the General Plan, the Zoning Map, and this Zoning Code whenever the Council determines public necessity and general welfare require an amendment. 
A.  General Plan amendments may include revisions to goals, policies, actions, land use designations, or text. 
B.  Zoning Map amendments have the effect of rezoning property from one zoning district to another. 
C.  Amendments to this Zoning Code may modify any procedure, provision, requirement, or standard applicable to the development and/or use of property within the town. 
D.  Correction of clerical errors also known as Scrivener's errors shall be completed administratively, under the direction and at the discretion of the Director. Scrivener's errors are minor mistakes that are made inadvertently, and may be readily corrected without objection. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 17-10, § 4(Exh. A), 11-1-2017)  
17.112.020 - Initiation of Amendment. 
An amendment of the General Plan, the Zoning Map, or this Zoning Code may be initiated by: 
A.  Council. A resolution of intention adopted by the Council; 
B.  Commission. A resolution of intention by the Commission; or 
C.  Property owner. An application from the property owner or authorized agent of property for which the amendment is sought. If the property is under more than one ownership, all owners or their authorized agents shall join in filing the application. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.112.030 - Processing, Notice, and Public Hearings. 
A.  Application filing. If the amendment is initiated by the filing of an amendment application from the property owner, the application shall be made to the Department on a form provided for that purpose pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). All required information and any applicable fees identified on the form shall be provided by the applicant, and any additional information required by the Director in order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed project. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.112.060 (Findings). 
B.  Application processing. The Director, upon finding the application for an amendment complete, shall set the application, together with recommendations, for a public hearing before the Commission. The Commission and Council shall each conduct one or more public hearings regarding the amendment. If the proposed amendment is a General Plan amendment, the Director shall make the referrals and engage in the consultations required by Government Code sections 65352 et seq. 
C.  Notice and public hearings. Notice of public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 17.124 (Public Hearings). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.112.040 - Commission Action on Amendment. 
Following conclusion of a public hearing for which notice was provided pursuant to Government Code section 65353 (for a General Plan amendment) or section 65854 (for a Zoning Map or Zoning Code amendment), the Commission shall make a recommendation to the Council whether to approve, approve in modified form, or deny the proposed amendment based on the findings contained in Section 17.112.060 (Findings), and the written recommendation and findings of the Commission shall be forwarded to the Council. The Commission's recommendation regarding a General Plan amendment shall be made with an affirmative vote of a majority of the total membership of the Commission. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.112.050 - Council Action on Amendment. 
A.  Council action. Upon receipt of the Commission recommendation in compliance with Section 17.112.040 (Commission Action on Amendment), the Council shall conduct a public hearing regarding the amendment. Following conclusion of a public hearing, the Council shall approve, approve in modified form, or deny the application based on the findings contained in Section 17.112.060 (Findings). A General Plan amendment shall be implemented by a resolution adopted by an affirmative vote of a majority of the total membership of the Council. 
B.  Referral to Commission. If the Council proposes to adopt substantial modification to the amendment not previously considered by the Commission during its hearing, the proposed modification shall first be referred back to the Commission for its report and recommendation in compliance with Government Code Sections 65356 and 65857. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.112.060 - Findings. 
An amendment to the General Plan, the Zoning Map, or this Zoning Code may be approved only after all of the following findings are made, as applicable to the type of amendment. 
A.  Mandatory findings required for all amendments: 
1.  The proposed amendment is internally consistent with all other provisions of the General Plan and any applicable specific plan or master plan; 
2.  The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the town; and 
3.  The proposed amendment is in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
B.  Additional finding for Zoning Code amendments. The proposed amendment is internally consistent with other applicable provisions of this Zoning Code. 
C.  Additional finding for Zoning Map amendments. The affected site is physically suitable in terms of design, location, shape, size, operating characteristics, and the provision of public and emergency vehicle access and public services and utilities for the requested zoning designation and the proposed or anticipated uses and/or development. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.112.070 - Conditional Rezonings. 
The Council may impose conditions on a Zoning Map amendment where it finds that the conditions are reasonable and necessary to ensure that the Council is able to make the findings identified in Section 17.112.060 (Findings). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.112.080 - General Plan Amendments. 
Consistent with Government Code Section 65358, no mandatory element of the General Plan shall be amended more than four times during any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.116 - Specific Plans 
 
17.116.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures for the preparation, processing, review, adoption, and amendment of specific plans in compliance with Government Code Section 65450 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.116.020 - Applicability. 
A.  When required. When required by the Council, the General Plan, or this Zoning Code to systematically implement the General Plan for any part of the town, a specific plan shall be prepared, processed, approved, and implemented in compliance with this chapter. 
B.  Review authority. An application for a specific plan shall be considered by the Commission, and approved or denied by the Council. 
C.  Effect of specific plan. The regulations provided by an adopted specific plan shall replace those of the applicable zone, and the development standards and design guidelines identified in the specific plan shall take precedence over the general standards contained in this Zoning Code and any Town adopted design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.116.030 - Initiation. 
A specific plan may be initiated by: 
A.  Council. A resolution of intention adopted by the Council; or 
B.  Property owner. An application from the property owner or authorized agent of property for which the specific plan is sought. If the property is under more than one ownership, all owners or their authorized agents shall join in filing the application. For specific plans, the project area may be a combination of adjoining parcels subject to a unified planning concept with the full written concurrence of all applicable property owners. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.116.040 - Specific Plan Filing and Content. 
A.  Application filing. An application for a specific plan shall be made to the Department on a form provided for that purpose pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). The application shall be accompanied by the information identified on the application form for specific plans and Subsection 17.116.040B, below. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.116.060 (Findings and Decision). 
B.  Specific plan content. The applicant shall prepare and submit a draft specific plan for review by the Town that includes detailed information in the form of text and diagrams, organized in compliance with Government Code Section 65451 and the following. 
1.  Proposed land uses. The distribution, location, and extent of land uses proposed within the area covered by the specific plan, including open space areas. 
2.  Infrastructure. The proposed distribution, location, and extent and intensity of major components of public and private circulation/transportation (including vehicular, pedestrian, bicycle, and transit), sewage water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy, water, utilities, and other essential features proposed to be located within the specific plan area and needed to support the proposed land uses. 
3.  Land use and development standards. Standards, criteria, and design guidelines by which development will proceed, and standards for the conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources, where applicable. 
4.  Implementation measures. A program of implementation measures, including regulations, programs, public works projects, and financing measures necessary to carry out the proposed land uses, infrastructure, and land use and development standards and criteria. 
5.  Relationship to the General Plan. A discussion of the relationship of the specific plan to the goals, policies, actions, general land uses, and programs of the General Plan. 
6.  Additional information. The specific plan shall contain any additional information deemed necessary by the Director because of the characteristics of the area to be covered by the plan, applicable policies of the General Plan, or any other issues determined by the Director to be relevant. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.116.050 - Processing and Review. 
A.  General processing. A draft specific plan shall be processed in the same manner as required for general plans by Government Code Sections 65350 et seq., and as provided in this section. 
B.  Director evaluation. The Director, upon finding the application for a specific plan complete and in conformance with this chapter, shall set the application, together with recommendations, for a public hearing before the Commission. 
C.  Public hearings. The Commission and Council shall each conduct one or more public hearings regarding the specific plan. Notice of public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 17.124 (Public Hearings). 
1.  Commission hearing. Following conclusion of a public hearing for which notice was provided pursuant to Government Code section 65353, the Commission shall make a recommendation to the Council whether to approve, approve in modified form, or deny the proposed specific plan based on the findings contained in Section 17.116.060 (Findings and Decision), and the written recommendation and findings of the Commission shall be forwarded to the Council. The Commission's recommendation shall be made with an affirmative vote of a majority of the total membership of the Commission. 
2.  Council hearing. 
a.  Council action. Upon receipt of the Commission recommendation in compliance with Subsection 17.116.050C.1, the Council shall conduct a public hearing regarding the specific plan. Following conclusion of a public hearing, the Council may adopt the specific plan, adopt the plan with modifications, or deny the plan with appropriate findings in compliance with Section 17.116.060 (Findings and Decision). 
b.  Referral to Commission. If the Council proposes to adopt substantial modification to the specific plan not previously considered by the Commission during its hearing, the proposed modification shall first be referred back to the Commission for its report and recommendation in compliance with Government Code Sections 65356. 
D.  Adoption of specific plan. A specific plan shall be adopted by ordinance or by resolution of the Council, in compliance with Government Code Section 65453, only after all of the findings contained in Section 17.116.060 (Findings and Decision) are made. A specific plan shall be adopted by an affirmative vote of a majority of the total membership of the Council. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.116.060 - Findings and Decision. 
The Council may adopt a specific plan, with or without conditions, only after all of the following findings are made: 
A.  That the specific plan is consistent with the General Plan and other adopted goals and policies of the Town; 
B.  That the specific plan is consistent with any applicable airport land use plan as required by Government Code Section 65302.3; and 
C.  That the specific plan is in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.116.070 - Implementation and Amendments. 
A.  Development within specific plan area. After the adoption of a specific plan, subsequent projects to implement the specific plan may be approved or adopted within an area covered by the specific plan only if first found consistent with the specific plan. 
B.  Specific plan fee. The Council may impose a specific plan fee on development permits within the specific plan area, in compliance with Government Code Section 65456. 
C.  Amendments. 
1.  An adopted specific plan may be amended through the same procedure specified by this chapter for the adoption of a specific plan. 
2.  An adopted specific plan may be amended as often as deemed necessary by the Council, in compliance with Government Code Section 65453. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.120 - Master Plans 
 
17.120.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for reviewing master plans that allow for flexibility in the application of Zoning Code standards to proposed development. A master plan is a set of specific development criteria tailored to an individual property or group of properties that constitutes site specific zoning for the subject properties. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.120.020 - Applicability. 
Master plans shall be allowed for property located in the R, PS, OS, or AH zone. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.120.030 - Master Plan Filing and Content. 
A.  Application filing. An application for a master plan shall be made to the Department on a form provided for that purpose pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). All required information identified on the form shall be provided by the applicant, and any additional information required by the Director in order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed project. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.120.060 (Findings and Decision). 
B.  Master plan content. An applicant shall prepare and submit a draft master plan for review by the Town that includes the following detailed information in the form of text and diagrams, organized in compliance with an outline furnished by the Director. 
1.  Proposed land uses. The distribution, location, extent, and density or intensity of land uses proposed within the area covered by the master plan, including open space areas. 
2.  Infrastructure. The proposed distribution, location, extent, and intensity of major components of public and private circulation/transportation (including vehicular, pedestrian, bicycle, and transit), drainage, energy, sewage, solid waste disposal, water, and other essential features proposed to be located within the master plan area and needed to support the proposed land uses. 
3.  Land use and development standards. Standards, criteria, and design guidelines by which development will proceed, and standards for the conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources, where applicable. Standards may include, but are not limited to, building heights, lot coverage, setbacks, and parking requirements. Design guidelines may include, but are not limited to, preliminary building elevations, landscape plans, lighting plans, and signage plans. 
4.  Implementation measures. A program of implementation measures, including regulations, programs, public works projects, and financing measures necessary to carry out the proposed land uses, infrastructure, and development and conservation standards and criteria. 
5.  Topography and grading. A topographic map and conceptual grading plan of the property. 
6.  Housing. Housing plan consistent with Article VI (Affordable & Workforce Housing). 
7.  Phasing. A discussion on the phases of development, if any. 
8.  Additional information. The master plan shall contain any additional information deemed necessary by the Director because of the characteristics of the area to be covered by the plan, applicable policies of the General Plan, or any other issues determined by the Director to be relevant. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.120.040 - Land Uses and Densities. 
The relevant sections of Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) shall be used as a general guideline for land uses and development densities. Land uses and densities may be modified by the master plan if the findings in Section 17.120.060 (Findings and Decision) can be made. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.120.050 - Master Plan Processing. 
A.  Director evaluation. The Director, upon finding the application for a master plan complete and in conformance with this chapter, shall set the application, together with recommendations, for a public hearing before the Commission. 
B.  Public hearings. The Commission and Council shall each conduct one or more public hearings regarding the master plan. Notice of public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 17.124 (Public Hearings). 
1.  Commission hearing. Following conclusion of a public hearing, the Commission shall make a recommendation to the Council whether to approve, approve in modified form, or deny the master plan based on the findings contained in Section 17.120.060 (Findings and Decision), and the written recommendation and findings of the Commission shall be forwarded to the Council. 
2.  Council hearing. 
a.  Council action. Upon receipt of the Commission recommendation in compliance with Subsection 17.120.050B1, the Council shall conduct a public hearing regarding the master plan. Following conclusion of a public hearing, the Council shall approve, approve in modified form, or deny the master plan based on the findings contained in Section 17.120.060 (Findings and Decision). 
b.  Referral to Commission. If the Council proposes to adopt substantial modification to the master plan not previously considered by the Commission during its hearing, the proposed modification shall first be referred back to the Commission for its report and recommendation in compliance with Government Code Section 65857. 
C.  Adoption of master plan. A master plan shall be approved by the adoption of an ordinance of the Council only after all of the findings contained in Section 17.120.060 (Findings and Decision) are made. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.120.060 - Findings and Decision. 
The Council may approve a master plan, with or without conditions, only after all of the following findings are made: 
A.  That the master plan is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan; 
B.  That any exception from the standards and requirements of this Code is warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in the master plan and is desired by Council; 
C.  That the master plan would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the town; 
D.  That the master plan is compatible with the surrounding area; 
E.  That the affected site is physically suitable in terms of design, location, shape, size, operating characteristics, and the provision of public and emergency vehicle access and public services and utilities for the master plan and the proposed or anticipated uses and/or development; and 
F.  That the phasing plan provides a workable, functional, and efficient relationship throughout the development of the master plan. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.120.070 - Amendments. 
A.  General requirements. Major and minor amendments shall be defined in a master plan. If not defined in the master plan, any amendment shall be processed as a major amendment. Amendments to an approved master plan shall be processed as established in the master plan. 
B.  Minor amendment. The Director may administratively approve minor changes, alterations, or amendments to an approved master plan, subject to appeal pursuant to Chapter 17.104 (Appeals), only after all of the following findings are made: 
1.  That the proposed amendment is consistent with the intent of the approved master plan, including the findings contained in Section 17.120.060 (Findings and Decision); 
2.  That the proposed amendment will not increase the density or intensity of development or use within the approved master plan area; 
3.  That the proposed amendment will not adversely impact the environment; 
4.  That the proposed amendment will not be detrimental to the surrounding uses; and 
5.  That the proposed amendment will not significantly increase traffic levels on existing streets and thoroughfares within and surrounding the development. 
C.  If minor amendment findings cannot be made. If the Director determines the above findings for a minor amendment cannot be made, then the request shall be considered a major amendment. 
D.  Major amendment. Major changes, alterations, and amendments shall be approved, modified, or denied by the Council following the process established in Section 17.120.050 (Master Plan Processing). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.124 - Public Hearings 
 
17.124.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This Chapter provides procedures for public hearings before the Commission and Town Council. When a public hearing is required by this Zoning Code, public notice shall be given and the hearing shall be conducted as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.124.020 - Notice of Hearing. 
When a land use permit, entitlement or other matter requires a public hearing, the public shall be provided notice of the hearing(s) in compliance with State law (Government Code Sections 65090 et seq. and 66451.3). 
A.  Contents of notice. Notice of a public hearing shall include: 
1.  The date, time, and place of the hearing and the name of the hearing body; 
2.  A general explanation of the matter to be considered; and a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property that is the subject of the hearing; and 
3.  If a proposed Negative Declaration or final Environmental Impact Report has been prepared for the project in compliance with the Town's CEQA Guidelines, the hearing notice shall include a statement that the hearing body will also consider approval of the proposed Negative Declaration or certification of the final Environmental Impact Report (EIR) and the notice shall be published, posted, mailed, and/or delivered at least the minimum number of days required by the California Environmental Quality Act. 
B.  Method of notice distribution. Notice of a public hearing required for a land use permit, entitlement, plan amendment, zoning amendment, or appeal shall be given as follows, as required by State law (Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091) and in compliance with Subsection A. (Contents of Notice), above: 
1.  Notice shall be published at least once in a local newspaper of general circulation within the Town at least 10 days before the hearing; 
2.  Notice shall be mailed or delivered at least 10 days before the hearing to: 
a.  The owners of the property being considered or the owner's agent, and the applicant; 
b.  All owners of real property as shown on the County's latest equalized assessment roll within 300 feet of the property which is the subject of the hearing; and 
3.  If the number of property owners to whom notice would be mailed is more than 1,000, the Director may choose to provide the alternate notice allowed by State law (Government Code Section 65091(a)(4)). 
4.  In addition to the types of notice required by Subsection B., above, the Director may provide any additional notice with content or using a distribution method as the Director determines is necessary or desirable. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 19), 1-21-2015)  
17.124.030 - Notice of Decision—Planning and Economic Development Commission. 
The Commission may announce and record the decision at the conclusion of a scheduled hearing or defer action and take specified items under advisement and announce and record the decision at a later date. Within 21 days following the closing of the public hearing on a use permit application, the Commission shall act on the application. The decision shall contain applicable findings of the Commission, any conditions of approval and reporting/monitoring requirements deemed necessary to mitigate any impacts and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the Town. Following the hearing, a final resolution and any conditions of approval shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.124.040 - Effective Date of Decision. 
A decision by the Director or Commission is final, and shall become effective on the 16th day after the decision, unless appealed in compliance with Chapter 17.104 (Appeals). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.124.050 - Recommendation by Commission. 
At the conclusion of any public hearing on a proposed amendment to the General Plan, Zoning Map Amendment, Zoning Code Amendment, or a Specific Plan, the Commission shall forward a recommendation, including all required findings, to the Council for final action. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.124.060 - Notice of Decision—Council. 
For applications requiring Council approval, the Council shall announce and record its decision at the conclusion of the public hearing. The decision shall contain the findings of the Council, any conditions of approval and reporting/monitoring requirements deemed necessary to mitigate any impacts and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the Town. Following the hearing, a final resolution and any conditions of approval shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. A decision by the Council is final and shall become effective the next business day after the Council's decision. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.128 - Revocations and Modifications 
 
17.128.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This Chapter provides procedures for securing revocation or modification of previously approved land use permits or entitlements. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.128.020 - Hearings and Notice. 
A.  Hearing required. The appropriate review authority shall hold a public hearing in order to revoke or modify any land use permit or entitlement granted in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Code. 
B.  Mailing of notice. Ten days before the public hearing notice shall be mailed to the applicant and/or owner of the property for which the permit was granted. 
C.  Deemed delivered. Notice shall be deemed delivered two days after being mailed, certified mail postage paid, to the owner as shown on the equalized assessment roll of the County and/or to the project applicant, who is not the owner of the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.128.030 - Review Authority Action. 
A.  Permit revocation/modification. A land use permit or entitlement may be revoked or modified by the review authority (e.g., Commission or Council) that originally approved the permit, if any one of the following findings can be made: 
1.  Circumstances under which the permit or entitlement was granted have been changed by the applicant to a degree that one or more of the findings contained in the original permit can no longer be made in a positive manner and the public health, safety, and welfare require the revocation or modification; 
2.  The permit or entitlement was issued, in whole or in part, on the basis of a misrepresentation or omission of a material statement in the application, or in the applicant's testimony presented during the public hearing, for the permit or entitlement; 
3.  The use or improvement authorized in compliance with the permit has not been exercised or commenced in a timely manner and a time extension is not warranted; 
4.  One or more of the conditions of the permit have not been met or have been violated; 
5.  The use or improvement authorized in compliance with the permit is in violation of any code, law, ordinance, regulation, or statute; 
6.  The use or improvement authorized by the permit has become detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or the manner of their operation constitutes a nuisance; or 
7.  The use and/or on-site structure(s) are nonconforming and: 
a.  Have been discontinued for a period of one year; or 
b.  Have been destroyed or damaged, and the use and/or structure(s) cannot be repaired, rebuilt, or replaced in compliance with Chapter 17.100 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels). 
B.  Variance revocation/modification. A variance may be revoked or modified by the review authority which originally approved the variance, if any one of the following findings can be made, in addition to any one of the findings outlined in Subsection A., above: 
1.  Circumstances have been changed by the applicant to a degree that one or more of the findings contained in the original approval can no longer be made in a positive manner, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the variance; or 
2.  One or more of the conditions of the variance have not been met, or have been violated, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the variance. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.132 - Enforcement 
 
17.132.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter are intended to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Code and any conditions of land use permit or subdivision approval, to promote the Town's planning efforts and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.132.020 - Enforcement Procedures. 
A.  Compliance with Zoning Code Required - All departments, officials, and public employees of the Town which are vested with the authority or duty to issue licenses or permits shall comply with the provisions of this Zoning Code and shall not issue a license or permit for purposes, structures, or uses which would be in conflict with the provisions of this Zoning Code. 
B.  Official Duty to Enforce - It shall be the duty of the Director to enforce the provisions of this Code and any use of land or structures and the addition, alteration, construction, erection, moving, or reconstruction of or to any structure. 
C.  Police Department - During non-office hours, it shall be the responsibility of the Mammoth Lakes Police Department to monitor and enforce the provisions of this Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.132.030 - Violations. 
Any use, structure, or property which is altered, enlarged, erected, established, maintained, moved, or operated contrary to the provisions of this Code or any condition of approval, is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and may be abated by the Town through civil proceedings by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.132.040 - Remedies Are Cumulative. 
All remedies contained in this Code for the handling of violations or enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other applicable provisions of Town, County, or State law. Should a person be found guilty and convicted of a misdemeanor for the violation of any provision of this Code, the conviction shall not prevent the Town from pursuing any other available remedy to correct the violation(s). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.132.050 - Inspection. 
Every applicant seeking a permit or any other action in compliance with this Code shall allow the Town officials handling the application access to any premises or property which is the subject of the application (Government Code Section 65105). If the permit or other action in compliance with this Code is approved, the owner or applicant shall allow appropriate Town officials access to the premises in order to determine continued compliance with the approved permit and/or any conditions of approval imposed on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.132.060 - Recovery of Costs. 
The procedures for the recovery of administrative costs and expenses incurred by the Town for the enforcement of this Code or any condition imposed through this Title, in cases where no permits are required to correct a violation, shall be followed as set forth in Municipal Code Section 8.20 (Nuisances). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Article VI. - Affordable and Workforce Housing  
Chapter 17.136 - Housing[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-03, § 4c(Exh. A), adopted June 3, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 17.136, §§ 17.136.010—17.136.080, and enacted a new Ch. 17.136 as set out herein. The former Ch. 17.136 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, adopted Mar. 19, 2014; and Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, §§ 20, 26), adopted Jan. 21, 2015. 
 
17.136.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.  Encourage the development and availability of housing that is affordable to a broad range of households with varying income levels within the town as mandated by State law, Government Code Section 65580; 
B.  Promote the town's goal to add to, and preserve the existing stock of workforce housing units within the town; 
C.  Mitigate the impacts of market rate residential and non-residential development on the need for workforce housing in the town through the imposition of workforce housing requirements as included in this chapter; and 
D.  Implement the goals, objectives, policies, and programs of the general plan and housing element related to workforce housing. 
(Ord. No. 15-03, § 4c(Exh. A), 6-3-2015)  
17.136.020 - Applicability. 
New development, additions, and conversion of uses from one type to another, that are not exempt pursuant to Section 17.136.100, shall be required to mitigate housing in accordance with the options identified in Sections 17.136.040 through 17.136.080, listed below. 
Mitigation Option 	Code Section 
Housing Impact Mitigation Fees 	17.136.040 
On-Site Provision of Units 	17.136.050 
Off-Site Provision of Units 	17.136.060 
Conveyance of Land 	17.136.070 
Alternate Housing Mitigation Plan 	17.136.080 
 
(Ord. No. 15-03, § 4c(Exh. A), 6-3-2015)  
17.136.030 - Housing mitigation required for incremental new demand and credit. 
A.  Mitigation Required for Incremental New Demand. Where a project would replace existing residential, lodging, or non-residential uses on the project site, the project shall only be required to mitigate the incremental new demand of the proposed project (such as an increase in gross commercial or industrial square footage, the net increase in the number of lodging rooms, or the net increase in the number of market rate housing units). 
B.  Housing Mitigation Credit. 
1.  Credit for existing uses shall be calculated based on the housing impact mitigation fee(s) applicable to the existing use(s) at the time of submittal of a complete building permit application for reconstruction, replacement, or new construction to which some or all of the credit will be applied. 
2.  Credit for the provision of housing mitigation above that required by this chapter shall be determined by the director. 
3.  Under previous housing mitigation requirements, housing credits have been calculated based on full time equivalent employees (FTEEs) and/or employee housing units (EHUs). One FTEE is a full time year round employee. One EHU equals one bedroom and is calculated as fifty eight and one-half percent of an FTEE. FTEE and EHU credits may be applied to mitigation requirements identified herein. 
4.  Unused credits may be sold or transferred to other properties on which a workforce housing obligation is required under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-03, § 4c(Exh. A), 6-3-2015)  
17.136.040 - Housing impact mitigation fees. 
A.  Fee Established. The housing impact mitigation fee ("housing fee") applicable to each use shall be established by resolution of the council, in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 17.136.040.G. 
B.  Director Determination of Category. The director shall determine the appropriate category for the development, and shall calculate the amount of the housing fee based on the adopted fee schedule, based on the provisions herein. 
C.  Housing Fee Calculations. Housing fees shall be calculated as follows: 
1.  New residential developments: 
Housing fee = (number of new units) × (applicable housing fee for new use) 
2.  New lodging developments: 
Housing fee = (number of new rooms) × (applicable housing fee for new use) 
3.  Non-residential developments that include new construction or addition to existing non-residential space: 
Housing fee = (gross square feet of new non-residential space) × (applicable fee by type of use) 
4.  Conversion of one non-residential use, without addition of new space, to another non-residential use: 
Housing fee = [(gross square feet) × (applicable housing fee for new use)] - [(gross square feet) × (applicable housing fee for prior use)] 
5.  Conversion from a residential use to a non-residential use: 
Housing fee = [(gross square feet of new non-residential use) × (applicable housing fee)] - [(number of prior residential units) × (applicable housing fee)] 
6.  Conversion from a lodging use to a non-residential use: 
Housing fee = [(gross square feet of new non-residential use) × (applicable housing fee)] - [(number of prior lodging rooms) × (applicable housing fee)] 
D.  Individualized Use Determination for Housing Fees. The land use category for a development shall be determined by the Director based on an individualized determination only if: 
1.  The adopted fee schedule so specifies; or 
2.  The director determines that insufficient generalized information is available to permit a determination that the use falls within one of the specified use categories. 
3.  Any application for a non-residential project where an individualized fee determination is required pursuant to this Section shall be accompanied by information sufficient to enable the director to make a determination of employee generation or density. The determination of employee generation or density shall be based on: data concerning anticipated employee generation or density for the project submitted by the applicant; employment surveys or other research on similar uses submitted by the applicant or independently researched by the director; or any other data or information the director determines relevant. Based on the evidence submitted, the Director shall determine the most similar land use category, or shall establish a mixed fee, as appropriate. 
E.  Appeal. An applicant may appeal the director's fee determination to the commission according to provisions of Chapter 17.104 (Appeals) of the Municipal Code. 
F.  Refund or Rebate of Housing Fees Based on Conversion of Use. No refund or rebate of housing fees previously paid shall be made in the case of conversion from one use with a higher housing fee to one with a lesser housing fee, or conversion from a non-exempt to an exempt use. 
G.  Housing Fees Established. 
1.  Established by Council Resolution. All housing fees shall be established by resolution of the town council. 
2.  Methodology. Housing fees shall not exceed the cost of mitigating the impact of market-rate residential and non-residential projects on the need for workforce housing in the town, based on an approved nexus study. Housing fees shall be established per unit for for-sale transient and non-transient residential uses; per room for lodging uses; and per gross square foot for non-residential uses (office, retail, restaurant, and industrial). 
3.  Review and Update. The town council shall periodically review the housing fees for various land uses including residential, lodging and non-residential developments and adjust the fees by resolution. At a minimum the housing fees shall be reviewed and, if appropriate, revised at the time of each Housing Element update. The town manager shall prepare a recommendation to the council for such fee revision. 
4.  Use of Housing Fees. Fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be placed in a separate fund of the town and shall be used only for the purposes of planning for, administering, subsidizing, or developing workforce housing within the town limits. The council may set specific direction, consistent with this Subsection, for use of these funds through the council resolution establishing the fees. 
(Ord. No. 15-03, § 4c(Exh. A), 6-3-2015)  
17.136.050 - On-site provision of units. 
A.  Applicable to Residential Developments. Transient and non-transient residential ownership developments including condominiums, fractional ownership, residential ownership components of mixed-use projects, and single family or other subdivisions may propose to provide on-site unit(s) to satisfy the housing mitigation requirement for the development. The cost to the developer of such on-site unit(s) shall not be required to exceed the amount of the applicable housing fee pursuant to Section 17.136.040, and calculated as outlined in Subsection 17.136.050.B.5, below. 
B.  On-Site Unit Requirements. The on-site unit(s) required to satisfy housing mitigation for a particular residential ownership development shall comply with the following: 
1.  The affordability level(s) of the unit(s) (stated as a proportion of Area Median Income (AMI)) shall comply with those established by council resolution, which shall be periodically reviewed and updated. 
2.  Such units shall be for-sale units, unless the builder/developer chooses the rental alternative specified in Section 17.136.090 of this chapter. 
3.  The proposed on-site units shall meet or exceed the livability and design standards described in Section 17.136.120 unless a waiver or modification to those standards has been approved by the town. 
4.  If the total cost to the developer to mitigate on-site would result in a fraction of a dwelling unit, the proportionate share of the housing fee described in Section 17.136.040 shall be paid for the fraction. 
5.  If the total cost to the developer to mitigate on-site exceeds the amount of the applicable housing fee pursuant to Section 17.136.040, the developer shall be assigned housing mitigation credit for the additional cost consistent with Section 17.136.030.B. and according to the following: 
Total cost to developer (for-sale unit) = Total cost of construction of on-site unit(s) less unit(s) sales price(s) at target AMI level(s). 
Total cost to developer (rental unit) = Total cost of construction of on-site unit(s) less net present value(s) of rents at target AMI level(s) over thirty years based on a documented cap rate. 
Total cost of construction includes land cost, direct costs (e.g., labor and materials), indirect or "soft" costs (e.g., architecture, entitlement, marketing, etc.) specifically associated with the on-site mitigation unit(s). 
The calculation of total cost shall include only those costs for meeting Workforce Housing Amenity and Design Standards. The developer shall provide a pro-forma document of those costs. 
C.  Application Requirements. If on-site mitigation housing is proposed, the applicant shall provide the following information for town review, prior to project approval: 
1.  Identification of the location within the project of the mitigation unit(s). 
2.  A description and floor plan of the proposed unit(s) including habitable square footage, number of bedrooms, living areas, and proposed resident amenities. Such information shall be provided in sufficient detail so as to permit an evaluation of the units' conformance with the livability and design criteria set forth in Section 17.136.120. 
3.  The proposed timeframe for development of the mitigation unit(s), including number of units to be provided within each phase of multi-phase projects. 
4.  The proposed sales price, or rental price if applicable (refer to Section 17.136.090), and calculation method or basis for establishing such price). 
5.  Documentation demonstrating the cost to the developer of the provision of the on-site unit(s) through a standard pro forma statement. 
D.  Calculation of Project Density. On-site housing units provided pursuant to this Section shall not count towards the calculation of total project density (i.e., rooms per acre or units per acre) if all of the following conditions apply: 
1.  The project fully satisfies its housing mitigation requirements on-site by providing on-site housing units consistent with the target AMI established by council resolution; 
2.  The project is located in the Downtown, Old Mammoth Road, Mixed Lodging/Residential, or Residential Multi-Family 2 zones, or in an area subject to a specific plan or master plan that permits such an exclusion; 
3.  The applicable floor area ratio (FAR) limit is not exceeded; 
4.  The project has not applied for or received a state housing density bonus pursuant to Chapter 17.140; and 
5.  Findings can be made in conjunction with project approval that the total project density or intensity, considering all uses, would meet all applicable design and development standards of the Municipal Code, would not result in significant and unavoidable environmental impacts, and would be compatible with surrounding uses. 
In all other cases, total project density, inclusive of provided on-site housing units, shall not exceed the maximum density for the zone in which the project is located, except as permitted by the provisions of Chapter 17.140 (Affordable Housing Density Bonuses and Incentives). 
Pursuant to General Plan Policy L.2.D and Housing Element Action H.1.C.1, for housing development projects where all units are deed restricted for workforce housing, a density bonus may be granted in addition to any State housing density bonus pursuant to Chapter 17.140, up to a combined bonus of twice the density identified for the designation in which the project is located. The findings identified in subsection D.4, above, shall be made by the review authority prior to granting a density bonus pursuant to this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 15-03, § 4c(Exh. A), 6-3-2015)  
17.136.060 - Off-site provision of units. 
A.  Off-Site Housing. Off-site housing units may be proposed within the town limits to satisfy the housing mitigation requirement for the development. Off-site housing units may include any combination of new dwelling units, new dwelling units created in existing structures, or acquisition and conversion of existing market-rate to below market rate (BMR) units. The cost to the developer of such off-site unit(s), including acquisition and rehabilitation, shall not be required to exceed the amount of the applicable housing fee pursuant to Section 17.136.040, and calculated as outlined in Subsection 17.136.060.B.6, below. 
B.  Off-Site Unit Requirements. The off-site unit(s) required to satisfy housing mitigation for a particular development shall comply with the following: 
1.  Units that are currently serving as long-term (i.e., non-transient) rental units, may only serve to satisfy housing mitigation requirements if all applicable relocation law provisions are adhered to. 
2.  The affordability level(s) of the unit(s) (stated as a proportion of area median income (AMI)) shall comply with those established by council resolution, which shall be periodically reviewed and updated. 
3.  The proposed off-site units shall meet or exceed the livability and design standards described in Section 17.136.120 to the extent feasible, unless a waiver or modification to those standards has been approved by the town. 
4.  If the total cost to the developer to mitigate off-site would result in a fraction of a dwelling unit, the proportionate share of the housing fee described in Section 17.136.040 shall be paid for the fraction. 
6.  If the total cost to the developer to mitigate off-site exceeds the amount of the applicable housing fee pursuant to Section 17.136.040, the developer shall be assigned housing mitigation credit for the additional cost consistent with Section 17.136.030.B. and according to the following: 
Construction of New Off-Site Units 
Total cost to developer (for-sale unit) = Total cost of construction of off-site unit(s) less unit(s) sales price(s) at target AMI level(s). 
Total cost to developer (rental unit) = Total cost of construction of off-site unit(s) less net present value(s) of rents at target AMI level(s) over thirty years based on a documented cap rate. 
Total cost of construction includes land cost, direct costs (e.g., labor and materials), indirect or "soft" costs (e.g., architecture, entitlement, marketing, etc.) specifically associated with the off-site mitigation unit(s). 
The calculation of total cost shall include only those costs for meeting Workforce Housing Amenity and Design Standards. The developer shall provide a pro-forma document of those costs. 
Acquisition and Rehabilitation of Existing Off-Site Units 
Total cost to developer (existing for-sale unit) = Total cost of acquisition and rehabilitation of off-site unit(s) less unit(s) sales price(s) at target AMI level(s) 
Total cost to developer (existing rental unit) = Total cost of acquisition and rehabilitation of off-site unit(s) less rental unit(s) net present value(s) of rents at target AMI level(s) over thirty years based on a documented cap rate. 
Total cost of acquisition and rehabilitation includes purchase price, direct costs (e.g., labor and materials), indirect or "soft" costs (e.g., architecture, permits, marketing, etc.) specifically associated with the off-site mitigation unit(s). 
5.  If the off-site housing units will not be constructed or otherwise secured concurrently with the market-rate units, the builder shall propose the security to be provided to the town to ensure the timely construction or acquisition of said units, including evidence of ownership, control or other legally-binding commitment to required sites, and evidence that funding has been secured for the off-site units. Such security shall be provided prior to issuance of any certificates of occupancy for the market-rate units. 
C.  Application Requirements. If off-site mitigation housing is proposed, the applicant shall provide the following information for town review, prior to project approval: 
1.  Identification of the location(s) of the mitigation unit(s). 
2.  A description and floor plan of the proposed unit(s) including habitable square footage, number of bedrooms, living areas, and proposed resident amenities. Such information shall be provided in sufficient detail so as to permit an evaluation of the units' conformance with the livability and design criteria set forth in Section 17.136.120. 
3.  The proposed timeframe for development or acquisition and rehabilitation of the mitigation unit(s). 
4.  The proposed sales price or rental price (if applicable refer to Section 17.136.090), and calculation method or basis for establishing such price. 
5.  Documentation demonstrating the cost to the developer of the provision of the off-site unit(s) through a standard pro forma statement. 
D.  Deed Restricting Existing Market-Rate Ownership Unit(s) within the Town. As a condition of project approval, when the deed restriction of existing market-rate unit(s) is proposed, the applicant must describe the specific unit(s) to be deed restricted. Applicants must demonstrate: 
1.  The long term affordability of the proposed unit(s) is adequately protected, considering issues including but not limited to long term maintenance and homeowner's assessments. 
2.  The targeted income level(s) of the deed restricted units. 
3.  If under the jurisdiction of a homeowner's association, that the project's governing documents, if any, do not prohibit the deed restrictions. 
4.  Provisions to ensure that any unit(s) so restricted meets long term standards for maintenance and affordability. 
The town may request additional information about the proposed unit(s) as reasonable to make such a determination. 
(Ord. No. 15-03, § 4c(Exh. A), 6-3-2015)  
17.136.070 - Conveyance of land. 
A.  Criteria for Conveyance of Land. The dedication of land may be proposed to satisfy the housing mitigation requirement, if it can be determined by the town that all of the following criteria have been met: 
1.  Marketable title to the site is transferred to the town, or an affordable housing developer or non-profit approved by the town, no later than the approval of a final map or issuance of first building permit, pursuant to an agreement between the market-rate project developer and the town, and such agreement is in the best interest of the town. 
2.  The site has general plan and zoning designations that authorize residential uses. 
3.  The site is suitable for development of workforce units in terms of configuration, physical characteristics, location, access, adjacent uses, and other relevant planning and development criteria including, but not limited to, factors such as the cost of construction or development arising from the nature, condition, or location of the site. 
4.  Infrastructure to serve the dedicated site, including but not limited to streets and public utilities, must be available at the property line, or will be made available prior to issuance of certification of occupancy. 
5.  Environmental review of the proposed site has been completed to allow full disclosure for the conveyance of the proposed site, including analysis of the site for the presence of hazardous materials and geological review for the presence of geologic hazards and that such hazards are or will be mitigated to the satisfaction of the town prior to acceptance of the site by the town. 
6.  The value of the site upon the date of conveyance is equal to or greater than the applicable housing fee for the market-rate development. Fair market value shall be determined preliminarily at the time the market-rate development is submitted to the town for review. Final determination of fair market value shall be made by a licensed California appraiser prior to building permit issuance and shall be net of any real estate commission for the conveyance of the land. 
7.  If the value of the site upon the date of conveyance exceeds the amount of the applicable housing fee pursuant to Section 17.136.040, the developer shall be assigned housing mitigation credit for the different in the value of the site upon conveyance and the applicable housing fee, consistent with Section 17.136.030.B. 
B.  Disposition of Land by the Town. The town shall not be required to construct BMR units on the site dedicated to the town, but may sell, transfer, lease, or otherwise dispose of the dedicated site in order to facilitate the construction of those units and only when a clearly demonstrable greater housing benefit would be achieved as determined by council. Any funds collected as a result of sale, transfer, lease, or other disposition of sites dedicated to the town shall be deposited into the town's Housing Mitigation Fund and the funds and interest accrued shall remain in the fund and shall be used pursuant to Subsection 17.136.040.G.4. 
C.  Conveyance of Development-Ready Lots within the Project Site. The builder or developer may dedicate development-ready lots within the project site in compliance with the provisions of Section 17.136.050. All such conveyed lots shall be part of an approved final subdivision map and have completed utility connections and roadway improvements at the time of conveyance so as to be development ready. Such conveyance shall be subject to the criteria in Section 17.136.070.A. 
(Ord. No. 15-03, § 4c(Exh. A), 6-3-2015)  
17.136.080 - Alternate housing mitigation plan. 
Projects that are required to mitigate housing and propose to utilize an alternative method of mitigation not identified herein, may propose an alternate housing mitigation plan (AHMP) subject to approval by the town, based on the following provisions: 
A.  Application. An AHMP shall be submitted at time of the application for first approval associated with the project. The application shall include: 
1.  A calculation of the housing mitigation requirements generated by the project, as defined herein. 
2.  A description of the proposal by which the housing mitigation requirement is to be satisfied. 
3.  An analysis demonstrating that the AHMP provides housing mitigation at a similar value or cost, number and type of housing units, and level of affordability as other methods outlined in Sections 17.136.040 through 17.136.070. 
4.  A description of how the AHMP is in conformance with the town's approved housing strategy. 
5.  Any other information determined relevant to the application by the director. 
B.  Early Consultation. Prior to submitting an application for an AHMP, the applicant should hold preliminary consultations with the director to provide the applicant information and guidance. 
C.  Approval. The review authority may approve, conditionally approve, or reject any alternative proposed by a builder/developer as part of an AHMP. Approval or conditional approval shall be based on the conformance to this chapter and applicable council resolutions, including the resolution establishing the target AMI. 
(Ord. No. 15-03, § 4c(Exh. A), 6-3-2015)  
17.136.090 - Residential projects: Rental permitted if consistent with Costa-Hawkins Act. 
A.  Rental Housing Alternative. As an alternative to providing for-sale mitigation units on-site pursuant to Section 17.136.050, an applicant may propose to provide some or all of the mitigation units as BMR rental units restricted to occupancy by households at the target proportion of AMI. The target AMI shall be established by council resolution. To ensure compliance with the Costa-Hawkins Act (Chapter 2.7 of Title 5 of Part 4 of Division 3 of the Civil Code), the town may only approve such a proposal if the applicant agrees in a rent regulatory agreement with the Town to limit rents in consideration for a direct financial contribution or a form of assistance specified in Section 65915 of the Government Code (State Density Bonus Law). 
B.  Rental Regulatory Agreement Provisions. The rent regulatory agreement with the town shall include provisions for sale of workforce units, including compliance with Section 17.52.110, Condominium Conversions, and relocation benefits for tenants of the workforce units if the owner of the residential project later determines to offer any workforce units in the residential project for sale. If dwelling units in the residential project are later sold at market rate, the applicant shall pay the specified housing fee(s) described in Section 17.136.040, as applicable or other mitigation consistent with this chapter. If dwelling units are later sold at BMR, continued affordability of such units shall be assured through deed restrictions or other document acceptable to the director, and include all other relevant requirements as noted in Section 17.136.130. 
(Ord. No. 15-03, § 4c(Exh. A), 6-3-2015)  
17.136.100 - Exemptions from housing mitigation requirements. 
The following development types are exempt from the housing mitigation requirements set forth in this chapter: 
A.  Any non-residential development where it can be determined, by the Director, that the project would not contribute new demand for employment or housing within the community (e.g., replacement of an existing use or facility or addition of non-habitable square footage such as storage) or would generate no more than one total new employee. 
B.  Additions to single family homes and multi-family units in any zone. 
C.  Multi-family projects of four or fewer units in the Residential Multi-Family 1 Zone, where the average habitable area per unit would not exceed one thousand three hundred square feet. 
D.  Live-work units. 
E.  Legally-permitted secondary residential units. 
F.  Non-transient market-rate rental apartments. 
G.  Rental or for-sale units that are deed restricted to workforce housing in any zone. 
H.  Any development operated by a non-profit or social services organization to provide food storage, meal service, and/or temporary shelter to the homeless. 
I.  Residential care and assisted living facilities. 
J.  Subdivision of property is exempt. Applicable housing fees shall be assessed at time of building permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 15-03, § 4c(Exh. A), 6-3-2015)  
17.136.110 - Time performance required. 
A.  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any market-rate unit or development subject to the requirements of this chapter until the permittee has: 
1.  Complied with housing mitigation requirements specified in Sections 17.136.040 to 17.136.070; 
2.  Received certification from the director that the permittee has met, or made arrangements satisfactory to the town to meet, an alternative requirement as specified in Section 17.136.080; or 
3.  Received director approval to modify the timing requirements to accommodate phasing schedules, model variations, or other appropriate factors. At the discretion of the director, a form of security (e.g., surety bond, cash-equivalent security, legally-binding commitment, or other form approved by the director) may be required to approve a modification of the timing requirements. 
B.  No final inspection for occupancy for any market-rate unit in a for-sale project shall be completed until the permittee has complied with Section 17.136.110.A. 
(Ord. No. 15-03, § 4c(Exh. A), 6-3-2015)  
17.136.120 - Livability standards. 
The following livability standards shall apply to all housing mitigation units developed pursuant to the requirements of the Municipal Code. The intent of these requirements is to ensure that developers of housing mitigation units build units that meet minimum standards of square footage and amenities necessary for households living and working in Mammoth Lakes. 
A.  Distribution of Units. Housing mitigation units shall be distributed throughout a project to the extent feasible, and, where units at multiple levels of affordability are proposed, such units shall also be distributed both throughout the project and in relationship to one another to the extent feasible. 
B.  Size of Units. Housing mitigation units shall meet minimum size requirements for square footage and number of rooms. It is the town's desire to achieve comparability of average size and number of rooms of housing mitigation units and market-rate units to the extent feasible. 
C.  Minimum Square Footage. Housing mitigation units shall meet the following minimum square footage requirements, exclusive of garages, decks and balconies, as follows: 
1.  A studio unit shall be no less than four hundred fifty square feet. 
2.  A one bedroom unit shall be no less than six hundred fifty square feet. 
3.  A two bedroom unit shall be no less than nine hundred square feet. 
4.  A three bedroom unit shall be no less than one thousand one hundred fifty square feet. 
5.  A four bedroom unit shall be no less than one thousand three hundred fifty square feet. 
D.  Amenities and Design Standards. Housing mitigation units shall meet minimum amenity and design standards adopted by council resolution. These standards may be revised, as needed, to meet changing workforce housing needs and housing development practices and technologies. The amenities and design standards shall address minimum requirements for: 
1.  Kitchen, bathroom, laundry, and other appliances and fixtures, including appliance and fixture energy and water efficiency standards; 
2.  Minimum kitchen cabinet, closet, and other storage space; 
3.  Dining area; 
4.  Number and dimensions of bedrooms; 
5.  Number of bathrooms, bathroom fixtures, and amenities; 
6.  Sound insulation and other noise attenuation; 
7.  Quality and external appearance of construction materials and finishes; 
8.  Comparability of project amenities for occupants of housing mitigation units relative to market-rate units (except as specified in Chapter 17.140); and 
9.  Convenient access to private or common outdoor space that is provided in conformance with Section 17.52.210 (Multi-Family Residential Projects). 
E.  Request for Waiver or Modification of Livability Standards. 
1.  A developer may submit a request for a waiver or modification of one or more of the livability standards based on site- or project-specific conditions that would make strict compliance with that standard infeasible or impractical. Specifics regarding the allowable waivers and deviations from standards shall be described in the council resolution for amenity and design standards identified in Subsection 17.136.120.D. Agreement to any such concession shall be made at the discretion of the review authority. 
2.  In the case of off-site units provided through acquisition and rehabilitation of existing unit(s), particularly when such units are located within an existing larger development of market-rate units, strict adherence to standards for interior room size and configuration, noise insulation, number of bathrooms, and common areas used by all residents of the project shall only be required to the extent feasible based on the existing characteristics and location of the unit being acquired. Such a determination shall be made by the director. 
(Ord. No. 15-03, § 4c(Exh. A), 6-3-2015)  
17.136.130 - Eligibility, continued affordability. 
A.  Eligibility for Below Market Rate Units (Owner-occupied and Rental Units). 
1.  No household shall be permitted to occupy a BMR unit, or to purchase a BMR unit for owner occupancy, unless the town or its designee has approved the household's eligibility. If the town or its designee maintains a list of eligible households, households selected to occupy such units shall be first selected from that list to the extent provided in the workforce housing agreement, rent regulatory agreement, or resale restrictions. 
2.  Any household which occupies a rental BMR unit or purchases a BMR unit shall occupy that unit as its principal residence and shall not lease or sublease to a different party, unless allowed in special circumstances as documented in the deed restriction. 
B.  Continued Affordability Requirements (Owner-occupied and Rental Units). Prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy for BMR units provided in accordance with this chapter, resale restrictions, deeds of trust, rent regulatory agreements, and/or other documents, as appropriate, all of which must be acceptable to the director and town attorney and consistent with the requirements of this chapter, shall be recorded against parcels or units having such BMR units and shall ensure that each BMR unit remains affordable to the same income level for a minimum of fifty-five years for rental units and a minimum of sixty years for ownership unit years. At a minimum agreements provided in accordance with this section shall provide: 
1.  A provision to provide the town or its qualified designee the continuing right-of-first-refusal to purchase or lease any or all of the designated dwelling units at the appraised value of the unit or the BMR value, whichever is less, subject to the resale restriction; 
2.  A covenant stating that the developer or successors-in-interest shall not assign, lease, rent, sell, sublet, or otherwise transfer any interests for the designated units without the written approval of the town or its designee; 
3.  That the town or its designee shall have the authority to enter into other agreements with the developer, or purchasers of the designated dwelling units, to ensure that the required dwelling units are continuously occupied by eligible households for the agreed to affordability period; 
4.  Provisions, in a form satisfactory to the town, for the enforcement of owner or developer compliance. Any default or failure to comply may result in foreclosure, specific performance, or withdrawal of the certificate of occupancy; 
5.  That in any action taken to enforce compliance with the deed restrictions, the town attorney shall, if compliance is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction, take all action that may be allowed by law to recover all of the town's costs of action including legal services; and 
6.  That compliance with the agreement will be monitored and enforced in compliance with the measures included in the agreement. 
C.  Initial and Continued Affordability: Owner-occupied Units. In addition to the minimum requirements set forth in Subsection B, the developer shall agree to the following measures to assure the initial and on-going affordability of required BMR units: 
1.  Initial Sales Price for Below Market Rate Units. The initial sales price of a for-sale BMR unit shall be set by the town or its designee at the time a building permit is issued for the unit, so that the eligible household will pay an affordable ownership cost. The initial sales price shall be based on the developer's estimate of homeowners association dues, if any, the town's assumptions for interest rates and other factors, and the methodology or formula for calculating sales prices contained in the council resolution. The town shall provide the developer with an estimate of the initial sales price for the BMR units at an earlier date if so requested by the developer in writing. After the building permit is issued, the initial sales price may be adjusted by the town due to changes in market factors upon written request by the developer no less than ninety days prior to marketing of the BMR units. 
2.  Resale Restrictions. Documents to assure continued affordability shall be recorded against the property in accordance with the provisions of Subsections A and B, above, and the following concerning resale restrictions: 
a.  Terms and conditions concerning the resale of the units shall be specified as necessary to ensure their continuing affordability. Such requirements may include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Limits on resale price, based on an appropriate calculation method. 
ii.  Provisions offering units for resale to the town or its designee, and/or which limit resale to households determined to be eligible for workforce units by the town in compliance with this section. 
iii.  Monitoring requirements for resale of units, including required notice of intent to sell in a timely manner before the unit is intended to be marketed. 
b.  The town reserves the right to modify or waive recorded resale restrictions at the time of resale, as warranted, based on residential real estate market conditions or economic hardship on the part of the BMR homeowner. A BMR homeowner may request a modification or waiver of resale restrictions by completing a modification/waiver request form provided by the town. 
D.  Initial and Continued Affordability: Rental Units. 
1.  Initial Rents for Below Market Rate Units. The initial rent of BMR units shall be set by the town or its designee at least thirty days prior to the marketing of the BMR unit, so that the eligible households will pay an affordable rent in accordance with the established affordability level. The initial rent shall be based on the town's assumptions for utility costs and the methodology or formula for calculating rents contained in the council resolution. The town shall provide the developer with an estimate of the initial rent for the BMR units at an earlier date upon written request. 
2.  Rent Regulatory Agreement. A rent regulatory agreement acceptable to the Town shall be recorded against the residential development prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. Such an agreement shall reflect the limitations on rents required by this chapter, the provisions of Subsection A, above, and the minimum requirements outlined below: 
a.  Nondiscrimination. When selecting tenants, the owners of BMR units shall follow all fair-housing laws, rules, regulations and guidelines. The owner shall apply the same rental terms and conditions to tenants of BMR units as are applied to all other tenants, except as required to comply with this chapter (for example, rent levels and income requirements) or with other applicable government subsidy programs. 
b.  Move-in Costs. Total deposits, including security deposits, required of households occupying a BMR unit shall be limited as mandated by state law applicable at the time of leasing or renting. 
c.  Reporting Requirements. 
i.  The owner (or their designated agent) shall be required to submit an annual report summarizing the occupancy of each BMR unit for the year, demonstrating the continuing eligibility of each tenant, and the rent charged for each BMR unit. The town or its designee may require additional information to confirm household income and rents charged for the unit if it determines necessary. 
ii.  The town or its designee shall maintain the right to periodically audit the information supplied to the town for the annual report if deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
d.  The owners of any BMR unit shall agree to cooperate with any audit or reporting requirements conducted by the town or its designee, State agencies, federal agencies, or their designees. 
e.  Provisions concerning changes in tenant income, where, after moving into a unit a tenant's household income would exceed the specified limit for that unit. It is anticipated that these provisions would comply with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development's requirements for annual income recertification. 
(Ord. No. 15-03, § 4c(Exh. A), 6-3-2015)  
Chapter 17.140 - Affordable Housing Density Bonuses and Incentives 
 
17.140.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
As required by State law, this chapter offers density bonuses and incentives or concessions for the development of housing that is affordable to the types of households and qualifying residents identified in Section 17.140.020 (Eligibility for Bonus, Incentives, or Concessions), below. This Chapter is intended to implement the requirements of Government Code Section 65915 et seq., or as may be amended, and the Housing Element of the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.140.020 - Eligibility for State Density Bonus, Incentives, or Concessions. 
In order to be eligible for a State housing density bonus or other incentives or concessions as provided by this chapter, a proposed housing development shall comply with the following requirements, and satisfy all other applicable provisions of this Zoning Code, except as provided by Section 17.140.040 (Allowed Incentives or Concessions). 
A.  Resident requirements. A housing development proposed to qualify for a State housing density bonus and incentive or concession shall be designed and constructed so that it includes at least one of the following: 
1.  Five percent of the total number of proposed units are for very low income households, as defined by the Health and Safety Code Section 50105; 
2.  Ten percent of the total number of proposed units are for lower income households, as defined by the Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5; 
3.  Ten percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest development as defined in Civil Code Section 1351 are for persons and families of moderate income, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50093, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase; or 
4.  The project is a senior citizen housing development as defined in Civil Code Sections 51.3 and 51.12, or is a mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing older persons in compliance with Civil Code Sections 798.76 or 799.5. 
B.  Applicant selection of basis for bonus. For the purposes of calculating the amount of the density bonus in compliance with Section 17.140.030 (Allowed Density Bonus), below, the applicant who requests a density bonus shall elect whether the bonus shall be awarded on the basis of Subsections 17.140.030A.1, 2, 3, or 4. 
C.  Bonus units shall not qualify for a project. Density bonus units authorized by this chapter shall not be included when determining the number of target units required to qualify for a density bonus. 
D.  Minimum project size to qualify for density bonus. The density bonus provided by this chapter shall be available only to a housing development of five or more dwelling units. 
E.  Condominium conversion projects. A condominium conversion project for which a density bonus is requested shall comply with Government Code Section 65915.5 and Section 17.52.110 (Condominium Conversions). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.140.030 - Allowed Density Bonuses. 
The amount of a density bonus allowed in a housing development shall be determined by the Commission in compliance with this section. For the purposes of this chapter, "density bonus" means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zone and designation of the Land Use Element of the General Plan as of the date of the application by the applicant to the Town. 
A.  Density bonus. A housing project that complies with the eligibility requirements in Subsections 17.140.020A. 1, 2, 3, or 4, shall be entitled to density bonuses as follows, unless a lesser percentage is proposed by the applicant. 
1.  Density bonus for very low income households. For each one percent increase above five percent in the percentage of target units affordable to very low income households, the density bonus shall be increased by 2.5 percent, up to a maximum of 35 percent. For example, a 20 unit project with two very low income units (i.e., 10 percent of units is very low income) is entitled to a 32.5 percent density bonus, resulting in seven additional units. 
2.  Density bonus for low income households. For each one percent increase above 10 percent in the percentage of target units affordable to low income households, the density bonus shall be increased by 1.5 percent, up to a maximum of 35 percent. For example, a 20 unit project with three low income units (i.e., 15 percent of units is low income) is entitled to a 27.5 percent density bonus, resulting in six additional units. 
3.  Density bonus for moderate income units in common interest development. For a residential project that is a qualified common interest development pursuant to Subsection 17.140.020A.3, for each one percent increase above 10 percent in the percentage of target units for sale to moderate income households at an affordable sales price, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent, up to a maximum of 35 percent. For example, a 20 unit project with four moderate income units (i.e., 20 percent of units is moderate income) is entitled to a 15 percent density bonus, resulting in three additional units. 
4.  Density bonus for senior housing units. A housing development that is eligible for a bonus in compliance with the criteria in Subsection 17.140.020A.4 shall be entitled to a density bonus of 20 percent of the number of senior housing units. 
TABLE 17.140.030: STATE DENSITY BONUSES (CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE 65915) 
Affordability Category 	Minimum % 
Target Units 	Bonus 
Granted 	Additional Bonus for Each 
1% Increase in Target Units 	% Target Units Required for Maximum 35% Bonus 
Very Low-Income 	5% 	20% 	2.5% 	11% 
Low-Income 	10% 	20% 	1.5% 	20% 
Moderate-Income (for-sale, common interest development only) 	10% 	5% 	1% 	40% 
Senior Citizen Residential Project 	100% 	20% 	N/A 	N/A 
 
5.  Density bonus for land donation. A residential project may be eligible for a density bonus in return for land donation pursuant to the requirements set forth in Government Code 65915(g). 
B.  Greater or lesser bonuses. The Town may choose to grant a density bonus greater than provided by this section for a development that meets the requirements of this section, or grant a proportionately lower density bonus than required by this section for a development that does not comply with the requirements of this section. 
C.  Density bonus calculations. The calculation of a density bonus in compliance with this section that results in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number, as required by Government Code Section 65915(f)(5). 
D.  Requirements for amendments or discretionary approval. The granting of a density bonus shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a General Plan amendment, Zoning Map amendment, Zoning Code amendment, or other discretionary approval. 
E.  Location of bonus units. The developer may locate the density bonus units in areas on the project site other than where the units for the lower income households are located in the housing project. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.140.040 - Allowed Incentives or Concessions. 
A.  Applicant request. 
1.  The applicant may file their request concurrently with the application for project approval. 
2.  The applicant shall show that a waiver or modification of development standards is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible. 
3.  An applicant for a density bonus in compliance with this chapter may also submit to the Town a proposal for the specific incentives or concessions listed in Subsection 17.140.040D (Type of incentives or concessions), below, that the applicant requests in compliance with this section, and may request a meeting with the Director. 
B.  Commission approval. The Commission shall grant an incentive or concession request that complies with this section unless the Commission makes at least one of the following findings in writing, based upon substantial evidence: 
1.  The incentive or concession is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5, or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in Section 17.140.070B (Unit cost requirements); 
2.  The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households; or 
3.  The incentive or concession would be contrary to State or Federal law. 
C.  Number of incentives or concessions. The applicant shall receive the following number of incentives or concessions. 
1.  One incentive or concession. One incentive or concession for a project that includes at least 10 percent of the total units for low income households, or at least five percent for very low income households, or at least 10 percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development. 
2.  Two incentives or concessions. Two incentives or concessions for a project that includes at least 20 percent of the total units for low income households, or at least 10 percent for very low income households, or at least 20 percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development. 
3.  Three incentives or concessions. Three incentives or concessions for a project that includes at least 30 percent of the total units for low income households, or at least 15 percent for very low income households, or at least 30 percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development. 
TABLE 17.140.040(C): STATE INCENTIVES OR CONCESSIONS (CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE 65915) 
Affordability Category 	% of Target Units 
Very Low-Income 	5% 	10% 	15% 
Low-Income 	10% 	20% 	30% 
Moderate-Income (for-sale, common interest development only) 	10% 	20% 	30% 
Maximum Incentive(s) or Concession(s) 	1 	2 	3 
Notes: 
1. An incentive or concession may be requested only if an application is also made for a density bonus. 
2. Incentives may be selected from only one category (i.e., very low, low, or moderate). 
 
D.  Type of incentives or concessions. For the purposes of this chapter, incentive or concession means any of the following: 
1.  A reduction in the site development standards of this Zoning Code (e.g., lot coverage, setbacks, parking requirements, building height, etc.) or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission in compliance with Health and Safety Code Section 18901 et seq., that would otherwise be required, that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions; 
2.  Approval of mixed-use zoning not otherwise allowed by this Zoning Code in conjunction with the housing development if non-residential land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development, and the non-residential land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the project will be located; 
3.  Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or the Town that will result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions; and/or 
4.  In its sole and absolute discretion, a direct financial contribution granted by the Council, including the provision of publicly owned land, the waiver of fees or dedication requirements, subsidizing the cost of construction, or participating in the cost of infrastructure. 
E.  Effect of incentive or concession. The granting of an incentive or concession shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a General Plan amendment, Zoning Map amendment, Zoning Code amendment, or other discretionary approval. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.140.050 - Parking Requirements in Density Bonus Projects. 
A.  Applicability. This Section applies to a development that meets the requirements of 17.140.020 (Eligibility for Bonus, Incentives, or Concessions), but only at the request of the applicant. An applicant may request additional parking incentives or concessions beyond those provided in this section in compliance with Section 17.140.040 (Allowed Incentives or Concessions) and consistent with Chapter 17.44 (Parking and Loading Standards). 
B.  Number of parking spaces required. 
1.  At the request of the applicant, the Town shall require the following vehicular parking ratios for a project that complies with the requirements of Section 17.140.020 (Eligibility for Bonus, Incentives, or Concessions), inclusive of handicapped and guest parking. 
a.  Zero to one bedroom: One on-site parking space. 
b.  Two to three bedrooms: Two on-site parking spaces. 
c.  Four or more bedrooms: Two and one-half on-site parking spaces. 
2.  If the total number of parking spaces required for a development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
3.  If, in any instance, the parking ratios listed above would result in a parking requirement greater than that established by Chapter 17.44, the lesser requirement would apply. 
C.  Location of parking. For the purposes of this section, a development may provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.140.060 - Bonuses and Incentives for Housing with Child Care Facilities. 
A housing development that complies with the resident and project size requirements of Subsection 17.140.020A and also includes as part of that development a child care facility other than a large or small family day care home, that will be located on the site of, as part of, or adjacent to the development, shall be subject to the following. 
A.  Additional bonus and incentive. The Town shall grant a housing development that includes a child care facility in compliance with this section either of the following: 
1.  An additional density bonus that is an amount of floor area in square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the floor area of the child care facility; or 
2.  An additional incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility. 
B.  Requirements to qualify for additional bonus and incentive. If either the density bonus or incentive is granted in compliance with Subsection 17.140.060A, above, the Town shall require the following as a condition of approving the housing development: 
1.  The child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the density bonus units are required to remain affordable in compliance with Section 17.140.070 (Continued Availability); and 
2.  Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of very low income households, lower income households, or families of moderate income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for very low income households, lower income households, or families of moderate income in compliance with 17.140.020A (Resident requirements). 
C.  Bonus not required when adequate child care facilities exist. The Town shall not be required to provide a density bonus for a child care facility in compliance with this section if it finds, based on substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child care facilities. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.140.070 - Continued Availability. 
The units that qualified the housing development for a density bonus and other incentives and/or concessions shall continue to be available as affordable units in compliance with the following requirements, as required by Government Code 65915(c) and 65916. 
A.  Duration of affordability. The applicant shall agree to, and the Town shall ensure the continued availability of the units that qualified the housing development for a density bonus and other incentives and/or concessions, as follows: 
1.  Low, very low, and moderate income units. The continued affordability of all low, very low, and moderate income qualifying units shall be maintained for 30 years, or more, if a longer period continuing affordability is required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, rental subsidy program, or by Town policy or ordinance. 
2.  Housing development with Town funding. Where there is a direct financial contribution to a housing development through participation in cost of infrastructure, write-down of land costs, or subsidizing the cost of construction, the Town shall assure continued availability for low- and moderate-income units for 30 years, or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, rental subsidy program, or by Town policy or ordinance. 
3.  Enforcement. Continuing affordability of units that qualified the housing development for a density bonus and other incentives and/or concessions shall be enforced through rent regulatory agreements, resale restrictions, deeds of trust, or other documents as appropriate and acceptable to the Director and Town Attorney, recorded against the subject unit or property except to the extent that any of the requirements therein would conflict with requirements of State law. 
B.  Unit cost requirements. The rents and owner-occupied costs charged for the housing units in the development that qualify the project for a density bonus and/or other incentives or concessions, shall not exceed the following amounts during the period of continued availability required by this section: 
1.  Low income units. Rents for the low income density bonus units shall be set at an affordable rent as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50053; and 
2.  Owner-occupied units. Owner-occupied units shall be available at an affordable housing cost as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5. 
C.  Occupancy and resale of moderate income common interest development units. An applicant shall agree to, and the Town shall ensure that the initial occupant of moderate income units that are directly related to the receipt of the density bonus in a common interest development as defined in Civil Code Section 1351, are persons and families of moderate income, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50093, and that the units are offered at an affordable housing cost, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5. The Town shall enforce an equity sharing agreement unless it is in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law. The following requirements apply to the equity sharing agreement. 
1.  Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate share of appreciation. 
2.  The Town shall recapture any additional subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall then be used within five years for any of the purposes described in Health and Safety Code Section 33334.2(e) that promote home ownership. For the purposes of this section: 
a.  The value of the Town's initial subsidy shall be considered equivalent to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale, minus the initial sale price to the moderate-income household, plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of resale shall be used as the initial market value; and 
b.  The Town's proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to the ratio of the initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.140.080 - Processing of Bonus Requests. 
A.  Permit requirement. A request for a density bonus and other incentives and/or concessions shall require use permit approval in compliance with Chapter 17.68 (Use Permits). In addition, the density bonus award and other incentives and/or concessions shall require Council approval. 
B.  Findings for approval. A density bonus and other incentives and/or concessions may be approved only after all of the following findings are made. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings for approval. 
1.  All of the findings required for use permit approval; 
2.  A finding that the residential development is eligible for the density bonus and any incentives or concessions, parking reductions, or waivers requested; 
3.  The residential development is consistent with the General Plan, except as provided by this chapter for density bonuses, and other incentives and concessions; 
4.  The approved number of dwellings can be accommodated by existing and planned infrastructure capacities; 
5.  A finding that any requested incentive or concession will result in an identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reduction based upon financial analysis and documentation provided, and none of the findings for denial of an incentive or concession in Subsection 17.140.040B can be made; 
6.  Adequate evidence exists to indicate that the project will provide affordable housing in a manner consistent with Government Code Section 65915, or as may be amended, the purpose and intent of this chapter; 
7.  There are sufficient provisions to guarantee that the units will remain at the required affordability levels for the required time period; and 
8.  Affordable housing units would meet the required livability standards. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.140.090 - Density Bonus Agreement. 
A.  Agreement required. Consistent with Government Code Section 65917, an applicant requesting a density bonus and/or incentives or concessions shall agree to enter into a density bonus agreement (referred to as the "agreement") with the Town in a form approved by the Council and Town Attorney. The agreement shall be consistent with any construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, rental subsidy program, or other similar grant program requirements or terms. 
B.  Execution of agreement. 
1.  Following approval of the agreement, and execution of the agreement by all parties, the Town shall record the completed agreement on the parcels designated for the construction of designated dwelling units, at the County Recorder's Office. 
2.  The approval and recordation shall take place at the same time as the final map or, where a map is not being processed, before the issuance of a building permit for the designated dwelling units. 
3.  The agreement shall be binding on all future owners, developers, and/or successors-in-interest for the specified term. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.140.100 - Judicial Relief, Waiver of Standards. 
A.  Waiver of standards preventing the use of bonuses, incentives, or concessions. 
1.  As required by Government Code Section 65915(e), the Town will not apply a development standard that will have the effect of precluding the construction of a development meeting the criteria of Subsection 17.140.020A (Resident requirements), above, at the densities or with the incentives or concessions allowed by this chapter. 
2.  An applicant may submit to the Town a proposal for the waiver or reduction of development and zoning standards that would have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a development utilizing a density bonus consistent with this chapter. 
3.  The applicant shall show that the waiver or reduction is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible. 
B.  Town exemption. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection 17.140.100.A, above, nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the Town to: 
1.  Grant a density bonus, incentive or concession, or waive or reduce development standards, if the bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, or reduction would have a specific, adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact; 
2.  Grant a density bonus, incentive or concession, or waive or reduce development standards that would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources; or 
3.  Grant a density bonus, incentive or concession, or waive or reduce a development standard that is contrary to State or Federal law. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Article VII. - Zoning Code Terms and Definitions  
Chapter 17.144 - Use Classifications 
 
17.144.010 - Purpose and Applicability. 
Use classifications describe one or more uses of land having similar characteristics but do not list every use or activity that may appropriately be within the classification. The Director shall determine whether a specific use shall be deemed to be within one or more use classifications or not within any classification in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.144.020 - Residential Use Classifications. 
Single-family Dwelling 
Detached. A dwelling unit designed for occupancy by one household, and located on a separate lot from any other unit (except second living units, where permitted). This classification includes individual manufactured housing units installed on a foundation system pursuant to Section 18551 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Attached. A dwelling unit designed for occupancy by one household, located on a single lot, and attached through common vertical walls to one or more dwellings on abutting lots. 
Multi-Family Residential. Two or more dwelling units on a site or lot. Types of multiple unit dwellings include duplexes, triplexes, four-plexes, garden apartments, senior housing developments, and multi-story apartment buildings. 
Assisted Living Facility. A housing arrangement chosen voluntarily by the residents, or the residents' guardians, conservators, or other responsible persons where 75 percent of the residents are at least 62 years of age, or if younger, have needs compatible with other residents; and where varying levels of care and supervision are provided, as agreed to at the time of admission or as determined necessary at subsequent times of reappraisal. Assisted living facilities may include kitchenettes (small refrigerator, sink and/or microwave oven) within individual rooms. Assisted living facilities are required to be licensed by the California Department of Social Services, and may include skilled nursing services if adequately licensed by the State Department of Social Services, the State Department of Health Services, and the State Department of Insurance. 
Caretaker Housing. A permanent residence that is secondary or accessory to the primary use of the property, and used for housing a caretaker on the site of a non-residential use where needed for security purposes or to provide 24-hour oversight of operations, equipment, or other resources on the site, including but not limited to the care or monitoring of people, plants, animals, equipment, or other conditions on the site. 
Convalescent Home. Establishments that provide 24-hour medical, convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves, and is licensed as a skilled nursing facility by the State of California, including but not limited to, rest homes and convalescent hospitals, but not Residential Care, Hospitals, or Clinics. 
Emergency Housing/Shelter. A temporary, short-term residence providing housing with minimal supportive services for homeless families or individual persons where occupancy is limited to six months or less, as defined in Section 50801 of the California Health and Safety Code. Medical assistance, counseling, and meals may be provided. 
Family Day Care Home. As defined by Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78, a home that regularly provides care, protection, and supervision for 14 or fewer children, in the provider's own home, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away, and is either a large family day care home or a small family day care home. 
Large. As defined by Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78, a day care facility in a single dwelling where an occupant of the residence provides family day care for seven to 14 children, including children under the age of 10 years who reside in the home. 
Small. As defined by Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78, a day care facility in a single residence where an occupant of the residence provides family day care for eight or fewer children, including children under the age of ten years who reside in the home. 
Group Living Quarters. Shared living quarters without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit, offered for rent for permanent or semi-transient residents on a weekly or longer basis. This classification includes clean and sober facilities, rooming and boarding houses, dormitories and other types of organizational housing, private residential clubs, and extended stay hotels intended for long-term occupancy (thirty days or more) but excludes Hotels and Motels, and Residential Care Facilities. 
Institutional Public Employee Housing. Residential units that house employees of uses allowed in the General Plan Institutional Public Land Use Designation. 
Live/Work Unit. An integrated housing unit and working space, occupied and utilized by a single household in a structure, either single-family or multi-family, that has been designed or structurally modified to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work activity, and where the residential use is secondary and accessory to the primary use as a place of work. 
Mobile Home Parks. A development designed and occupied by mobile homes including development with facilities and amenities used in common by occupants who rent, lease, or own spaces for mobile homes through a subdivision, cooperative, condominium or other form of resident ownership. 
Residential Care Facility. Facilities that are licensed by the State of California to provide permanent living accommodations and twenty-four-hour primarily non-medical care and supervision for persons in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance for sustaining the activities of daily living. Living accommodations are shared living quarters with or without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This classification includes facilities that are operated for profit as well as those operated by public or not-for-profit institutions, including hospices, nursing homes, convalescent facilities, and group homes for minors, persons with disabilities, and people in recovery from alcohol or drug addictions. 
General. A facility providing care for more than six persons. 
Limited. A facility providing care for six or fewer persons. 
Second Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons that is located on a lot with another primary, single-unit dwelling. A second unit may be within the same structure as the primary unit, in an attached structure, or in a separate structure on the same lot. 
Single Room Occupancy. A residential facility containing housing units that may have kitchen and/or bathroom facilities and are guest rooms or efficiency units as defined by the State Health and Safety Code. Each housing unit is occupied by no more than two persons and is offered on a monthly rental basis or longer. 
Student and Faculty Housing. Residential units or facility that houses students or faculty of Cerro Coso Community College. 
Supportive Housing. Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population (see definition in Chapter 17.148), and is linked to an onsite or offsite service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. 
Transitional Housing. Buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of the assistance. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, § 22, 1-21-2015; Ord. No. 17-10, § 4(Exh. A), 11-1-2017)  
17.144.030 - Recreation, Education, and Public Assembly Use Classifications. 
Commercial Recreation Facility. Establishments providing indoor or outdoor amusement and/or entertainment services for a fee or admission charge, such as ice skating and roller skating, golf driving ranges where separate from golf course, miniature golf courses, swim and tennis clubs, batting cages, arcades, pool and billiard rooms as primary uses and bowling alleys. Does not include parks and playgrounds or adult oriented businesses, which are separately defined. 
Community Assembly. A facility for public or private meetings including community centers, banquet centers, religious assembly facilities, civic and private auditoriums, union halls, meeting halls for clubs and other membership organizations. This classification includes functionally related facilities for the use of members and attendees such as kitchens, multi-purpose rooms, and storage. It does not include gymnasiums or other sports facilities, convention centers, or facilities, such as day care centers and schools that are separately classified and regulated. 
Conference/Convention Facility. One or more structures accommodating multiple assembly, meeting, and/or exhibit rooms, and related support facilities (e.g., kitchens, offices, etc.). 
Fitness/Health Facility. Fitness centers, gymnasium, health and athletic clubs, which may include any of the following: indoor sauna, spa or hot tub facilities; indoor tennis, handball, racquetball, archery and shooting ranges and other indoor sports activities; does not include adult entertainment businesses. 
Instructional Services. Establishments that offer specialized programs in personal growth. Examples of these facilities include: individual and group instruction and training in the arts; production rehearsal; photography, and the processing of photographs produced only by users of the studio facilities; martial arts training studios; gymnastics instruction, and aerobics and gymnastics studios with no other fitness facilities or equipment. Also includes production studios for individual musicians, painters, sculptors, photographers, and other artists. 
Parks and Playgrounds, Public. Public parks, play lots, playgrounds, and athletic fields for non-commercial neighborhood or community use, including open space areas for passive recreation and picnicking, swimming pools, tennis courts, and other sport and active recreation facilities. This classification also includes related food concessions or community centers within the facilities. If privately owned, the same facilities are included under the definition of "Private Recreation Facility." 
Private Residential Recreational Facility. A privately-owned, non-commercial recreation facility provided for a residential project or neighborhood residents, including swimming pools, swim and tennis clubs, and sport court facilities; does not include golf courses, country clubs, or private sport courts accessory to single-family dwellings. 
Public Recreational and Cultural Facility. Public or non-profit institutions engaged primarily in the display or preservation of objects of interest in the arts or sciences that are open to the public on a regular basis. This classification includes performing arts centers for theater, music, dance, and events; libraries, museums; outdoor theatres (e.g., amphitheater); stadiums; art galleries; historical sites; and similar types of facilities. 
Schools, Public or Private. An institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained in compliance with standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education or an institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university. Also includes specialized education and/or training for adults, including art school, language school, vocational training, professional school and other similar educational facilities. Does not include pre-schools and child day care facilities (see "Day Care"). 
Ski Facilities. Uses and facilities pertaining to ski areas, including but not limited to: runs, trails, lift-lines cables, chairs, cars, warming huts, parking, day lodges, shops for sale and rental of ski equipment, ski pro shop, first aid stations, ski school facilities and assembly areas, day nurseries, maintenance facilities, lounges, eating and drinking establishments, and other ski oriented shops. This classification includes uses and facilities serving non-skiing activities or operating year-round such as tennis courts, swimming pools, hot tubs, restaurants, bars, and retail sales constructed on lands which serve or are utilized in the operation of a ski area. 
Theater, Cinema or Performing Arts. An indoor facility for public assembly and group entertainment, other than sporting events, including civic theaters and facilities for "live" theater and concerts, and motion picture theaters. Does not include outdoor theaters, concert and similar entertainment facilities, and indoor and outdoor facilities for sporting events (see "Public Recreational and Cultural Facilities"). 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.144.040 - Retail Use Classifications. 
Artisan Shop. A retail store selling art glass, ceramics, jewelry, paintings, sculpture, and other handcrafted items, where the store includes an area for the crafting of the items being sold, but where the crafting activity is incidental to retail sales. 
Auto and Vehicle Sales and Rental. A retail or wholesale establishment selling and/or renting automobiles, trucks and vans, trailers, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, snowmobiles, and other like vehicles. Vehicles for sale may be displayed outdoors or indoors, as authorized by the required permit. May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. 
Bars/Taverns/Nightclubs. Businesses serving beverages for consumption on the premises as a primary use and including on-sale service of alcohol including beer, wine, and mixed drinks where food service is subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. This use includes micro-breweries where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on-site. May include entertainment (e.g., live music and/or dancing); does not include adult oriented businesses. 
Building Materials and Services. Retail sales or rental of building supplies or equipment. This classification includes lumber yards, tool and equipment sales or rental establishments, and includes establishments devoted principally to taxable retail sales to individuals for their own use. This definition does not include hardware stores less than 10,000 square feet in floor area or plant nurseries. 
Commercial Cannabis Activity. 
Cannabis Retailer. A facility where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale. Unless otherwise specified, "cannabis retailer" includes both a retailer selling medicinal cannabis and cannabis products to patients with valid physician's recommendations, and a retailer selling adult-use cannabis and cannabis products for adults twenty-one years of age and over. 
Adult-Use Cannabis Retailer. A cannabis retailer that sells cannabis and cannabis products to individuals twenty-one years of age or older. 
Medicinal Cannabis Retailer. A cannabis retailer that sells medicinal cannabis and medicinal cannabis exclusively to individuals with a valid physician's recommendation and are twenty-one years of age or older. 
General Retail. The retail sale or rental of merchandise not specifically listed under another use classification. This classification includes retail establishments; including supermarkets, food markets, groceries, convenience stores, liquor stores, department stores, clothing stores, furniture stores, pet supply stores, small hardware stores (with 10,000 square feet or less of floor area), and businesses retailing the following goods: toys, hobby materials, handcrafted items, jewelry, cameras, photographic supplies and services (including portraiture and retail photo processing), medical supplies and equipment, pharmacies, firearms, electronic equipment, sporting goods, kitchen utensils, hardware, appliances, antiques, art galleries, art supplies and services, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, office supplies, bicycles, video rental, and new automotive parts and accessories (excluding vehicle service and installation). Retail sales may be combined with other services such as office machine, computer, electronics, and similar small-item repairs. 
Nurseries and Garden Centers. Establishments primarily engaged in retailing nursery and garden products—such as trees, shrubs, plants, seeds, bulbs, and sod—that are predominantly grown elsewhere. These establishments may sell a limited amount of a product they grow themselves onsite. Fertilizer and soil products are stored and sold in package form only. This classification includes wholesale and retail nurseries offering plants for sale. 
Restaurant, Café, Coffee Shop. A retail business selling ready-to-eat food and/or beverages for on- or off-premise consumption. These include eating establishments where customers are served from a walk-up ordering counter for either on- or off-premises consumption ("counter service"); and establishments where customers are served food at their tables for on-premises consumption ("table service"), that may also provide food for take-out. This use includes micro-breweries where the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages are subordinate to on-site food service and catering businesses or bakeries that have a storefront retail component. 
Tasting Room. A retail sales facility where customers may taste and purchase beverage and food that may have been grown or processed on-site. Products offered for tasting and sale may include wine, olive oil, cheese, and/or other food and beverage products. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 18-02, § 5(Exh. A, f.), 3-13-2018)  
17.144.050 - Service Use Classifications. 
Adult-Oriented Business. An establishment that, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, offers, sells or distributes adult-oriented merchandise, or that offers to its patrons materials, products, merchandise, services, entertainment or performances that have sexual arousal, sexual gratification, and/or sexual stimulation as their dominant theme, or are characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and are not customarily open to the general public because they exclude minors by virtue of their age. This classification does not include any establishment offering professional services conducted, operated, or supervised by medical practitioners, physical therapists, nurses, chiropractors, psychologist, social workers, marriage and family counselors, osteopaths, and persons holding licenses or certificates under applicable State law or accreditation from recognized programs when performing functions pursuant to the respective license or certificate. 
Animal Care and Boarding. Care and services related to the boarding and care of household pets including: 
Animal Raising and Keeping. The raising and keeping of animals, except for household pets (e.g., cats, dogs, and other animals ordinarily kept as household pets). 
Kennel. Facilities for keeping, boarding, training, breeding or maintaining four or more dogs, cats, or other household pets not owned by the kennel owner or operator. It excludes pet shops and animal hospitals that provide 24-hour accommodation of animals receiving medical or grooming services. 
Pet Day Care. Facilities for providing non-medical care for four or more dogs, cats, or other household pets not owned by the pet day care owner or operator on a less than 24-hour basis. 
Pet Grooming. Grooming or selling of dogs, cats, and similar small animals. Typical uses include dog bathing and clipping salons, pet grooming shops, and pet stores and shops. This classification excludes dog walking and similar pet care services not carried out at a fixed location. 
Veterinary Services. Veterinary services for small animals. This classification allows 24-hour accommodation of animals receiving medical services but does not include kennels. 
Banks and Financial Services. Financial institutions providing retail banking services. This classification includes only those institutions serving walk-in customers or clients, including banks, savings and loan institutions, and credit unions. 
Cemeteries and Interment Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation, or disposition of the human remains and conducting memorial services. Typical uses include a cemetery, crematory, columbarium, mausoleum, burial place, or mortuary. 
Day Care Centers. Establishments providing non-medical care for persons on a less than 24-hour basis other than Family Day Care. This classification includes nursery schools, preschools, and day care facilities for children or adults, and any other day care facility licensed by the State of California. 
Food Preparation. Businesses preparing and/or packaging food for off-site consumption, excluding those of an industrial character in terms of processes employed, waste produced, water used, and traffic generation. Typical uses include catering kitchens, bakeries, small-scale specialty food production, and micro-breweries. Food preparation operations may include tasting rooms open to the public retail sales where tasting rooms and retail sales are also allowed uses. 
Government Offices. Administrative, clerical, or public contact offices of a government agency, including postal facilities and courts, together with incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles. This classification excludes corporation yards, equipment service centers, and similar facilities that primarily provide maintenance and repair services and storage facilities for vehicles and equipment (see Utilities, Major). 
Lodging. An establishment providing overnight accommodations to transient patrons, for payment, for periods of less than 30 consecutive calendar days. 
Bed and Breakfast. A residential structure that is in residential use with one or more bedrooms rented for overnight lodging and where meals may be provided. 
Hotels and Motels. Establishments providing overnight lodging to transient patrons. These establishments may provide additional services, such as conference and meeting rooms, restaurants, bars, or recreation facilities available to guests or to the general public. This use classification includes motor lodges, motels, and tourist courts, but does not include rooming houses, boarding houses, private residential clubs, transient rentals of single family homes or condominiums, or bed and breakfast establishments within a single-unit residence, which are separately defined and regulated. 
Transient Rental. A residential structure, which is occupied, or intended or designed for occupancy, by persons for purposes of sleeping, lodging, or similar reasons for a period of 30 consecutive days or less in exchange for a fee or other consideration. 
Maintenance and Repair Services. Establishments engaged in the maintenance or repair of office machines, household appliances, furniture, and similar items. This classification excludes maintenance and repair of vehicles or boats (see Automotive/Vehicle Sales and Services) and personal apparel (see Personal Services). 
Medical Services. State-licensed facilities or facilities which employ providers or operate programs that offer medical services licensed by the State. Medical services provided in the facility may include medical, surgical, psychiatric, or emergency medical services to sick or injured persons. This classification includes facilities for inpatient or outpatient treatment, including substance-abuse programs as well as training, research, and administrative services for patients and employees. This classification excludes veterinaries and animal hospitals (see Animal Care and Boarding). 
Hospital. Hospitals and similar facilities engaged primarily in providing diagnostic services, and extensive medical treatment, including surgical and other hospital services. These establishments have an organized medical staff, inpatient beds, and equipment and facilities to provide complete health care. May include on-site accessory clinics and laboratories, accessory retail uses, and on-site ambulance dispatch facilities. 
Clinics and Laboratories. Facilities primarily engaged in furnishing outpatient medical, mental health, surgical, dental and other personal health services, and medical and dental laboratories. Counseling services by people other than medical doctors or psychiatrists are included under "Office." 
Physical Wellness and Rehabilitation Facilities. Facilities providing medical services to individuals primarily suffering from physical injuries and illnesses which require physical therapy on- and off-site, for a period of not more than a cumulative six months within a twelve-month period. Supportive services such as mental health counseling and life skills training may also be offered. Overnight accommodations with common cooking, dining, and recreational areas may be provided to individuals (including caretakers and family members) receiving medical services, so long as the accommodations do not meet the definition of a dwelling unit (see definition in Chapter 17.148). 
Offices. Offices of firms or organizations providing professional, executive, management, or administrative services, such as accounting, advertising, architectural, computer software design, counseling, data processing, research, engineering, graphic design, interior design, legal offices and tax preparations offices. 
Walk-In Clientele. An office business providing direct services to patrons or clients that may or may not require appointments. This use classification includes employment agencies, insurance agent offices, real estate offices, travel agencies, utility company offices and offices for elected officials. It does not include banks that are separately classified and regulated. 
Personal Services. Provision of recurrently needed services of a personal nature. This classification includes barber shops and beauty salons, seamstresses, tailors, day spas, dry cleaning agents (excluding large-scale bulk cleaning plants), shoe repair shops, self-service laundries, video rental stores, photocopying and photo finishing services, tattoo parlors, and travel agencies mainly intended for the consumer. This classification also includes massage establishments in which all persons engaged in the practice of massage are certified pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code Section 4612. 
Public Safety Facilities. Facilities providing public-safety and emergency services, including police and fire protection and emergency medical services, with incidental storage, training and maintenance facilities. 
Research and Development. A facility for scientific research, and the design, development and testing of electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical and computer and telecommunications components in advance of product manufacturing, and the assembly of related products from parts produced off-site, where the manufacturing activity is secondary to the research and development activities or where there is no manufacturing on the same site; includes pharmaceutical, chemical and biotechnology research and development. 
Vehicle Services. The repair, servicing, alteration, restoration, painting, cleaning, or finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats and other vehicles as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use, including: 
Fueling Station. Establishments primarily engaged in retailing automotive fuels or retailing these fuels in combination with activities, such as providing minor automobile/vehicle repair services; selling automotive oils, replacement parts, and accessories; and/or providing incidental food and retail services. 
Large Vehicle and Equipment Sales, Service and Rental. Sales, servicing, rental, fueling, and washing of large trucks, trailers, tractors, and other heavy equipment used for construction, moving, agricultural, or landscape gardening activities. Examples include cranes, earth moving equipment, tractors, combines, heavy trucks, etc. Includes large vehicle operation training facilities. Sales of new or used automobiles or trucks are excluded from this classification. 
Repair, Major. Repair of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, boats and recreational vehicles, including the incidental sale, installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts, generally on an overnight basis. This classification includes auto repair shops, body and fender shops, transmission shops, wheel and brake shops, auto glass services, vehicle painting and tire sales and installation, but excludes vehicle dismantling or salvaging and tire retreading or recapping. 
Service and Repair, Minor. The service and repair of automobiles, light-duty trucks, boats, and motorcycles, including the incidental sale, installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts. This classification includes the replacement of small automotive parts and liquids as an accessory use to a gasoline sales station or automotive accessories and supply store, and quick-service oil, tune-up and brake and muffler shops where repairs are made or service provided in enclosed bays and no vehicles are stored overnight. This classification excludes disassembly, removal or replacement of major components such as engines, drive trains, transmissions or axles; automotive body and fender work, vehicle painting or other operations that generate excessive noise, objectionable odors or hazardous materials., and towing services. It also excludes repair of heavy trucks, limousines or construction vehicles. 
Vehicle Storage. A facility for the storage of operative cars and other fleet vehicles, trucks, buses, recreational vehicles, and other motor vehicles; includes facilities for the storage and/or servicing of fleet vehicles. Also includes the parking of a vehicle on private property for more than 72 hours without operation, such as a towing or impound yard. 
Washing. Washing, waxing, or cleaning of automobiles or similar light vehicles, including self-serve washing facilities. 
Warehousing, Storage, and Distribution. Storage and distribution facilities without sales to the public on-site or direct public access except for public storage in small individual space exclusively and directly accessible to a specific tenant. This classification includes mini-warehouses. 
Construction and Material Yards. Storage of construction materials or equipment on a site other than a construction site. 
Indoor Warehousing and Storage. Storage within an enclosed building of commercial goods prior to their distribution to wholesale and retail outlets and the storage of industrial equipment, products and materials including but not limited to automobiles, feed, and lumber. Also includes cold storage, draying or freight, moving and storage, and warehouses. This classification excludes the storage of hazardous chemical, mineral, and explosive materials. 
Outdoor Storage. Storage of vehicles or commercial goods or materials in open lots. 
Personal Storage. Facilities offering enclosed storage with individual access for personal effects and household goods including mini-warehouses and mini-storage. This use excludes workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing, or commercial activity. 
Wholesaling and Distribution. Indoor storage and sale of goods to other firms for resale; storage of goods for transfer to retail outlets of the same firm; or storage and sale of materials and supplies used in production or operation, including janitorial and restaurant supplies. Wholesalers are primarily engaged in business-to-business sales, but may sell to individual consumers through mail or internet orders. They normally operate from a warehouse or office having little or no display of merchandise, and are not designed to solicit walk-in traffic. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-02, § 4(Exh.A), 3-4-2015; Ord. No. 18-02, § 5(Exh. A, g.), 3-13-2018; Ord. No. 19-02, § 4(Exh. A, c.), 3-6-2019)  
17.144.060 - Industry, Manufacturing, and Processing Use Classifications. 
Commercial Cannabis Activity. 
Commercial Cannabis Cultivation Facility. A facility engaged in the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. This also includes: (1) facilities that operate only as a nursery and produce only clones, immature plants, seeds, or other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of cannabis and (2) facilities that only package and label non-manufactured cannabis products. This use does not include outdoor cultivation of cannabis, as that use is prohibited within the town limits. 
Commercial Cannabis Nonvolatile Manufacturing Facility. A facility engaged in the compounding, blending, extracting, infusing, or otherwise making or preparing a cannabis product by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and/or infusion and chemical synthesis, using nonvolatile solvents. This also includes: (1) facilities that process, prepare, hold, or store components and ingredients used in the manufacturing of cannabis products and (2) facilities engaged in the holding, storing, packaging, or labeling of cannabis products. This use does not include manufacturing of cannabis products using volatile solvents, as that use is prohibited within the town limits. 
Commercial Cannabis Distribution Facility. A facility engaged in the procurement, sales, and transport of cannabis or cannabis products between state-licensed cannabis businesses. This also includes facilities that offer storage-only services for a licensed cultivator, manufacturer, or another distributor. 
Commercial Cannabis Testing Facility. A facility, laboratory, or entity that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in the cannabis industry in the state. 
Handicraft/Custom Manufacturing. Establishments manufacturing and/or assembling small products primarily by hand, including jewelry, pottery and other ceramics, as well as small glass and metal art and craft products, and taxidermists. Also includes manufacturing establishments producing small products not classified in another major manufacturing group, including: brooms and brushes; buttons, costume novelties; jewelry; musical instruments; pens, pencils, and other office and artists' materials; sporting and athletic goods; toys; etc. 
Industry, General. Manufacturing of products from extracted or raw materials or recycled or secondary materials, or bulk storage and handling of such products and materials. This classification includes operations such as bottling plants; laundries and dry cleaning plants; food and beverage processing; production apparel manufacturing; photographic processing plants; sign manufacturing; ski and snowboard manufacturing; nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing; primary metal manufacturing; lumber and wood product manufacturing; automotive and heavy equipment manufacturing; monument works; printing, engraving and publishing; computer and electronic product manufacturing; furniture and related product manufacturing; and industrial services. 
Industry, Heavy. Industrial uses that regularly use hazardous chemicals or procedures or produce hazardous byproducts, including the following: manufacturing of acetylene, cement, lime, gypsum or plaster-of-paris, chlorine, corrosive acid or fertilizer, insecticides, disinfectants, poisons, explosives, paint, lacquer, varnish, petroleum products, coal products, plastic and synthetic resins, and radioactive materials. This classification also includes asphalt and concrete plants and rock, sand or gravel yards and/or processing. Heavy industrial uses have high potential for external impacts on the surrounding area in terms of noise, vibration, odor, hours of operation, and traffic. 
Recycling Facility. A facility for receiving, temporarily storing, transferring and/or processing materials for recycling, reuse, or final disposal. This use classification does not include waste transfer facilities that operate as materials recovery, recycling, and solid waste transfer operations and are classified as utilities. 
Reverse Vending Machine. An automated mechanical device that accepts, sorts and processes recyclable materials and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip. 
Small Collection Facility. An incidental use that serves as a neighborhood drop off point for the temporary storage of recyclable materials but where the processing and sorting of such items is not conducted on-site. 
Large Collection Facility. A facility that receives, sorts, stores and/or processes recyclable materials. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 16-04, § 2d, 5-18-2016; Ord. No. 18-02, § 5(Exh. A, h.), 3-13-2018)  
17.144.070 - Transportation, Communication, and Utilities Use Classifications. 
Airports and Heliports. Facilities for the takeoff and landing of airplanes and helicopters, including runways, helipads, aircraft storage buildings, public terminal building and parking, air freight terminal, baggage handling facility, aircraft hangar and public transportation and related facilities, including bus operations, servicing and storage. Also includes support activities such as fueling and maintenance, storage, airport operations and air traffic control, incidental retail sales, coffee shops and snack shops and airport administrative facilities, including airport offices, terminals, operations buildings, communications equipment, buildings and structures, control towers, lights, and other equipment and structures required by the United States Government and/or the State for the safety of aircraft operations. 
Parking, Public or Private. Surface lots and structures for use of occupants, employees, or patrons on the subject site or offering parking to the public, potentially for a fee, when such use is not incidental to another on-site activity. 
Telecommunication Facilities. Facilities for the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms. 
Transportation Passenger Facilities. Facilities for passenger transportation operations. Includes rail stations and bus terminals but does not include terminals serving airports or heliports. Also includes private transportation facilities, including ski lifts or similar aerial conveyances. 
Utilities, Major. Generating plants, electric substations, service yards, solid waste collection, including transfer stations and materials recovery facilities, solid waste treatment and disposal, water or wastewater treatment plants, and similar facilities of public agencies or public utilities. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.144.080 - Agriculture and Natural Resource Use Classifications. 
Animal Raising and Crop Cultivation. The raising, grazing, or feeding of animals for animal products, animal increase, or value increase, and dairying as an accessory use on farms with dairy cattle and the cultivation of tree, vine, field, forage, and other plant crops intended to provide food or fibers. This classification includes agriculturally related services, such as storage of agricultural products; agricultural waste handling and disposal services; and other similar related services. 
Environmental Research Facilities. Research establishments primarily engaged in implementing scientific research relating to the environment. The use includes laboratories, monitoring stations, scientific interpretive centers, research and training classrooms, and related support facilities. 
Flood Control Facilities. Facilities design to provide flood control by controlling rates of runoff, holding extra water, or diverting floodwater. 
Forestry Products. The operation and harvesting of timber tracts, tree farms, forest nurseries, whether planted or of natural growth, standing or down, including Christmas trees and nursery stock for restocking commercial forest land and related activities such as reforestation services; also the gathering of gums, barks, sap, moss and other forest products. 
Geothermal Exploration/Production. Activities related to the discovery, test, production, disposal, or use or geothermal resources and deriving energy primarily from geothermal resources. 
Riding Academies and Commercial Stables. Any place where horses, donkeys, and/or mules are kept, housed, boarded, lodged, fed, hired, trained, sold or bred as a commercial activity, examples of which include horse ranches, boarding stables, riding schools and academies, horse exhibition facilities (for shows or other competitive events), and barns, stables, corrals and paddocks accessory and incidental to these uses; does not include the simple pasturing of horses, donkeys, and/or mules. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
Chapter 17.148 - Definitions 
 
17.148.010 - Purpose of Chapter. 
This Chapter provides definitions of terms and phrases used in this Zoning Code that are technical or specialized, or that may not reflect common usage. If a definition in this chapter conflicts with a definition in another provision of the Municipal Code, these definitions shall control for the purposes of this Zoning Code. If a word is not defined in this chapter, or in other provisions of the Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code, the Director shall determine the correct definition, giving deference to common usage. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014)  
17.148.020 - Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases. 
A.  Definitions A 
Above-Moderate Income Household. A household whose income exceeds the qualifying limits set for "persons and families of low or moderate income" in Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Abut. Having property lines, street lines, and/or zoning district lines in common. 
Access or Access Way. The place, means, or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have safe, adequate, and usable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this Zoning Code. 
Accessory Structure. A structure or part of a structure that is secondary and incidental to, and commonly associated with a primary structure on the same site. Also, an accessory building. 
Accessory Use. A use customarily incidental to, related and clearly subordinate to a primary use on the same parcel that does not alter the primary use of the parcel or serve property other than the parcel where the primary use is located; does not include secondary residential units, which are separately defined. 
Accessory Use, Retail. The retail sales of various products (including food) in a store or similar facility for the purpose of serving employees or customers of the primary use, and is not visible from public streets. These uses include pharmacies, gift shops, as well as convenience stores and food service establishments within hotel, office and industrial complexes. 
Active Frontages. Street frontages mapped on Figure 17.24.020 where pedestrian activity is a priority. In these locations, specific measures are required to create areas where shopfront buildings frame the street and provide an animated, pedestrian-friendly environment with high visual quality. 
Addition. An extension or increase in floor area and/or height of a building or structure. 
Adult Business Terms. The following terms are defined for the purposes of Section 17.52.050, Adult Uses. 
•  Adult Arcade. Any business establishment or concern to which the public is permitted or invited and where coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled amusement devices, still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images on a regular or substantial basis, where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
•  Adult Bookstore. Any business establishment or concern having as a regular and substantial portion of its stock in trade, "Material" (as defined below) which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
•  Adult Business or Adult Use means: 
— Any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct operates as an Adult Bookstore, Adult Theater, Adult Arcade, Adult Cabaret, Adult Figure Modeling Studio; or ;b2;—;en;;hg;Any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers, sells or distributes Adult-Oriented Merchandise or sexually-oriented merchandise, or which offers to its patrons Materials, products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Parts," but not including those uses or activities which are preempted by State Law. 
•  Adult Cabaret or Adult Nightclub. A business establishment or concern (whether or not serving alcoholic beverages) which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, and where such performances are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
•  Adult Dance Studio. Any business establishment or concern which provides for members of the public a partner for dance where the partner, or the dance, is distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting, or describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
•  Adult Use Facility. Any building devoted to the purpose of housing an Adult Business or an Adult Use. 
•  Adult-Oriented Merchandise. Sexually-oriented implements, paraphernalia or novelty items, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually-oriented vibrators, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually-oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity or distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
•  Adult Massage Parlor. Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment manipulation of the human body which occurs as a part of or in connection with "Specified Sexual Activities," or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation, or service related thereto, exposes "Specified Anatomical Areas." The definition of Adult Business shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed hospital, nor by a licensed hospital, nor by a physical surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by a nurse or technician working under the supervision of a licensed surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team for a school athletic program, nor by any California State licensed massage practitioners. 
•  Adult Theater. A theater or other commercial establishment with or without a stage or proscenium which is used for presenting, on a regular and substantial basis, "Material" which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "Matter" depicting, or describing, or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
•  Arcade Booth. Any enclosed or partially enclosed portion of an establishment in which an Adult Arcade is located, or where a live performance is presented, on a regular or substantial basis, where the Material presented is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, or describing, or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
•  Escort. A person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees of offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
•  Escort Agency. A person or business association which furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish Escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
•  Facility. Any building that is devoted to a particular use. 
•  Figure Modeling Studio. Any establishment or business which provides for members of the public, the services of a live human model for the purposes of reproducing the human body, wholly or partially in the nude, by means of photograph, painting, computer software, sketching, drawing, or other pictorial form. 
•  Material. Relative to Adult Businesses, "Material" means and includes, but is not limited to, accessories, books, magazines, photographs, prints, drawings, paintings, motion pictures, pamphlets, videos, slides, tapes or electronically generated images or devices including computer software, or any combination thereof. 
•  Minor. The legal status of anybody under the age of 18 years. 
•  Operator. The on-site manager or highest-ranking employee on the premises. 
•  Park. Any property within the town which is designated as a public park. 
•  Performer. Any person who is an Employee or independent contractor of the Adult Business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an Adult Business. 
•  Religious Institution. A facility used primarily for religious assembly or worship and related religious activities. 
•  Residential Zone. Any property within the town which is zoned with the intent of a residential land use including: Affordable Housing (overlay), Residential Multi-Family 1, Residential Multi-Family 2, Rural Residential, Rural Residential (Equestrian overlay) and Residential Single-Family as set forth on the Town's official Zoning Map. 
•  School. Any parcel which contains any public elementary school, public middle school, public high school or public library. The definition of School does not include a community or junior college, college or university, preschool, or a vocational institution. 
•  Specified Anatomical Areas means: 
— Less than completely and opaquely covering human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
— Any device or covering, when exposed to view, which simulates the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, human genitals, pubic region or buttock; or 
— Human or simulated male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
•  Specified Sexual Activities means: 
— Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; and/or 
— Acts of human masturbation, sexual stimulation or arousal; and/or 
— Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; and/or 
— Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; and/or 
— Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; and/or 
— Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
Affordable Housing Concession or Incentive. A development incentive or concession that shall be provided to a qualifying development in accordance with Chapter 17.140 and State Housing Density Bonus law (Government Code 65915 et. seq.). 
Affordable Housing Density Bonus. A density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zone and designation of the Land Use Element of the General Plan as of the date of the application by the applicant to the Town, as allowed under Government Code 65915 or Article IV (Affordable and Workforce Housing). 
Affordable Housing Incentive. See "Affordable Housing Concession." 
Affordable Housing Unit. A housing unit that is available at an affordable rent or affordable ownership cost. 
Affordable Rent. Monthly housing expenses, including rent and a reasonable allowance for utilities, which does not exceed one-twelfth of thirty percent of the maximum annual income for a household of the applicable income level for Mono County as published annually pursuant to Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 6932 (or its successor provision) by the California Department of Housing and Community Development, and adjusted for household size. 
Affordable Ownership Cost. A sales price for a housing unit resulting in projected average monthly housing payments, during the first calendar year of a household's occupancy, including interest, principal, mortgage insurance, property taxes, homeowners insurance, homeowner's association dues if any, and a reasonable allowance for utilities, property maintenance and repairs, all as determined by the Town, which does not exceed one-twelfth of thirty-five percent of the maximum annual income for a household of the applicable income level for Mono County as published annually pursuant to Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 6932 (or its successor provision) by the California Department of Housing and Community Development, and adjusted for household size. 
Agent. A person authorized in writing by the property owner to represent and act for a property owner in contacts with Town employees, committees, Commissions, and the Council, regarding matters regulated by this Zoning Code. 
Airport. The Mammoth Yosemite Airport. 
Alcoholic Beverage Sales. The retail sale of beer, wine, and/or distilled spirits for on-premise or off-premise consumption, as licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
Alley. A public or private roadway that provides vehicle access to the rear or side of parcels having other public street frontage that is not normally intended for general traffic circulation. 
Allowed (Allowed Use). A land use identified by Article II as a permitted or conditional use that may be established with an administrative permit or use permit, and where applicable, design review and/or building permit approval, subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this Zoning Code. 
Altered. A physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the supporting members of a structure, or a change in the external appearance of any structure, not including painting, unless otherwise defined in this Zoning Code. Also see "Structural Alteration." 
Alternate Housing Mitigation Plan (AHMP). A plan, prepared in conformance with the requirements of Chapter 17.136, proposing an alternate means to fulfill the housing requirements otherwise required by the chapter. 
Antenna. See "Telecommunications Facilities." 
Apartment. A dwelling in a structure designated, built, rented, let, or hired out to be occupied or used to house two or more households living independently of each other and doing their cooking in the dwelling; not a condominium project as defined by Civil Code 1351(f). 
Applicant. Any person who is filing an application requesting an action who is: 
• The owner or lessee of property; 
• A party who has contracted to purchase property contingent upon that party's ability to acquire the necessary approvals required for that action in compliance with this Zoning Code, and who presents written authorization from the property owner to file an application with the Town; or 
• The agent of either of the above who presents written authorization from the property owner to file an application with the Town. 
Approval. Includes both approval and approval with conditions. 
Appurtenance. A tower, spire, cupola, chimney, mechanical equipment (e.g., elevator equipment), exit (e.g., fire escape), or other similar structure that is attached to a structure and not intended for human occupancy. 
Arborist. A certified arborist who is registered with the International Society of Arboriculture, or a member in good standing with the American Society of Consulting Arborists. 
Architectural Feature. An exterior building feature, including a balcony, canopy, column, doors, porches, roof, roof eave, soffit, windows, wing wall, and any other similar element that does not create an interior floor space. 
Area Median Income (AMI). The median household income for Mono County as published by the State of California pursuant to California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Section 6932, or successor provision. 
Assessed Value. The value of land and improvements as shown in the most recent records of the County Assessor. 
Attic. The area located between the uppermost plate and the roof or ridge of a structure. Attics may be finished or unfinished. 
Automated Teller Machine (ATM). A computerized, self-service machine used by banking customers for financial transactions, including deposits, withdrawals and fund transfers, without face-to-face contact with financial institution personnel. 
Awning. A projecting structure, consisting of a frame and a material covering, attached to and wholly supported by a wall of a building and installed over and partially in front of doors, windows, or other openings in a building; an awning may be permanent or temporary and may be retractable. See also "Canopy." 
B.  Definitions B 
Balcony. A platform that is cantilevered from a building wall and is enclosed by a parapet or railing. 
Bedroom. A room that meets the minimum dimension, area, and height requirements for a habitable room as specified in the California Building Standards Code and California Residential Building Code that has an adjoining area or space that may be used as a closet whether or not the room is actually utilized for sleeping purposes. 
Below-Market Rate (BMR) Unit. A dwelling unit that shall be restricted to an Affordable Rent or Affordable Ownership Cost to individuals and households working in the community of Mammoth Lakes, including but not limited to those at the very-low, low-, or moderate income levels pursuant to Chapter 17.136. 
Bicycle Parking. Parking spaces for short and long-term bicycle storage. Bicycle parking may consist of bicycle racks, lockers, or storage rooms and typically allows for bicycles to be stored securely. 
•  Bicycle Parking, Long-term. Bicycle parking that is intended for bicycle trips where bicycles will be left for a long-period of time (generally for several hours, overnight, or seasonally). 
•  Bicycle Parking, Short-term. Bicycle parking that is intended for bicycle trips where bicycles will be left for a short time period (generally less than 2 hours). 
Bicycle Space. An accessible space for the parking of one bicycle. See "Bicycle Parking." 
Blank Wall. Any wall that is not enhanced by architectural features, windows, doors, or similar features. Solid and mechanical doors and glass with less than 80 percent transparency are considered blank wall areas. 
Breezeway. A roofed structure not enclosed on more than two sides attached to and connecting portions of a main building, or a portion of a main building, and an accessory building. 
Buildable Site Area. An area within a lot suitable for the placement of a building or structure located outside of required setback areas that meets minimum building site dimension, maximum slope area, and all applicable access requirements. 
Build-To Line. A line parallel to a property line where a structure is required to be located. 
Building. A structure to be used as a place of occupancy, storage, or shelter. 
Building Frontage. A building wall adjacent to a parcel boundary that abuts a public right-of-way. A primary building frontage provides the main pedestrian entrance to the building. A secondary building frontage abuts a side street, rear entrance, or has an entrance from other than a public right-of-way. 
Building Height. See Section 17.36.060 (Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions). 
Building Official. Designated Town employee who is primarily responsible for administration of the building regulations adopted by this title, subject to the overall direction and control of the Town Manager or designee. 
C.  Definitions C 
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). State law (California Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.) requiring public agencies to document and consider the environmental effects of a proposed action, prior to allowing the action to occur. 
California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). The governmental agency which regulates the terms and conditions of public utilities in the State. 
Cannabis Terms. The following terms are defined for the purposes of Section(s) 17.52.085 (Cannabis—Commercial Businesses) and 17.52.086 (Cannabis—Personal Cultivation and Use). 
Adult-Use License. A state license issued pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Sections 26000, et seq. for cannabis or cannabis products that are intended for adults who are twenty-one years of age or older and who do not possess a valid physician's recommendation. Also referred to as an "A-License." 
Attractive to Children or Youth. Products, packaging, labeling, or advertising that may especially encourage persons under age twenty-one to initiate cannabis consumption or otherwise to consume (accidentally or purposefully) cannabis or cannabis products and includes: 
1. Products that (1) resemble a non-cannabis product of a type that is typically consumed by, or marketed to, children or youth, such as a specific candy or baked treat; or (2) occur in the shape of a cartoon, human, or any other animate creature including an insect, toy, fruit, vehicle, or robot. 
2. Packaging or labeling that (1) resembles packaging or labeling of a non-cannabis consumer product of a type that is typically consumed by, or marketed to, children or youth; (2) contains images depicting a cartoon, human, or any other animate creature including an insect, toy, fruit, vehicle, or robot, or images of a candy or baked goods resembling a non-cannabis consumer product of a type that is typically consumed by, or marketed to, children or youth; (3) contains text referring to a cartoon, or any other animate creature including insects, toy, fruit, vehicle or robot; (4) any likeness to images, characters, or phrases that are popularly used to advertise to children; or (5) describes any characterizing flavor; except that, for edible products only, terms such as "lemon-flavored" describing a characterizing flavor may be used in font sizes that do not exceed that of the largest word in the "warning" on the packages. 
3. The term includes advertising that (1) mimics advertising of a non-cannabis consumer product of a type that is typically consumed by, or marketed to children or youth; or (2) depicts a cartoon, or any non-human animate creature including insects, toy, fruit, vehicle or robot, candy, baked goods, vehicles or robots typically marketed to youth. 
Bureau. The Bureau of Cannabis Control within the California Department of Consumer Affairs. 
Cannabis. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this division, "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code. "Marijuana" shall have the same meaning as cannabis. 
Cannabis Concentrate. Cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product's potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate for purposes of this section. A cannabis concentrate is not considered food, as defined in Section 109935 of the California Health and Safety Code, or a drug, as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Cannabis Product. Cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. "Marijuana product" shall have the same meaning as cannabis product. 
Canopy. All areas occupied by any portion of a cannabis plant, inclusive of all vertical planes, whether contiguous or noncontiguous on any one site. 
Certificate of Accreditation. A certificate issued by an accrediting body to a licensed testing laboratory, entity, or site to be registered in the state. 
Commercial Cannabis Activity or Commercial Cannabis Business. Any commercial activity or business (i.e., non-personal use) involving the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery, or retailing of cannabis, of cannabis products, or of ancillary products and accessories, whether or not carried on for gain or profit. 
Commercial Cannabis Permit. A permit issued by the town to an applicant to perform commercial cannabis activities pursuant to Chapter 5.38. 
Cultivation. Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
Cultivation—Indoor. Cultivation of cannabis within a permanent structure using exclusively artificial lighting. 
Cultivation—Outdoor. Cultivation of cannabis using no artificial lighting conducted in the ground or in containers outdoors. 
Cultivator. A permittee that performs any commercial cannabis cultivation activity. 
Customer. A natural person twenty-one years of age or older. 
Day Care Center. "Day care center" shall have the same meaning as in Section 1596.76 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Delivery. The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer in a location other than a licensed retail premise. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer. 
Distribution. The procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between licensed entities. 
Distributor. A permittee that engages in the procurement, sale, or transport of cannabis and cannabis products between licensed entities. 
Edible Cannabis Product. A cannabis product that is intended to be used orally, in whole or in part, for human consumption. An edible cannabis product is not considered food, as defined by Section 109935 of the California Health and Safety Code, or a drug, as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Labeling. Any label or other written, printed, or graphic matter upon cannabis or a cannabis product, upon its container or wrapper, or that accompanies any cannabis or cannabis product. 
Licensee. Any person holding a state license under California Business and Professions Code Sections 26000, et seq. 
Licensing Authority. The state agency responsible for the issuance, renewal, or reinstatement of the state license, or the state agency authorized to take disciplinary action against the licensee. 
Limited Access Area. An area in which cannabis goods are stored or held and is only accessible to a permittee and its employees and contractors. 
Manufacture. Compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product. 
Manufacturer. A permittee that produces, prepares, propagates, or compounds manufactured cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location. 
Medicinal Cannabis or Medicinal Cannabis Product. Cannabis or a cannabis product, respectively, intended to be sold for use pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at Section 11362.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, by a medicinal cannabis patient in California who possesses a physician's recommendation. "Medicinal marijuana" and "medicinal marijuana product" shall have the same meaning as medicinal cannabis and medicinal cannabis product. 
Medicinal License. A state licensed issued pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Sections 26000, et seq. for commercial cannabis activity involving medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products. Also referred to as an "M-License." 
Nonvolatile Solvents. Any solvent used in the extraction process that is not a volatile solvent and includes carbon dioxide and ethanol. 
Nursery. A facility that produces only clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the propagation and cultivation of cannabis. 
Opaque Exit Packaging. An opaque bag, box, or similar container provided by the retailer, in which purchased cannabis or cannabis products are placed prior to departing the store. 
Owner. An owner shall mean any of the following: 
1. A person with an aggregate ownership interest of twenty percent or more in the person applying for a permit or a permittee, unless the interest is solely a security, lien, or encumbrance; 
2. The chief executive officer of a nonprofit or other entity; or 
3. An individual who will be participating in the direction, control or management of the person applying for a permit. 
Permittee. A person issued a town permit pursuant to Chapter 5.38. 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. 
Physician's Recommendation. A recommendation by a physician that a patient use cannabis provided in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at Section 11362.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Plant—Dried Flower. All dead cannabis plant that has been harvested, dried, cured, or otherwise processed, excluding leaves and stems. 
Plant—Flowering. A cannabis plant that has formed a mass of pistils measuring greater than one-half inch wide at its widest point. 
Plant—Immature. A cannabis plant that is not flowering. 
Plant—Live. Living cannabis flowers and plants, including seeds, immature plants, and vegetative stage plants. 
Plant—Mature. A cannabis plant that is flowering. 
Premises. The designated structure or structures and land specified in the application that is owned, leased, or otherwise held under the control of the applicant or permittee where the commercial cannabis activity will be or is conducted. 
Primary Caregiver. "Primary caregiver" shall have the same meaning as in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code, as it may be amended from time to time. A person asserting primary caregiver status must establish by written documentation that (1) he or she has been designated as such by the medicinal cannabis patient and (2) he or she is a person "who has consistent assumed responsibility for the housing, health, or safety of the patient." 
Property Owner. The individual or entity who is the record owner of the subject property or premises where commercial cannabis activities are located or are proposed to be located. 
Public Park. An area created, established, designated, or maintained by the town for public play, recreation, or enjoyment or for the protection of natural resources and features at the site. 
Qualified Patient. "Qualified patient" shall have the same meaning as in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code, as it may be amended from time to time. 
Retail Area. A building, room, or other area that is open to the public, upon the retailer premises in which cannabis goods are sold or displayed. 
Retailer. A facility where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually, or in any combination for retail sale. 
State License. A state license issued pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Sections 26000, et seq. 
Tamper Evident Packaging. Packaging with a one-time-use seal that is affixed to the opening of the package, allowing a person to recognize whether or not the package has been opened. 
Temporary State License. A temporary license issued pursuant to the California Code of Regulations which allow commercial cannabis activities for a period of one hundred twenty days from the effective date of the state emergency regulations (i.e., January 1, 2018). 
Tester. A permittee that engages in the testing of cannabis products in a licensed testing laboratory and does not hold any other license for a cannabis activity. 
Testing Laboratory. A facility, entity, or site in the state that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in the cannabis industry in the state. 
THC. The compound tetrahydrocannabinol. 
Track-and-Trace System. The state approved system used to track commercial cannabis activity and movement. 
Transport. The transfer of cannabis or cannabis products between licensees. 
Unique Identifier. An alphanumeric code or designation used for reference to a specific plant on a licensed premises and any cannabis or cannabis product derived or manufactured from that plant. Also referred to as a "UID." 
Volatile Solvents. Any solvent that is or produces a flammable gas or vapor that, when present in the air in sufficient quantities, will create explosive or ignitable mixtures. Examples of volatile solvents include, but are not limited to, butane, hexane, and propane. 
Youth Center. "Youth center" shall have the same meaning as in Section 11353.1 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Canopy. A permanent roofed structure supported in part by a wall of the building and by posts or stanchions. 
Cardroom. See Municipal Code Chapter 5.16 (Cardrooms). 
Cargo Container. A metal or similar rectangular shipping container that is otherwise carried on rail cars, truck beds, and/or cargo ships. 
Carport. See "Garage or Carport." 
Change of Use. The replacement of an existing use on a lot or parcel, or any portion thereof, by a new use, or a change in the nature of an existing use; but does not include a change of ownership, tenancy, or management associated with a use for which the previous nature of the use will remain substantially unchanged. 
Commercial Vehicle. A vehicle used for commercial purposes having a manufacture's gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more per California Vehicle Code Section 22507.5; typically with three or more axles and/or a minimum of six feet and ten inches wide. 
Commission. The Town of Mammoth Lakes Planning and Economic Development Commission, appointed by the Mammoth Lakes Town Council in compliance with Government Code Section 65101, referred to throughout this Zoning Code as the "Commission." 
Community and Economic Development Director. The Director of Community and Economic Development for the Town of Mammoth Lakes, referred to in this Zoning Code as the "Director." 
Condominium. As defined by Civil Code Section 1351(f), an undivided interest in common in a portion of real property coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan. Also see "Fractional or Timeshare Development." 
Coniferous. A tree or shrub that bears cones and has needles or scale-like leaves. Coniferous trees include pine, fir, spruce, and cedar and are sometimes referred to as "evergreens." 
Construction Permit. A permit issued by the Town that authorizes construction activities, including building permits, grading permits, etc. 
Cooking Facilities. See "Kitchen." 
Council. See "Town Council." 
County. The County of Mono, State of California. 
County Recorder. The recorder for the County of Mono. 
Court. See "Sport Court." 
D.  Definitions D 
Deck. A platform attached to a house to provide outdoor living area that may be roofed (i.e., covered deck), but is without walls on at least two sides, and which includes railings where required by the California Building Standards Code. 
Dead Tree. A tree that is completely lifeless or showing substantial evidence of becoming lifeless. Such evidence may include unseasonable lack of foliage on a deciduous tree, extensive areas of dead brown foliage on a coniferous tree, brittle dry branches, or lack of growth during the growing season. 
Deciduous. A tree or shrub that typically loses its leaves seasonally; deciduous trees are generally the converse of coniferous trees. Deciduous trees include aspen, birch, oak, maple, and trees that flower or bear fruit. 
Defined Portion. That portion of a unit that is designed and constructed to be occupied by one or more persons separate and apart from a person or persons occupying the remainder of the unit. The term "defined portion" includes each portion of the unit that has facilities for sleeping and sanitation that can be physically secured or locked off from another area within the fractional-use unit that also has facilities for sleeping and sanitation, each of which has a separate entrance. 
Density. The ratio of development intensity to gross lot area. Density may be measured in any of the following ways that most closely resemble the defined portion to be occupied, including: dwellings, guest rooms, hotel rooms, suites, resort units, square footage of development, keys (i.e., lock-off hotel rooms), persons or any other unit, and based on the gross area of the property prior to any required dedications. 
Department. The Town of Mammoth Lakes Community and Economic Development Department, referred to in this Zoning Code as the "Department." 
Detached. Any structure that does not have a wall or roof in common with another structure. 
Detached Living Area. A detached accessory structure to a single-family dwelling, accommodating living and/or sleeping quarters, but without a kitchen or cooking facilities. 
Development. Any construction activity or alteration of the landscape, its terrain contour or vegetation, including the erection or alteration of structures. New development is any construction, or alteration of an existing structure or land use, or establishment of a land use, after the effective date of this Zoning Code. 
Development Agreement. A contract between the Town and an applicant for a development project, in compliance with the Municipal Code, and Government Code Sections 65864 et seq. 
Development Plan. A development plan may consist of maps, plans, reports, development and performance standards, schematic drawings, or such other documents and includes or describes the public and/or private improvements required by parcel or tract map, use permit, grading permit, and/or encroachment permit. A development plan may be a specific plan, master plan, tentative map, use permit, design review, or other similar type of development plan. 
Development Standards. The provisions of this Municipal Code that regulate the site planning and design of a proposed development or new land use, including provisions for height limits, landscaping, lot coverage, minimum lot area, off-street parking, setbacks, signs, and standards for specific land uses; includes performance standards. 
Diameter at Breast Height (DBH). the diameter of a tree trunk at four and one half feet above adjacent ground. The diameter may be calculated by use of the following formula: DBH = tree circumference at breast height divided by 3.142. 
Director. The Town of Mammoth Lakes Community and Economic Development Director, or designee of the Director. 
Discretionary Permit. A Town land use review and entitlement process where the review authority exercises discretion in deciding to approve or disapprove the permit; includes use permits, variances, design review permits, and subdivision maps. 
Drip Line. An area delineated by the projection of the periphery of the crown area of a tree down to the ground surface (e.g., a line drawn on the ground around a tree directly under its outermost branch tips). 
Driveway. An improved vehicular access way that provides access to the parcel on which it is located. Driveway shall also include an easement crossing no more than one other parcel for the purpose of providing access to no more than one abutting parcel. 
Dwelling or Dwelling Unit. A building or portion thereof (e.g., room or group of internally connected rooms) that has sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation facilities, but not more than one kitchen, which constitute an independent housekeeping unit, occupied by or intended for one household on a long-term basis. Also, a residence; does not include tents, recreation vehicles, or travel trailers. 
E.  Definitions E 
Easement. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity. 
Eave. The overhang that projects from a building at the lower edge of the roof (i.e., the overhanging lower edge of a roof). 
Environmental Impact Report (EIR). A document used to assess the physical characteristics of an area and to determine what effects will result if the area is altered by a proposed action, prepared in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
Established Business. For the purpose of temporary outdoor displays and sales, an established business is a business that meets the following criteria: 
1.  The business location shall be a standalone building or a physically separated suite within a multi-tenant building. Physically separated is defined as an enclosed area with a lockable door; 
2.  The business shall have a point-of-sale for retail transactions and shall conduct sales at the business location (e.g., the location cannot function as merchandise storage); 
3.  The business shall have its own name, provided that any business occupying the same location as a previous business, under the management and control of the same or substantially similar people as that previous business, and engaged in a substantially similar business as that previous business, shall not be considered a new business simply because of a change of name; 
4.  Any sales made by a business shall be made under the business's name and all price tags and receipts shall identify that name; and 
5.  The business shall possess a valid business tax certificate. 
Event. See "Special Event." 
F.  Definitions F 
Farmer's Market. The temporary use of a site for the outdoor sales of food and farm produce items, in compliance with California Food and Agriculture Code Sections 1392 et seq. 
Feasible. Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social, and technological factors. 
Fence. A constructed, un-roofed barrier of wood, metal, masonry, or other material as allowed by this Zoning Code, that is intended to enclose, separate, define, secure, protect, and/or screen one or more areas of a site. Includes masonry walls. 
First Approval. The first discretionary approval to occur with respect to a development, or, for developments not requiring a discretionary approval, the issuance of a building permit. 
Floor Area. The total horizontal enclosed area of all the floors below the roof and within the outer surface of the walls of a building or other enclosed structure unless otherwise stipulated. 
The following is included in Floor Area: Floor area includes, but is not limited to, all habitable space (as defined in the California Building Standards Code) that is below the roof and within the outer surface of the main walls of principal or accessory buildings or the centerlines of party walls separating such buildings or portions thereof or within lines drawn parallel to and two feet within the roof line of any building without walls. In the case of a multi-story building that has covered or enclosed stairways, stairwells or elevator shafts, the horizontal area of such features shall be counted only once at the floor level of their greatest area of horizontal extent. 
The following is excluded from Floor Area: Floor area does not include mechanical, electrical, and communication equipment rooms that do not exceed two percent of the building's gross floor area; bay windows or other architectural projections where the vertical distance between the lowest surface of the projection and the finished floor is 30 inches or greater; areas that qualify as usable open space; and areas used for off-street parking spaces or loading spaces, driveways, ramps between floors of a multi-level parking garage, and maneuvering aisles that are located below the finish grade of the property. 
For Non-Residential Uses: For non-residential uses, gross floor area includes interior walkways or corridors, interior courtyards, and walkways, paseos, or corridors covered by a roof or skylight. Non-residential gross floor area does not include arcades, porticoes, and similar open areas that are located at or near street level and are accessible to the general public but are not designed or used as sales, display, storage, service, or production areas. 
Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The ratio of floor area of a building or buildings on a lot divided by the total lot area. Floor area located below finished grade, the ceiling of which does not extend more than five feet above finished grade, is excluded when calculating FAR. 
Footcandle (fc). A unit of measurement for the total amount of light cast on a surface (illuminance). One footcandle is equivalent to the illuminance produced by a source of one candle at a distance of one foot. 
Fractional or Timeshare Development. A project in which a purchaser receives the right in perpetuity, for life or for a term of years to the recurrent, exclusive use or occupancy of a lot, parcel, unit, rooms, or segment of real property, annually or on some other periodic basis, for a period of time that has been or will be allotted from the use or occupancy periods into which the project has been divided. A fractional or timeshare development may comprise a portion of a larger, mixed-use development containing a hotel, inn, and/or other residential components and shall include, but no be limited to timeshare estate, interval ownership, fractional ownership, vacation license, vacation lease, club membership, time-share use, hotel/motel, or uses of a similar nature, as defined in the California Business and Professions Code. Also, a fractional-use project. 
Fractional-Use Occupant. Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy of a fractional-use project. 
G.  Definitions G 
Garage or Carport. Parking space and shelter for automobiles or other vehicles where the size of the parking space complies with the provisions of Chapter 17.44 (Parking and Loading Standards). 
• A garage is a completely enclosed attached or detached accessory structure, with an operational door. 
• A carport is an attached or detached accessory structure enclosed on no more than two sides. 
General Plan. The Town of Mammoth Lakes General Plan, including all its elements and all amendments, as adopted by the Town Council in compliance with Government Code Section 65300 et seq., and referred to in this Zoning Code as the "General Plan." 
Glare. Direct and unshielded light striking the eye to result in visual discomfort and reduced visual performance. 
Government Code. The State of California Government Code. 
Grade, Existing or Natural. The ground surface elevation prior to ground disturbance, grading, or site preparation. 
• Existing or natural grade of an undeveloped lot is the ground surface elevation in its natural state, before construction or ground disturbance. 
• Existing or natural grade of a developed lot is the ground surface elevation of the lot that conforms to an approved grading permit and/or building permit. 
Grade, Finished. The final ground surface elevation after the completion of grading or other site preparation related to a proposed development that conforms to an approved grading permit and/or building permit. In cases where substantial fill is proposed, "finished grade" shall be established by the Director consistent with parcels in the immediate vicinity and shall not be, nor have been artificially raised to gain additional building height pursuant to Section 17.36.060. 
Gross Leasable Area (GLA). Gross leasable square footage of floor area measured in square feet, including balconies, basements, mezzanines, or upper floors, but excluding common areas such as elevators, stair wells, bathrooms, shared hallways, and lobbies. This shall apply to single and multiple occupant/tenant structures. 
Gross Lot Area. See "Lot Area." 
Ground Floor. The primary floor of a building to which pedestrian access is provided from the fronting street, either at the sidewalk level, or not more than six feet above or below the sidewalk. 
H.  Definitions H 
Habitable Space. Space within a dwelling unit for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and/or bathing. Also, conditioned space. 
Home Occupation. The conduct of a business within a residential dwelling by the inhabitants thereof, which is subordinate to the residential use of the property. 
Household. One person living alone or two or more persons sharing residency whose income is considered for housing payments. 
Household Pets. Cats, dogs, and other animals normally kept as household pets, incidental to a residential use. 
Housing. The following terms are defined for the purposes of Chapter 17.136 (Housing). 
•  Affordable Housing. Housing that is restricted as to a rental rate or sales price for which the occupant(s) is/are paying approximately thirty percent of their gross income for housing costs, adjusted for household size. 
•  Bedroom. A room designed to be used for sleeping purposes which contains a closet(s), shall have access to a bathroom and which meets applicable California Building Standards Code requirements for light, ventilation, sanitation and egress and has a minimum floor area of one hundred square feet plus closet. 
•  Deed Restriction. A recorded contract entered into between the Town of Mammoth Lakes or its designee and the owner or purchaser of real property identifying the conditions of occupancy and resale. 
•  Existing Long-Term Rental Unit. Any dwelling that has been leased for residential purposes for a period or periods in excess of thirty consecutive days for more than five months per year within the last two years. 
•  New Development. Any new construction or conversion of use resulting in an increase in housing mitigation requirements as described in Chapter 17.136. New development includes expansions of, or additions to, existing uses. 
•  Workforce Housing. Housing that is restricted for rent or purchase by individuals and households working in the community of Mammoth Lakes. Workforce Housing is Affordable Housing for workers. Employment criteria, rental rates, and sales prices for workforce housing shall be established administratively by the town. 
I.  Definitions I 
Ice Cream Truck. As provided in Section 22456(c) of the California Vehicle Code, a motor vehicle engaged in the curbside vending of frozen or refrigerated desserts, confections or novelties commonly known as ice cream, or prepackaged candies, prepackaged snack foods, or soft drinks, primarily intended for the sale to children under 12 years of age. 
Inclusionary Housing Unit. A dwelling which is built under the provisions of Chapter 17.136, which is a required below market rate dwelling unit restricted to occupancy by households at or below a target proportion of Area Median Income. 
Inclusionary Percentage. See Inclusionary Rate. 
Inclusionary Rate. The proportion of total dwelling units in a residential or lodging development which are required to be provided as inclusionary housing units. 
Intensification of Use. A change in the use of a structure or site that generates more traffic or other level of activity on the site, for example: where the new use is required by this Zoning Code to have more off-street parking spaces than the former use; or a change in the operating characteristics of a use (for example, hours of operation). 
J.  Definitions J 
No specialized terms beginning with the letter "J" are defined at this time. 
K.  Definitions K 
Kitchen. A room or space within a building used or intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food, which includes any of the following cooking facilities: stove, oven, gas and electric ranges, hot plates, dishwasher, kitchen sink, appurtenant plumbing, and/or any other appliances for the preparation or preservation of food. 
L.  Definitions L 
Lamp. The generic term for an artificial light source installed in the socket portion of the fixture, to be distinguished from the whole assembly; commonly referred to as a "bulb." 
Land Use. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained. 
Land Use Permit. Authority granted by the Town to use a specified site for a particular purpose, including use permits, administrative permits, variances, design review permits, and other permits as established by this Zoning Code. 
Landscaping. The following terms are defined for the purposes of Chapter 17.40 (Water Efficient Landscape Regulations). 
•  Applied Water. The portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape. 
•  Adapted Plant. Plant species that is not indigenous to Mammoth Lakes, but is suitable for its climate and growing conditions. Adapted plants are identified in the Mammoth Lakes Recommended Plant List found in the Making the Most of Every Drop user guide. 
•  Automatic Irrigation Controller. A timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data. 
•  Backflow Prevention Device. A safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
•  Certificate of Substantial Completion. A certificate submitted to the Town by the project applicant certifying that the landscape and irrigation system have been completed in compliance with Section 17.40.060. 
•  Certified Irrigation Designer. A person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a profession trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense Irrigation Designer Certification Program and Irrigation Association's Certified Irrigation Designed Program. 
•  Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor. A person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense Irrigation Auditor Certification Program and Irrigation Association's Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor Program. 
•  Check Valve or Anti-drain Valve. A valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off. 
•  Compost. The safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth. 
•  Defensible Space. A vegetation-free zone extending thirty feet or more from a home and other structures for the purposes of reducing fire hazards. The defensible space zone should be larger than thirty feet if the property is sloped. 
•  Distribution Uniformity. The measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area. 
•  Drip Irrigation. Any non-spray low-volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low-volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
•  Drip Line. The outer edge of a tree or shrub, the point where water would drip to the ground from the outer leaves of a plant. 
•  Dynamic Water Pressure. The water pressure in the supply line when any of the irrigation emitters are running. 
•  Ecological Restoration Project. A project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
•  Emitter. A drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil. 
•  Established Landscape. The point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. 
•  Establishment Period of the Plants. The first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may need three to five years for establishment. 
•  Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU). The total water used for the landscape, estimated by applying the formula in Section 17.40.040F. 
•  Evapotranspiration Adjustment Factor (ETAF). A coefficient that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant water requirements and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF value for the purposes of this Code shall be 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas. The ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8. 
•  Evapotranspiration Rate (ETo). The quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time. The ETo for Mammoth Lakes is thirty-three inches/year for the growing season, May through October. 
•  Flow Rate. The rate at which water flows through pipes, valves, and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second. 
•  Flow Sensor. An inline device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves. This combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or submeter. 
•  Friable. A soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded. 
•  Fuel Modification Plan Guideline. Guidelines from a local fire authority to assist residents and businesses that are developing land or building structures in a fire hazard severity zone. 
•  Graywater. Untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. Graywater includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12 
•  Hardscape. Any constructed feature in a landscape built of concrete, stone, wood, or other such pervious or non-pervious durable material. Includes, but is not limited to, patios, walkways, and retaining walls. 
•  Hydrozone. A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated. 
•  Infiltration Rate. Rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour). 
•  Invasive Plant Species. Species of plants listed in the invasive plant inventory of the California Invasive Plant Council (IPC) that have been identified as invasive to areas within the IPC-delineated Central West (CW) region, and that are rated by the IPC as being either moderately invasive or highly invasive; listed in the USDA invasive and noxious weeds database; or included in the Mammoth Lakes Suggested Plant List as invasive or weedy. 
•  Irrigation Audit. An in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association's Landscape Irrigation Auditor Certification program or other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense labeled auditing program. 
•  Irrigation Efficiency (IE). The measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this Code is 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems. 
•  Irrigation Survey. An evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection of pressure at the emission devices, ability to eliminate overspray, installation of appropriate controller and conducting a system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system. 
•  Irrigation Water Use Analysis. An analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data. 
•  Landscape Architect. A person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in California as defined by the California Business and Professions Code, Section 5615. 
•  Landscape Area. The total horizontal surface area dedicated to plant installation and irrigation, plus the wet surface area of any decorative water features. The landscape area for shrubs and trees shall be determined using the shrub/tree mature growth diameter or drip line. The total landscape area shall be the sum of all the landscaped areas on the site that are irrigated, including special landscape areas. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, or other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes outside of planted areas. Landscape area does not include undisturbed areas with established non-irrigated vegetation, or landscaping that is exempt pursuant to Subsection 17.40.020. 
•  Landscape Contractor. A person licensed by the State of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems. 
•  Landscape Documentation Package. All documents, plans and other items required to demonstrate a project's compliance with the Water Efficient Landscape Regulations. 
•  Landscape Project. An undertaking of landscape design and installation on a particular area of land. A landscape project may be associated with new construction on an individual lot, a building project, or a multi-phased development. It may also be a larger, comprehensive landscape scheme that is not coupled with an individual building project, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt. A landscape project may also consist of a re-designed landscape. 
•  Landscape Water Meter. An inline device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is connected to a totalizer to record water use. 
•  Lateral Line. The water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve. 
•  Low-volume Irrigation. The application of irrigation water through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip line, and bubblers. Certain rotary emitters designed for highly efficient water distribution, and situated to irrigate low water use plants, may also be included in this definition at the discretion of the planning office. Low-volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
•  Main Line. The pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet. 
•  Making the Most of Every Drop. A document created to guide the layman through the compliance process of the Water Efficient Landscape Regulations. 
•  Mammoth Community Water District (MCWD). Water purveyor in most of the developed areas of the Town of Mammoth Lakes. Some parts of the Town are not served by the MCWD (e.g., Mammoth Yosemite Airport). 
•  Master Shut-Off Valve. An automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed, water will not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce any water loss due to a leaky station valve. 
•  Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA). The upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 17.44.040.F. For Mammoth Lakes, the MAWA applies to the months May-October. 
•  Median. An area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses. 
•  Mulch. Any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion. 
•  Native Plant. For purposes of this ordinance, a plant indigenous to the Mammoth Lakes Basin as identified in the Mammoth Lakes Recommended Plant List found in the Making the Most of Every Drop user guide. 
•  New Construction. For the purposes of the landscape regulations, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building. 
•  Non-residential Landscape. Landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial, and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas. 
•  Noxious Weed. Any plant species identified as a noxious weed by the California Department of Food and Agriculture, appearing on the most recent version of the publication entitled "Pest Ratings of Noxious Weed Species and Noxious Weed Seed." 
•  Operating Pressure. The pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate. 
•  Overhead Sprinkler Irrigation System. A system that delivers water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors). 
•  Overspray. Irrigation water that is delivered beyond the target area. 
•  Parkway. The area between a sidewalk and the curb or traffic lane. It may be planted or unplanted, and with or without pedestrian egress. 
•  Pervious. Any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil. 
•  Plant Factor or Plant Water Use Factor (PF). A numerical value that, when multiplied by reference evapotranspiration (ETo), estimates the amount of water needed by plants. General plant factors are assigned for very low, low, moderate, and high-water use plants as follows: very low = 0 to 0.1; low = 0.1 to 0.3; moderate = 0.4 to 0.6; high = 0.7 to 1.0; turf or grass = 1.0. The Mammoth Lakes Recommended Plant List found in the Making the Most of Every Drop users guide contains information about the water use level for recommended plants and trees. More specific plant factors may be found in the publication "Water Use Classification of Landscape Species" (WUCOLS), or may be more precisely determined by a landscape professional, with consideration of site-specific soil and microclimate conditions. 
•  Rain Sensor or Rain Sensing Shutoff Device. A component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains. 
•  Recreational Areas. Areas, excluding private single family residential areas, designated for active play, recreation, or public assembly in parks, sports fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters, or golf course tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds, and greens. 
•  Recycled Water or Reclaimed Water or Treated Sewage Effluent Water. Treated wastewater of a quality suitable for non-potable uses including landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption. 
•  Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo). The approximation of water loss from a field of four- to seven-inch tall cool-season grass that is not water stressed. ETo is measured at California Irrigation Management Stations in various locations around the state. 
•  Rehabilitated Landscape or Re-designed Landscape. A landscape project where the landscaping or irrigation system is modified or replaced and meets the following criteria: two thousand five hundred square feet or greater and the modifications or replacement are completed within two years. 
•  Residential Landscape. Landscape surrounding single or multifamily homes. 
•  Runoff. Water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. 
•  Soil Moisture Sensor. A device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also initiate or suspend irrigation. 
•  Special Landscape Area (SLA). An area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, recreational areas, areas irrigated with recycled water, or water features using recycled water. 
•  Sprinkler Head or Spray Head. A device which delivers water through a nozzle. 
•  Static Water Pressure. The pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing. 
•  Station. An area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously. 
•  Swing Joint. An irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage. 
•  Submeter. A metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the primary utility water meter. 
•  Turf. A ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, perennial ryegrass, red fescue, and tall fescue are examples of cool-season turf grasses. 
•  Valve. A device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. 
•  Water Conserving Plant Species. A plant species identified as having a very low or low plant factor. 
•  Water Feature. A landscape design element where open water performs an aesthetic function. Water features include ponds, fountains, waterfalls and artificial streams. Spas and swimming pools are not included in the landscape area. The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation. 
•  Watering Window. The time of day irrigation is allowed. 
•  WUCOLS. The "Water Use Classification of Landscape Species" published by the University of California Cooperative Extension, the Department of Water Resources and the Bureau of Reclamation. 
Lawfully Occupying. Occupying a site or structure with all legal requirements met (e.g., permits, certificate of occupancy, etc.). 
Legislative Permit. A permit that establishes rules, policies, or standards, such as a zone code amendment, district zoning amendment, specific plan, and master plan. 
Light Fixture. A complete lighting unit including the lamp and parts designed to distribute the light, position and protect the lamp, and connect the lamp to a power source. Also, a "luminaire" or "fixture." 
Light Fixture, Full Cut-Off. A lighting fixture designed such that no light, either directly from the bulb or indirectly from the fixture, is emitted at or above a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture. 
Light Pollution. Any adverse effect of artificial light sources including, but not limited to, discomfort to the eye or diminished vision due to glare, light trespass, uncontrolled up-lighting, uncomfortable distraction to the eye, or any artificial light that diminishes the ability to view the night sky. Also see "Glare." 
Light Shielding, Outdoor Lighting. A barrier around a fixture that helps conceals the lamp and control light distribution. A fixture that is "fully shielded" incorporates a solid barrier, emits no light rays above the horizontal plane and effectively obscures visibility of the lamp. A fixture that is "partially shielded" may allow some light to pass through a semi-translucent barrier, and/or may allow visibility of the lamp from certain perspectives. 
Light Trespass. Light falling where it is not desired or needed, generally light from one property that shines onto another property or the public right-of-way or shines upwards. Also see "Glare." 
Lighting Fixture, Outdoor. Any temporary or permanent lighting fixture that is installed, located, or used in such a manner to provide illumination of objects or activities outside. Outdoor lighting fixtures include all fixtures mounted to the exterior of a structure, poles, bollards, or other freestanding structures, or placed so as to provide direct illumination on any exterior area or activity. 
Lighting, Temporary. Lighting that is intended to be used for a special event for seven days or less. 
Lot, or Parcel. A recorded lot or parcel of real property under single ownership, lawfully created as required by applicable Subdivision Map Act and Town ordinance requirements, including this Zoning Code, and has frontage providing legal access on at least one street. Types of lots include the following: 
•  Corner Lot. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets, where they intersect at an interior angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the intersection angle is more than 135 degrees, the lot is considered an interior lot. 
•  Flag Lot. A lot having access from the building site to a public street by means of a private right-of-way strip that is owned in fee. 
•  Interior Lot. A lot abutting only one street. 
•  Key Lot. An interior lot, the front of which adjoins the side property line of a corner lot. 
•  Through Lot. A lot with frontage on two generally parallel streets. 
  
Lot Area. Also see Figure 17.148.020(1), Lot Types and Features. 
•  Gross Lot Area. Gross lot area is the total area included within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of adjacent dedicated street rights-of-way. 
•  Net Lot Area. Net lot area is the gross lot area, excluding dedications and easements that are not for the exclusive use of the lot on which the dedication or easement is located. 
Lot Coverage. The percentage of gross lot area, exclusive of any required dedications, occupied by structures, decks, driveways and parking areas (regardless of driveway material), walkways, and all impervious surfaces. When calculating site coverage of a structure or building, the exterior walls of the structure or building at ground level should be used. The following features may be excluded from lot coverage calculations: 
• Eaves; 
• 50 percent of the area of covered and uncovered decks that are at least eight feet above grade; 
• Paving materials used for landscape purposes that are more than 50 percent porous (driveways and parking areas are counted 100 percent towards lot coverage regardless of material); and 
• Subterranean or podium structures topped by landscaped open space areas of at least 10 feet by 10 feet by four feet deep. 
Lot Depth. The average linear distance between the front and the rear lot lines or the intersection of the two side lot lines if there is no rear line. The Director shall determine lot depth for parcels of irregular configuration. Also see Figure 17.148.020(3), Measuring Lot Width and Depth. 
Lot Line or Property Line. Any recorded boundary of a lot. Also see Figure 17.148.020(1), Lot Types and Features and Figure 17.148.020(2): Rear Lot Line of Irregular Lot 
•  Front Lot Line. 
— On an interior lot, the front lot line is the property line separating the parcel from the street. 
— On a corner lot, the front lot line is the shorter property line abutting a street. If the street-fronting lot lines of a corner lot are equal in length, the front lot line shall be determined by the Director. 
— On a through lot, both lot lines are front lot lines and the lot is considered to have no rear lot line. 
•  Rear Lot Line. A property line that does not intersect the front lot line, which is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot line. 
— In the case of an irregular-shaped lot, the rear lot line is an imaginary line within the lot,    ;hg;parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a minimum length of 10 feet. 
— A through lot or a lot bounded by streets on all sides may have no rear lot line. 
•  Side Lot Line. Any lot line that is not a front lot line or rear lot line. 
  
Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. The Director shall determine lot width for parcels of irregular shape. 
  
Low Income Household. A household whose income does not exceed the qualifying limits set for "lower income households" in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
M.  Definitions M 
Maintenance. See "Routine Maintenance." 
Map Act. See "Subdivision Map Act." 
Market-Rate Unit. New living units in residential or lodging projects which are not Below Market Rate units as defined in this chapter. 
May. The word "may" is permissive or not required. 
Mixed-Use Development. A project which includes two or more categories of land use such as residential and commercial in the same building or on the same site. Single residential units that are a part of a commercial building and are secondary to the primary commercial use are allowed, pursuant to the standards in Section 17.52.170. 
Moderate Income Household. A household whose income does not exceed the qualifying limits set for "persons and families of low or moderate income" in Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Mobile Home. A trailer, transportable in one or more sections, that is designed for use as a dwelling and as defined under State law. A mobile home on a permanent foundation is included under "Dwelling, Single-Family." 
Mobile Vending Vehicle. Any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart from which goods, services, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating cart or vehicle on private property or within the public right-of-way. 
Mobile Vendor. Any person in charge of or operating any mobile vending vehicle, either as agent, employee, or otherwise under the direction of the owner. 
Model Home. A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision. There shall only be one model home of each floor plan except that a multiple unit structure, up to a four-plex, containing duplicates of one or more floor plans may be considered as model homes. Structures containing more than four units shall not be considered model homes. 
Multimodal. Transportation infrastructure that supports travel by modes other than by personal vehicle, such as sidewalks, transit, or bicycle lanes. May also be referred to as alternative transportation. 
Municipal Code. The Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code. 
N.  Definitions N 
Negative Declaration. A Negative Declaration as defined by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
Net Lot Area. See "Lot Area." 
Nonconforming Lot or Parcel. A lot or parcel that was legally created before the adoption of this Zoning Code or amendment, but does not comply with the current access, area, width, depth, or other applicable requirements of this Zoning Code. 
Nonconforming Structure. A structure that was legally constructed before the adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code, but does not comply with the current setback, height limit, building separation, and/or other applicable requirements of this Zoning Code. 
Nonconforming Use. A use of land and/or a use within a conforming or nonconforming structure that was legally established and maintained before the adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code, but does not conform to the current Zoning Code requirements for allowable land uses within the applicable zone. 
O.  Definitions O 
Off-Site. An activity or accessory use that is related to a specific primary use, but is not located on the same site as the primary use. 
On-Site. Located on the same lot or, if in a master plan or specific plan, within the same master or specific plan area. 
Open Space. Land that is maintained in a primarily natural state, and/or primarily without structures other than facilities to support outdoor passive or active recreation. 
Open Space, Private. An area of a developed residential multi-family project site that is contiguous to and directly accessible from an individual dwelling unit, which is available for active and/or passive recreation uses by the inhabitants of the dwelling unit, and which is open on top or on at least one side (e.g., balcony, deck, patio, etc.). 
Ordinary High Water Mark. The line on the shore established by the fluctuations of water and indicated by physical characteristics such as a clear, natural line impressed on the bank, shelving, changes in the character of soil, destruction of terrestrial vegetation, the presence of litter and debris, or other appropriate means that consider the characteristics of the surrounding areas. Also see Top of Creek Bank. 
Outdoor Dining. An unenclosed dining area, including tables and chairs, accessory and incidental to a restaurant; does not include vendor carts/stands (see "Vendor Cart/Stand"). 
Outdoor Display and Sales. The permanent or temporary outdoor display of merchandise incidental to an adjacent indoor retail use, and certain independent outdoor retail sales facilities, including parking lot sales; does not include vendor carts/stands (See "Vendor Cart/Stand"). 
Outdoor Storage. See "Storage - Outdoor." 
Overlay Zone. A land use designation which due to special circumstances necessitates the imposition of developmental requirements in addition to those required by the underlying zoning. 
P.  Definitions P 
Parapet. A low wall projecting from the edge of a platform, terrace, or roof. 
Parcel. See "Lot, or Parcel." 
Parking, Bicycle. See "Bicycle Parking." 
Parking, Covered. Parking spaces located within or under a building including a garage or carport. 
Parking, Enclosed. Parking spaces located entirely within a structure with walls on all sides except for the entry to the parking space that shall be provided with a door. Understructure enclosed parking facilities for five or more vehicles are not required to have an entry door. 
Parking, In-Lieu Fee. A fee paid to satisfy parking requirements in lieu of providing physical parking spaces. 
Parking, Off-Street. Parking that is not provided on a street or within street right-of-way and is typically provided on private or public property in the form of a parking lot or structure. 
Parking, Off-Site. Parking that is required by Section 17.44.030 that is not provided on the site for which the parking is required. Off-site parking shall meet the requirements of Section 17.44.040A.2. 
Parking, On-Street. Parking that is provided on a street or within street right-of-way. On-street parking is typically unreserved, but may be time-limited, particularly in resort or commercial areas. On-street parking is intended to be utilized by customers or residents of the business or property fronting the street. 
Parking, On-Site. Parking that is required by Section 17.44.030 that is provided on the site for which the parking is required. 
Parking, Shared. Parking spaces that are shared between two or more uses that are on the same site or on different sites (off-site). Shared parking typically allows for a reduction in the number of total parking spaces required because parking is used more efficiently between uses. 
Parking Space. An accessible space within a public or private parking area for the parking of one motor vehicle. 
Parking, Surface. Parking that is not provided within a parking structure. 
Parking, Tandem. Parking of two or more vehicles, one in front of the other, in a single parking space. 
Parking, Underground. Parking that is provided within a structure that is primarily underground. On slopes of 10 percent or less, 70 percent of the structure is required to be below existing grade to be considered "underground." On slopes of more than 10 percent, 50 percent of the structure is required to be below existing grade to be considered "underground." 
Parking, Understructure. Parking that is located below a structure but not underground. 
Permanent Lake or Stream. Any lake, river, stream, pond, or other body of water or waterway which, most years, under natural conditions, will contain water all year. 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association; city, county, state, or district; and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof. 
Planned Residential Development. A project planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or a programmed series of operations in accordance with a detailed, comprehensive plans encompassing such elements as circulation patterns and parking, open space, recreational areas, utilities and lots or building sites together with a program for provision, operation, and maintenance of all areas, improvements, facilities and services provided for the common use of the residents of the development. In general, a planned residential development should have a minimum of 20 residential units. 
Planning and Economic Development Commission. See "Commission." 
Plot Plan. See "Site Plan." 
Porch. A covered but otherwise open platform that provides a transition between the interior of a building and the public space of the street. 
Primary Structure. A structure that accommodates the primary use of the site. 
Primary Use. The main purpose for which a site is developed and occupied; also, principal use. 
Property. A piece of land often with buildings on it that is owned by a person, business, etc. 
Property Line. See "Lot Line or Property Line." 
Property Owner. The person(s) or entity to whom property tax is assessed, as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll of the County. 
Proposed Project. A proposed new structure, new addition or alteration to an existing structure or site, or area of other new site development. See also "Development." 
Public Building and Uses. Public agency (including special district) facilities. 
Q.  Definitions Q 
No specialized terms beginning with the letter "Q" are defined at this time. 
R.  Definitions R 
Recreational Vehicle (RV). A motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, carryall, or camp trailer, house car, with or without motive power, originally designed for human habitation for recreational, emergency, or other occupancy. 
Replacement Value. The amount that an owner would have to pay to replace a structure or use at the present time. This value can be determined based on information from an insurance company, or other information that may be deemed appropriate by the Director to determine the current value of a use or structure. 
Review Authority. The individual or official Town body (e.g., the Community and Economic Development Director, Planning and Economic Development Commission, or Town Council) identified by this Zoning Code as having the responsibility and authority to review, and approve or disapprove a permit application. 
Roof-Mounted. Mounted above the eave line of a structure. 
Routine Maintenance. Normal site or structure repair and maintenance include the following: 
• Site. Repair or replace on-site items such as the following: Fences and/or walls; landscaping, including the planting of new ground cover, shrubs, and trees; striping of parking and circulation areas; or service facilities (drainage, irrigation components, and utility service connections). 
• Structure. Repair or replace items such as the following: Exterior doors, siding, windows, roofs, decks, service connections, or sewer/water system. 
• Exterior painting, stuccoing, or texture coating. 
• New construction not included. Normal site or structure repair and maintenance does not include the following: New on-site construction, additions to existing structure(s), or grading and paving for a new or expanded parking area. 
S.  Definitions S 
Setback. The distance by which a structure, parking area, or other development feature must be separated from a lot line. Setbacks for properties fronting on substandard streets are measured from the ultimate right-of-way line based upon the adopted road standards of the Town or, if in a community services district, the standards of the district (i.e., measured from the property line after the required street right-of-way dedication). 
•  Setback, Front Yard. A line parallel to the front lot line at a distance required by the zone in which the property is located. 
•  Setback, Rear Yard. A line parallel to the rear lot line at a distance required by the zone in which the property is located or by the California Building Standards Code, whichever is greater. 
•  Setback Side Yard. A line parallel to the side lot line at a distance required by the zone in which the property is located or by the California Building Standards Code, whichever is greater. 
Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory. 
Sign. The following terms are defined for the purposes of Chapter 17.48 (Signs). 
•  Abandoned sign. Any lawfully erected sign that, for a period of 90 days or more, no longer advertises or identifies an on-going business, activity, product, service, or other use available on the premise where the sign is located. 
•  Awning. A projecting structure, consisting of a frame and a material covering, attached to and wholly supported by a wall of a building and installed over and partially in front of doors, windows, or other openings in a building; also, a canopy. 
•  Awning sign. Any sign copy displayed on an awning. 
•  Banner. Any flexible device used to advertise, draw attention, or relay a message, typically displayed outdoors. A banner is only allowed for use as a temporary sign. 
•  Business frontage. The width of a building occupied by a single business tenant, that fronts on a public   ;hg;street or faces a plaza, courtyard, pedestrian corridor or walkway, parking lot, or alley, where customer access to the building is available. Width is measured as the widest point on an architectural elevation. 
•  Changeable copy sign. A sign with a message comprised of letters, numbers, or other characters that are designed to be manually or mechanically changed to display different messages. A changeable copy sign does not include internally lit or electronic message signs. 
•  Community event sign. Any sign identifying or communicating information about any type of race, parade, show, competition, special or temporary event, or community activity to which the general public is invited. 
•  Community information sign. A community information sign publicizes only community events and conditions (e.g., weather, road conditions, and other safety information), and is not used to identify or advertise products or businesses. A community information sign is operated and/or maintained by the Town in coordination with other public agencies for public health, safety, and general welfare. A community information sign may be an electronic message sign, a sign with a changeable copy, or other type of sign as allowed by Chapter 17.48. 
•  Decorative flag. Any flag which displays any holiday, season, design, or the like which does not include any commercial name, message, logo, or symbol. 
•  Directional sign. A sign designed and erected solely for the purposes of directing vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic from an entry or exit point, or to or from various points of passage on or within a private property (e.g., "entrance," "exit," "deliveries in rear," "one-way," "fire lane," and "no parking"). 
•  Double-faced sign. A sign constructed to display its message on the outer surfaces of two identical and parallel planes. 
•  Drive-up menu board. A drive-up menu board is for the convenience of customers of drive-through businesses and not for advertising. Drive-up menu boards shall only display products available for sale and the prices of those products. 
•  Electronic message sign. A sign with a fixed or changing display composed of a series of lights that are electronically changed to display different messages. 
•  Governmental sign. Erected by or on behalf of the Town or other public entity to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, or direct or regulate pedestrian, bicycle, or vehicular traffic. Signs of a public utility or transit company regarding its poles, lines, pipes, facilities, or routes, and emergency warning signs erected by the Town or other public entity, a public utility company, or contractor doing authorized or permitted work on public property, are considered governmental signs. 
•  Ground level business. A business where the main pedestrian entrance is accessed directly from a street, sidewalk, surface parking lot, or plaza. 
•  Halo lit sign. A sign illuminated by concealing the light source behind three-dimensional opaque letters, numbers, or other characters of a sign, resulting in the night time perception of a halo around the silhouette of each sign character. 
•  Hanging sign. A sign attached to and located below any eave, roof, canopy, awning, or wall bracket. 
•  Illegal sign. Any sign erected without complying with all ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of its construction and erection or use. 
•  Indirect lighting. Lighting that is not an integral part of the sign, usually directed on the sign from a different location (e.g., gooseneck lighting, etc.) in compliance with Section 17.48.080.E, Sign lighting. 
•  Informational sign. A sign used to provide information including signs indicating hours of operation, and such signs as "open," "closed," "no smoking," "no solicitors," current credit card signs, phone number, trade association emblems, and signs of similar purpose. 
•  Institutional sign. A sign used to provide information related to a public, quasi-public, or non-profit use such as a school, library, hospital, or church. 
•  Internally illuminated sign. A sign with a light source located in the interior of the sign so the light shines through the face of the sign, or with a light source which is attached to the face of the sign and is perceived as a design element of the sign. 
•  Master Sign Program. A sign plan which specifies the number, size, description, and location of all signs located or to be located on the property. 
•  Menu display box. A freestanding or wall sign enclosed in glass or other transparent material for the purpose of displaying menus oriented to pedestrians. 
•  Monument sign. An independent, freestanding sign that is displayed on and totally supported by one or more support elements that are on the ground, with no part of the sign attached to a building or similar structure. 
•  Multi-tenant center identification sign. A sign stating the name of the multi-tenant property and not advertising any particular business or product. 
•  Multi-tenant property. A building or property consisting of two or more separate businesses that share either the same property or structure and use common access and parking facilities. 
•  Neon sign. Any sign illuminated by or utilizing in any way tubes filled with neon and/or related inert gases, or products that produce the same or similar effect as neon, such as flexible light-emitting diode (LED) neon-like tubing. 
•  Nonconforming sign. Any permanent or temporary sign, including structural supports, which was lawfully erected and maintained, but does not comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.48. 
•  Off-site sign. Any sign identifying a use, facility, service, or product which is not located, sold, or manufactured on the same premise as the sign. 
•  Pedestrian-oriented sign. A sign designed and directed toward pedestrians; typically a small hanging or projecting sign legible to pedestrians adjacent to the structure. 
•  Political sign. A sign for the purpose of advocating a political party, platform, ideology, and/or candidate or proposition for a public election. 
•  Portable sign. Any sign or advertising device that rests on the ground and is not designed to be permanently attached to a building or permanently anchored to the ground, including but not limited to A-frame or sandwich board signs. Portable signs do not include pole or wooden post signs. 
•  Projecting sign. A sign projecting six inches or more from a wall or building that is supported by a wall or building with the display surface of the sign perpendicular to the building wall. 
•  Real estate development sign. A temporary sign used to identify a proposed real estate development and/or the owners, architects, contractors, real estate agent, or lenders involved with a development for which a valid land use permit has been approved, but which is not under construction. Sale and lease information may be included on such a sign. 
•  Real estate open house sign. An on-site or off-site sign identifying a residence for sale when the residence is open for view to the public, and when the seller or seller's agent is at the residence. 
•  Real estate sign. A temporary sign indicating the availability of land, property, or building for sale, lease, rent, or other permanent or temporary disposition, not including a real estate development sign or site construction sign. 
•  Reflective surface. Any shiny material or device reflecting light and creating glare. 
•  Residential nameplate. A sign for the sole purpose of identifying the inhabitants of a residential structure or the house name, which does not contain any form of advertising or business identification (e.g., "The Wilson's"). Residential nameplates do not include addressing as required by Chapter 16.32 (Street Name and Address Regulations). 
•  Roof sign. A sign constructed upon or over a roof or placed so that any portion of the sign extends above the edge of the roof. 
•  Sign. Any emblem, icon, insignia, logo, replica, symbol, or trademark that displays a message in lettered, written, numbered, pictorial, or any other visual perceptible form, and including the support elements, all component parts, and illumination, which is used or intended to be used to advertise a property, product or service, or to convey a message of any sort, and which is visible by the general public from any public right-of-way or any public area. "Visible" means capable of being seen, whether or not capable of being read. A sign does not include signs or displays located entirely inside of a structure and not clearly visible from public view, or works of art not used to advertise or identify any business or product. 
•  Sign copy. All portions of a sign displaying a message, including text and symbols, not including the supporting structure or base of a sign. 
•  Site construction sign. A temporary sign used to identify a real estate development which is under construction, and/or the owners, architects, contractors, real estate agents, or lenders involved with the development. Sales and lease information may be included on such signs. 
•  Support element. The structural portion of a sign securing the sign to the ground, a building, or to another structure. 
•  Temporary sign. A sign which is intended for a definite and limited period of display and which is not permanently affixed to a structure, sign area, or window. 
•  Tenant directory sign. A sign for listing the tenants and their suite numbers or addresses in a multiple tenant structure or center. 
•  Theater sign. A sign displaying current or coming movies, plays, concerts, performance, or other programs to the public, which may utilize changeable copy. 
•  Vehicle station fuel price sign. Price sign for gasoline stations or businesses that sell motor vehicle fuel to the public. 
•  Walking sign. Any commercial sign, including sandwich board type signs or costumed characters, which is held or supported by a person and visible from a public right-of-way or public area. Walking signs do not include writing or commercial logos on normal clothing. 
•  Wall sign. Any sign that is displayed on or attached to an exterior wall of a building or structure, with the sign parallel to, and not projecting more than six inches from, the wall. 
•  Wayfinding sign. A sign constructed or authorized by the Town to direct persons to specific districts, destinations, or facilities. Wayfinding signs also include kiosks or similar information stands intended to be a convenience for the traveling and visiting public as approved and authorized by the Town. 
•  Window area. Window area shall include perimeter window frames, mullions, and glass doors located on the ground level and second story of a business frontage. 
•  Window sign. Any permanent or temporary sign displayed on the surface of any glass or glazed material (e.g., window or door) in any way and exposed to public view, not including merchandise included in window displays. Window signs shall not include common wall windows on the inside of a building not visible by the general public from any public right-of-way or any public area. 
•  Works of art. An artistic creation such as a painting, sculpture, architecture, landscape design, mural, and other objects. Works of art not used to advertise or identify any business or product are not considered a sign. 
Single Dwelling. A building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one housekeeping unit. Also includes factory-built, modular housing units, constructed in compliance with the California Building Standards Code, and mobile homes/manufactured housing units that comply with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, placed on permanent foundation systems. 
Site. A parcel or adjoining parcels under single ownership or single control, considered a unit for the purposes of development or other use. 
Site Plan. A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, all of the buildings, structures, and uses in an exact manner of development proposed for a specific parcel of land. 
Sleeping Area. Any bedroom, loft, or other space that can be equipped with beds, foldout sofas, or other similar sleeping furniture. 
Slope. A comparison of the vertical rise of a property to its horizontal run, expressed as a percentage. 
•  Calculating Average Slope. Lot slope is calculated as an average slope of the ground area within the required setback lines (buildable area) for primary structures on a site. Lot slope is based on existing grade. The elevations of the points where required setback lines intersect are used to determine the average elevation of each setback line. Specifically, the average elevation of each setback line is calculated by adding the elevations at the line's intersection points and dividing by two. The average lot slope is then calculated by subtracting the average elevation of the most uphill setback line and the average elevation of the most downhill setback line and dividing the sum by the average distance between these two setback lines. Where required setback lines do not intersect to form a four-sided polygon, average lot slope shall be calculated by dividing the difference between the elevations of the highest and lowest points within the buildable area by the horizontal distance between said points. 
  
Snow Storage Area. Areas designated to accommodate and store snow. 
Special Event or Festival. A temporary use such as a circus, carnival, music festival, outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits, and similar amusement or entertainment activities; may include sporting events (e.g., running races, bicycle events, fishing tournaments, and similar activities); does not include "Outdoor Display and Sales." 
Specific Plan. See Chapter 17.116 (Specific Plans). 
Sport Court. A basketball, handball, squash, tennis, volleyball, or similar outdoor facility for playing a participant sport. Does not include a basketball hoop on the front of a garage. 
State. The State of California. 
Storage - Outdoor. The storage of various materials outside of a structure other than fencing, either as an accessory or primary use. 
Street. A thoroughfare, right-of-way, or easement, public or private, which affords principal means of access to abutting property, including alley, avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road, and any other thoroughfare; includes the entire right-of-way or easement and offers of dedication; does not include easements granted exclusively for pedestrian or non-vehicle use or an easement across a single parcel for the purpose of access to no more than one abutting lot. 
Street Wall. The portion of a building façade that faces the street. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires attachment to the ground, attachment to something located on the ground, or placement on the ground. For the purposes of this Zoning Code, the term "structure" includes "buildings" but does not include cargo containers or swimming pools. 
Structure, Primary. See "Primary Structure." 
Structural Alteration. Any change in or alteration to a structure involving a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling joists, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles, retaining walls, or similar components. Also see "Altered." 
Subdivision. The division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized Mono County assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. See Government Code Section 66424. 
•  Final Map. A subdivision map prepared and approved in compliance with the Map Act that is used to complete the subdivision of five or more parcels, five or more condominiums, and other projects per Government Code Section 66426. 
•  Lot Line Adjustment. As provided by Government Code Section 66412(d), a Lot Line Adjustment relocates one or more lot lines between two or more existing adjacent parcels, where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel and where no more parcels are created than originally existed. 
•  Parcel Map. The subdivision map required to complete a subdivision of four or fewer lots. See Government Code Sections 66444-66450. 
•  Subdivision Improvements. Subdivision improvements include streets, storm drainage facilities, sanitary sewers, water supply facilities, electric lines, and gas lines. See Government Code Section 66419. 
•  Subdivision Map Act, or Map Act. California Government Code, commencing with Section 66410 as presently constituted, and any amendments to those provisions. 
•  Tentative Map. A map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it (see Government Code Section 66424.5(a)). A tentative map is required for all subdivisions creating five or more parcels, five or more condominiums, and other projects per Government Code Section 66426. 
•  Vesting Tentative Map. A map that is filed and processed in the same manner as a Tentative Map except as otherwise provided by the Map Act. See Government Code Section 66424.5(b). 
T.  Definitions T 
Target Population. Persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people. 
Temporary Structure. A structure, typically without any foundation or footings, and which is required to be removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. 
Temporary Use. A land use that is designed, operated, and occupies a site for a limited time. See Chapter 17.56 (Temporary Uses and Events). 
Timeshare Development. See "Fractional or Timeshare Development." 
Top of Creek Bank. The uppermost ground elevation paralleling a creek or watercourse where the gradient changes from a more defined vertical component to more horizontal. Also see Ordinary High Water Mark. 
Town. The Town of Mammoth Lakes, State of California, referred to in this Zoning Code as the "Town." Town with a lowercase "t" (i.e., town) refers to the community of Mammoth Lakes. 
Town Council. The Mammoth Lakes Town Council, referred to in this Zoning Code as the "Council." 
Transient Occupancy. As defined per Section 3.12.020 of the Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code, but shall generally mean the occupation of a structure, or portion of a structure, intended or designed for occupancy by persons for purposes of sleeping, lodging, or similar reasons for a period of 30 consecutive days or less in exchange for a fee or similar consideration. 
Transient Occupancy Tax. The tax imposed pursuant to Chapter 3.12 of the Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code. 
Transportation Demand Management (TDM). Various strategies to efficiently manage the demand for transportation resources such as roadway capacity and parking. 
Tree. A live, tall woody plant, with a single main trunk or stem of a diameter at breast height (DBH) of six inches or greater. 
Tree Removal. Cutting a tree to the ground, extraction of a tree, or killing of a tree by spraying, girdling, damaging the roots of a tree, or any other means. Tree maintenance, such as the trimming or thinning of branches is not considered to be "removal." 
U.  Definitions U 
Underground Parking. See "Parking, Underground." 
Understructure Parking. See "Parking, Understructure." 
Unit. One individual residence, whether in a single-family or multiple-family development. 
Use. See "Land Use." 
Use Permit. See Chapter 17.68 (Use Permits). 
Use, Primary. See "Primary Use." 
V.  Definitions V 
Variance. See Chapter 17.72 (Variances). 
Vendor Cart/Stand. A temporary outdoor cart or stand selling food and/or beverages (e.g., fruit, hot dogs, ice cream) and other like merchandise without any outdoor seating; does not qualify as "Outdoor Dining." 
Very-Low Income Household. A household whose income does not exceed the qualifying limits set for "very low income households" in Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Vesting Tentative Map. See "Subdivision." 
W.  Definitions W 
Wing Wall. A wall that extends from an exterior building wall; is architecturally integrated into the design of the building to which it is attached and which has the effect of partially or entirely "fencing" an outdoor area. 
X.  Definitions X 
No specialized terms beginning with the letter "X" are defined at this time. 
Y.  Definitions Y 
Yard. An area between a lot line and a setback, unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted by this Zoning Code. A yard area includes any setback required by the applicable zoning district. See also "Setback." 
•  Yard, Front. An area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the required setback. 
•  Yard, Rear. An area extending the full width of the lot between a rear lot line and the required setback. 
•  Yard, Side. An area between a side lot line and the required setback extending between the front and rear yards. 
Z.  Definitions Z 
Zero Lot Line. The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more building sides rests directly on a lot line. 
Zoning Code. The Town of Mammoth Lakes Zoning Code, Title 17 of the Town of Mammoth Lakes Municipal Code, referred to herein as "this Zoning Code." 
Zoning District. Any district established by Chapter 17.16 (Establishment of Zoning Districts, Adoption of Zoning Map), within which certain land uses are allowed or prohibited, and certain site planning and development standards are established (e.g., setbacks, height limits, site coverage requirements, etc.). Also referred to as zone. 
(Ord. No. 14-02, § 4, 3-19-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 4(Exh. A, §§ 23—26), 1-21-2015; Ord. No. 15-02, § 4(Exh. A), 3-4-2015; Ord. No. 15-03, § 4d(Exh. B), 6-3-2015; Ord. No. 16-07, § 4(Exh. A), 9-21-2016; Ord. No. 18-02, § 5(Exh. A, i.), 3-13-2018)  
Title 18 - AIRPORT 
Chapters:  
Chapter 18.02 - MAMMOTH YOSEMITE AIRPORT RULES AND REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 5, 2014, amended Ch. 18.02 to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 18.02, §§ 18.02.010—18.02.340, pertained to Mammoth Lakes Airport Rules and Regulations, and derived from Ord. 97-04, § 1, adopted 1997; and Ord. 03-04, § 1, adopted 2003. 
 
18.02.010 - Short title. 
This chapter may be referred to as the Mammoth Yosemite Airport rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.015 - Airport fund. 
The airport authorized in this title shall have established in the town's accounting system a separate fund into which all expenditures and revenues will be accounted. No funds from the enterprise fund shall be used to support the activities of another fund, including the town's general fund, except for those services provided to the airport enterprise fund by another fund or repayment of a loan from another fund including the town's general fund. Funds reassigned as part of the September 21, 2012, settlement agreement between Mammoth Lakes Land Acquisition and the town of Mammoth lakes will be considered a loan from the airport fund and shall be reimbursed on an annual basis from the town's general fund until the town's settlement obligations are satisfied. No airport funds will be reassigned beyond February 2050. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.020 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies equally to every user of the Mammoth Yosemite Airport. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.030 - Responsibilities. 
A.  Management. It shall be the responsibility of the airport manager to fairly and impartially administer the airport rules and regulations. 
B.  Users. It shall be the responsibility of every user of the airport, pilot or other, to become familiar with the airport rules and regulations and to obey those rules and regulations. 
C.  Indemnification of the Town — The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned upon the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user thereof, and such user shall release, hold harmless and indemnify the town, members of the town council and the airport commission, its officers and employees, from any liability or loss resulting from such use, as well as against claims of third persons so using the airport. The exercise of the privilege of use shall constitute an acknowledgment that the town maintains the airport in a governmental capacity. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.040 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, words denoting the singular include the plural, and vice versa. For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions and meanings shall apply unless otherwise specified. 
"Air carrier" means any person who undertakes directly, by lease, or other arrangement to engage in air transportation of persons or things. They operate, in various categories, under authority or certification by the U.S. Civil Aeronautics Board and/or the California Public Utilities Commission. Categories include certificated route air carriers, all-cargo carriers, helicopter carriers, commercial air operators, air taxi operators, and charter air carriers. 
"Aircraft" means a device that is used, or intended to be used, for flight in the air. It includes airplanes, helicopters, and gliders and lighter than air devices such as blimps or balloons, but does not include hang gliders. 
"Airport" means the Mammoth Yosemite Airport, its buildings and facilities, all lands owned by the town of Mammoth Lakes, including airspace above such land and the designated approaches thereto. 
"Airport manager" means the duly designated town of Mammoth Lakes airport manager. 
"Air traffic" means aircraft operating in the air or on an airport surface exclusive of loading ramps or parking area. 
"Authorized persons" means only those persons who have lawful legitimate business relating to the operation, care and maintenance of aircraft, including passengers, either commercial or private, to the operation, use and maintenance of the aircraft. 
"Commercial operator" means any person who, for compensation or hire, engages in the carriage of persons, property, or mail in air commerce or engages in other aerial activity such as flight instruction, aerial photography, 
"Commercial use" means use of the Mammoth Lakes Airport for revenue-producing commercial activities. 
"Fixed-base operator" means any person who rents, leases, or owns facilities located on the airport who, by virtue of his/her specific type of aviation or aviation-related activity, requires the occupancy of a site with contiguous aircraft apron and direct access to the aircraft operation area and who engages in a business activity providing aviation sales or services including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Selling and/or servicing new and used aircraft and component parts. 
2.  Aircraft maintenance and repairs. 
3.  Sales and/or repair of avionics. 
4.  Aviation training including ground or flight instruction. 
5.  Aerial photography. 
6.  Air ambulance service. 
7.  Aircraft agricultural operations such as crop dusting, spraying, or the application of seed, fertilizers, pesticides, defoliants, etc. 
8.  Aircraft rental, charter, and/or leasing. 
9.  Other concessions as may be permitted by the town. 
"Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint-stock association, or governmental entity and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative of any of them. 
"Tenant" means any person who rents, leases, or owns a hangar or other facility at the airport. 
"Town" means the town of Mammoth Lakes and "town council" means the town council of the town of Mammoth Lakes. 
"Traffic pattern" means the traffic flow that is prescribed for aircraft landing at or taking off from the Mammoth Lakes Airport. 
"VFR" means visual flight rules covering meteorological conditions above those requiring flight under IFR conditions. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.050 - Necessity. 
This chapter is enacted to protect the health, safety, and peace and to promote the welfare and convenience of the general public using the Mammoth Yosemite Airport or affected by activities related to the airport by providing for the orderly conduct of activities on or related to the airport. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.060 - Based aircraft. 
Any person desiring to store or base his/her aircraft or vehicle at the Mammoth Yosemite Airport shall register the aircraft at the airport office prior to beginning such storage or operation and at any time that a change in ownership occurs. The use of the airport or any of its facilities in any manner shall create an obligation on the part of the user to obey all of the rules and regulations herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.070 - Commercial activity. 
No person shall utilize the airport for any revenue-producing commercial activities without first obtaining a permit from the town of Mammoth Lakes for such activities and paying the fees and charges established for such use. The airport manager shall establish and maintain, available for examination upon request, a schedule of fees and charges for the use of the airport and its facilities. Any aircraft owner who fails to pay any fee duly charged for aircraft owned or controlled by him/her shall have such aircraft subject to impounding until the fees are paid along with any impound fees or until the aircraft is sold for charges. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.080 - Aircraft storage and parking. 
Aircraft shall only be stored or parked at places designated by the airport manager and such storage or parking shall be at the sole risk of the owner or operator of the aircraft and without any responsibility of the town of Mammoth Lakes, or any of its officers or employees for any loss of or damage to the aircraft while so stored or parked. The owner or operator of the aircraft shall be responsible for the tying down and securing of his/her aircraft. The owner shall likewise be responsible for any liability arising from or caused by the aircraft or his/her activities. Transient aircraft shall only be parked in the area designated by the airport manager. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.090 - Hours of operation. 
The Mammoth Yosemite Airport shall be open for public use at all hours of the day and night subject to any restrictions imposed by the airport manager due to inclement weather, the condition of the landing area, the presentation of special events, construction or repair activities, or similar causes. The airport shall be attended in accordance with standards, rules, regulations, and hours established from time to time by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.100 - Unattended aircraft. 
No aircraft shall be left unattended on the airport unless properly secured or within a hangar. Owners of aircraft left so unattended shall be liable for damage to other aircraft or property resulting from the failure to adequately secure or tie down the aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.110 - Maintenance. 
Unless otherwise authorized by the airport manager, no aircraft or vehicle maintenance, other than required to remove damaged aircraft from the runway(s) or taxiway(s) or replacing a flat tire, shall be performed on the airport except in areas specifically designated by the airport manager for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.120 - Equipment requirements. 
Pilots approaching the airport shall maintain a listening watch on UNICOM for traffic advisories. Aircraft with no radio or with inoperative communication equipment or aircraft approaching the airport without UNICOM shall first fly over the airport traffic area above two thousand feet AGL to determine traffic direction and density prior to entering traffic pattern. Aircraft with radio equipment shall announce takeoffs and landings. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.130 - Accidents. 
Every person involved in or witnessing an aircraft accident on the airport shall report promptly the details of such accident to the airport manager or to the Mammoth Lakes police department at times the airport is unattended. In addition, the pilot or aircraft owner shall report fully to the National Transportation Safety Board, the details on any accident in which there is death or injury or in which damage to the property of others exceeds four hundred dollars. The owner and/or pilot of an aircraft which is damaged in an accident or wrecked shall be responsible for the prompt removal of the aircraft as directed by the airport manager or his designee. Where the pilot or owner is unable to arrange for removal of such disabled or wrecked aircraft, the airport manager shall have the authority to move or arrange the removal of the aircraft when released (if applicable) by the FAA or the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). No liability shall be incurred by the town or the airport manager or others for damage aggravated by or resulting from such removal. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.140 - Noise. 
No person shall operate any aircraft in flight or on the ground in such a manner as to cause unnecessary noise as determined by applicable federal or state or local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.150 - Restricted areas. 
No person shall enter any restricted area which is posted or closed to the public except: (a) persons duly authorized by the airport manager or (b) law enforcement or firefighting personnel. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.160 - Animals. 
A.  No person shall, on airport premises, do any of the following: 
1.  Willfully and knowingly permit any animal owned, possessed, or harbored by him/her to enter the airport unless the animal is leashed or restricted in such manner as to be under control or is in a shipping container or is otherwise under physical restraint; 
2.  Permit any feral animal under his or her control or custody to enter the airport, except for feral animals that are to be or have been transported by air and are properly confined for air travel; 
3.  Hunt, pursue, trap, catch, injure or kill any animal on the airport unless authorized by the airport manager or other governmental entity with jurisdiction; 
4.  Feed or do any other act to encourage the congregation of birds, rodents or other animals on the airport; 
B.  Persons who bring an animal into the airport shall clean up after said animal and may be held responsible for all costs incurred by the town in cleaning up after such animal. 
C.  All hangar lessees, sublessees or other persons occupying or controlling hangars shall maintain their hangars and other facilities in good repair so as not to attract birds, rodents, or other animals on the airport. This includes nesting of birds or providing habitat for rodents or other animals. 
D.  The design of structures or any modification to a structure shall not encourage the nesting of birds, congregation of birds, rodents or other animals on the airport. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.170 - Starting engines. 
No person shall start any aircraft engine on the airport: 
A.  Unless a competent operator is at the controls. 
B.  Unless the aircraft is equipped with adequate brakes fully applied or the wheels are securely blocked with blocks or chocks that can be removed safely. 
C.  When the aircraft is in such a position that propeller slipstream or jet blast can cause damage to or interfere with the operation of other aircraft, vehicles, mobile equipment, hangars, shops, other buildings, or can cause injury to passengers, spectators, or other personnel. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.180 - Taxiing. 
No person shall taxi any aircraft into, out of, or within any hangar or other building on or adjacent to the airport. Nor shall any person move any aircraft under its own power on the airport unless he/she is in full control of such aircraft and has assured himself that there is no danger of collision with other aircraft, vehicles, equipment, buildings, or other obstacles. Aircraft shall be taxied at a safe speed not to exceed fifteen miles per hour on parking aprons and taxiways. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.190 - Dumping refuse. 
A.  No person shall, on airport premises, do any of the following: 
1.  Place, deposit, or dump any garbage, cans, refuse, bottles, papers, ashes, sewage, carcass of any dead animal, offal, trash, rubbish, debris, or any other forms of trash in any location on the airport except in containers for such purposes. 
2.  Dispose of any fill, building or construction materials or any other discarded or waste materials on airport property except as approved in writing by the airport manager or as otherwise expressly provided in a written agreement with the town. 
3.  Place or allow to be placed liquids or other contaminants of any kind in storm drains or the sanitary sewer system at the airport which will damage such drains or system or will result in environmental pollution passing through such drain or system. 
4.  Perform aircraft, vehicle or equipment washing (dry or wet) without an aircraft or vehicle washing plan that has been approved by the airport manager. 
5.  Clean, paint, wet wash, polish, or otherwise maintain an aircraft, vehicle or ground equipment, other than in areas approved and in the manner designated by the airport manager. 
6.  Use a restroom, toilet or lavatory facility at the airport other than in a clean and sanitary manner. 
7.  Burn refuse, or cause smoke, dust, fumes, gaseous matter or particulate to be emitted into the atmosphere or carried into the atmosphere unnecessarily, unreasonably, or in violation of applicable law. 
8.  Keep or store material or equipment in such manner as to constitute a fire hazard or be in violation of this code, Mammoth Lakes Fire Protection District ordinances or directives, or direction provided by airport staff. 
B.  Any solid or liquid material which may be spilled at the airport shall be cleaned up immediately by the person responsible for such spill in a manner acceptable to the airport manager, and the person responsible for the spill shall report it immediately to the airport manager. 
C.  Any person who observes any foreign object or debris on an airplane movement area (runway, taxiway, ramp) shall remove such foreign object and debris from the movement area or immediately report the foreign object or debris to the airport manager. All persons shall comply with airport directives issued from time to time regarding the prevention and removal of foreign objects and debris within the airplane movement areas. 
D.  All persons using the airport shall comply with all airport directives that may be issued from time to time regarding the recycling of materials, including without limitation, recyclable paper, aluminum, plastic, glass, oils and solvents and other identified materials. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.200 - Firearms. 
No person shall shoot any projectile from a firearm or other device into, on, or across any portion of the airport, nor have in his/her possession or under his/her control any firearm which is not unloaded and securely wrapped and boxed for shipment or explosive or explosive device; provided, however, that this section does not apply to peace officers or the airport manager who are acting in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.210 - Traffic pattern. 
Every aircraft, before landing and after take-off, shall be flown in accordance with the traffic pattern. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.220 - Take-offs and landings. 
No aeronautical activity shall be conducted at the Mammoth Yosemite Airport or within the airport traffic areas except in conformance with current federal air regulations, state of California law and regulations, and this chapter; except air shows and demonstrations approved by the airport manager in conformance with said laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.230 - Aircraft fueling and defueling. 
A.  No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while the aircraft engine is running or while the aircraft is in a hangar or other enclosed space. 
B.  No smoking shall be permitted within fifty feet of the aircraft or fuel truck while the aircraft is being fueled or defueled. 
C.  During fuel handling no passenger shall be permitted in or on the aircraft unless a cabin attendant or crew member is stationed at or near the cabin door. 
D.  All hoses, funnels, and appurtenances used in fueling or defueling activities shall be equipped properly with a grounding device to prevent possible static ignition of volatile liquids. Such grounding devices shall be used during all fueling and defueling activities. 
E.  During fuel handling activities no person shall operate any radio transmitter or receiver nor switch electrical appliances on or off in such aircraft or in the immediate vicinity (fifty feet) thereof. 
F.  Every person engaged in aircraft fueling handling shall exercise due care to prevent the overflow of spilling of fuel. 
G.  During fuel handling no person shall use any material or device which is likely to cause a static spark within fifty feet of such aircraft or fuel truck. 
H.  Where there has been a fuel spill or leak, no person shall start the engine of any aircraft in close proximity until the spill or leak has been washed away. In the event of such spills or leaks, the airport manager shall be notified. 
I.  Fuel hoses and draining or defueling equipment shall be maintained in a safe, sound, and nonleaking condition. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.240 - Vehicle operations. 
A.  No person shall travel on any portion of the airport except upon the roads, walks, or places provided for the particular class of traffic, nor occupy the roads or walks in such manner as to hinder or obstruct their proper use. 
B.  Motor-vehicle traffic shall yield the right-of-way to aircraft. 
C.  Every vehicle operating within the airport security fence or anywhere on airport property including the runways, taxiways, ramps, access roads, between hangars, or aircraft parking or tie-down areas shall do so only by approval of the airport manager. 
D.  Any accident involving a motor vehicle, which results in a fatality or injury or in property damage, shall be reported by the driver to the airport manager. 
E.  No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the airport in excess of twenty miles per hour, except emergency vehicles responding to an emergency situation. On passenger loading ramps, in aircraft parking lots, and in areas immediately adjacent to hangars, speed shall not exceed five miles per hour. 
F.  Vehicles shall not be parked on the airport property other than in the areas approved by the airport manager, including between hangars, hangar ramps, commercial ramp, general aviation ramp, access roads, taxiways, runways, aircraft movement areas, nonpaved airport areas, within the airport security fence, or outside the fence. 
G.  Vehicles that are to be left unattended may be parked only in designated airport vehicle parking lots. At no time will unattended vehicles be allowed to park on aircraft parking aprons or anywhere within the airport security fence. 
H.  Vehicles parked other than specified in subsections F and G of this section may be removed by airport personnel, and in such event, a towing charge will be levied prior to releasing the vehicle from impound. No liability for damages sustained by such vehicles during said movement will be assumed by the town of Mammoth Lakes or any of its officers, employees, or airport personnel. 
I.  Motor vehicles shall not be driven on or across runways or other portions of aircraft operating areas or on nonpaved airport areas without clearance from the airport manager. 
J.  No person may operate a motor vehicle, or aircraft in or on any portion of the airport while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs. Alcoholic beverages will not be consumed within areas designated as ground operating areas for aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.250 - Fire hazards. 
A.  No person shall light or smoke any cigarette, cigar, pipe, or similar object in the following airport areas: 
1.  Within any hangar or fuel handling or storage areas. 
2.  Within or upon any aircraft parking area or ramp. 
3.  Inside any aircraft, whether or not such aircraft are parked or stored, or within fifty feet thereof. 
4.  Within fifty feet of any "NO SMOKING" sign posted unless within an approved smoking area such as the airport terminal building. 
B.  No person may use flammable liquids, solvents, or substances to clean any aircraft, engine, part, or accessory thereof within any hangar or building except a building specially designed for that purpose and approved in writing by the airport manager. Such approval shall only be granted when the airport manager approves the ventilation provisions, fireproofing, and fire extinguishing equipment. 
C.  No person shall light or use any open flame for any purpose in any hangar or other building on the airport without the prior written consent of the airport manager. 
D.  No person shall operate any electric or gas welding or cutting equipment anywhere on the airport, except in an approved maintenance hangar, without prior written approval of the airport manager. 
E.  No person shall clean or degrease any aircraft or part thereof except at or in a maintenance station properly equipped for such purposes or in a space designated or authorized by the airport manager. 
F.  No person shall store or stock any material or substance or permit such activities in or on the airport in such a manner or of such nature as to constitute a fire hazard. No person shall keep, store, or discard any flammable liquid, gas, signal flare, or other flammable material in any hangar, shop, building, room, enclosure, or other place on the airport except in areas specially designated by the airport manager for such purpose. 
G.  Lessees of hangars, shops, or other airport areas shall provide suitable metal receptacles with hinged lids for the storage of oily waste, rags, and other similar rubbish. All such materials shall be removed by the lessee at frequent intervals. 
H.  Every lessee shall maintain the leased area clean and reasonably free of oil, grease, waste, other flammable materials and weeds. 
I.  Lessees shall provide and maintain in proper working order adequate and readily accessible fire extinguishers. Each such extinguisher shall bear a suitable tag which indicates the most recent date of inspection or servicing. Extinguishers shall be approved by the district fire chief if they meet the requirements of the county fire warden or other designated official. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.260 - Fuel sales. 
No person shall deliver aviation fuels to or dispense such fuel from, at, or upon the airport without a permit from the airport manager. No fuel shall be stored anywhere on the airport except in underground tanks or such other tanks as may be approved by the airport manager. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.280 - Illegal activities. 
No person shall: 
A.  Take or use any aircraft, aircraft parts, instruments, or tools pertaining thereto which are owned, controlled, or operated by any other person while such aircraft, parts, instruments, or tools are stored or otherwise left on the airports or within their hangars, buildings, or facilities without the written consent of the owner/operator thereof, except upon satisfactory evidence of the right to do so duly presented to the airport manager or authorized by him or so ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
B.  Except when deemed an emergency, land, take-off, taxi, or otherwise operate any aircraft on, at or from any airport when he knows such aircraft is not operating properly or is equipped with any part or safety device which is defective or unsafe. Deviations from this restriction shall only be permitted by specific authorization from the airport manager or designated representative. Nor shall any aircraft be operated on or at the airports or on any runway thereof when the airports or runway has been closed to traffic by the airport manager or other legal authority and such closure has been indicated by the placement of appropriate markings at each end of the closed runway. 
C.  Operate any aircraft on, at, or in the vicinity (three statute miles) of the airport in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property, whether his/her own or that of others. 
D.  Engage in the performance of any aerobatics, stunt, or maneuver not necessary to a normal take-off, landing, normal turn or level flight of the aircraft over or within one mile of the exterior boundaries of the airports, excluding aircraft approved for such flight by the airport manager or his designee for show or demonstration. 
E.  Engage in the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, or services at or upon the airport without first having secured from the airport manager a permit therefor and paying any required fees for such permit. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.290 - Airport closure. 
The airport manager, or his or her designee, is directed and authorized to close the airports or portions thereof or suspend operations related to the landing, take-off, or taxiing of aircraft during any period in which he determines that such operations of their continuance would be hazardous. Causes for such closure could include, but not be limited to, adverse weather conditions, runway maintenance or repairs, runway obstacles, fire, aircraft, or other accident. Any such closure shall be effective only during such time as there is placed at each end of each runway so closed an appropriate marking. The airport manager shall immediately notify the flight service station and issue a notice to airmen (NOTAM) advising of the closure. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.300 - Severability. 
Should any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter be held invalid or unconstitutional for any reason, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter. The town of Mammoth Lakes declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase regardless of the fact that any one or more articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.310 - Airport advisory committee. 
The town council may, at its discretion, establish an airport advisory committee to advise the town manager from time to time and to make recommendations on airport strategic goals. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.320 - Prohibition. 
No person shall touch, contact, operate, turn off or on or obstruct the free access to any fire hydrant, as that term is used in this chapter, without a written permit from the appropriate authority having possession, control or ownership of the hydrant. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.330 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by any law enforcement officer, peace officer, special peace officer, state or district fire chief or other duly authorized fire enforcement individual. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.340 - Violation—Penalty. 
Each violation of this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the misdemeanor laws of the state of California. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014)  
18.02.350 - Water system. 
The town council hereby authorizes the creation of a financially self-sustaining water system at the airport to be managed and maintained as part of the airport enterprise fund. The system will consist of all elements required to bring potable water to the airport and airport tenants including wells, storage tanks, pipe lines, connections, and water meters. The town authorizes the airport enterprise fund to collect fees from users in order to maintain the system. The system boundaries will include all airport land owned, leased, or used as depicted on the airport layout plan, provided that nothing in this section shall require the water system to actually serve all such land. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-2014) 
