
Oxnard, California Code of Ordinances


OXNARD, CALIFORNIA
CODIFIED ORDINANCES




Contains 2019 S-33 Supplement
current through local legislation Ord. No. 2956, passed 2-19-19










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




PREFACE



The City of Oxnard, California was incorporated on June 30, 1903.



The former City Code Book constituted the second revision and codification of
the general ordinances of the City of Oxnard beginning in 1950.  That City
Code Book contained the ordinances adopted prior to 2005.



This City Code Book contains ordinances adopted up to 2005, and those
ordinances adopted subsequent thereto.



The ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of
The American Legal Publishing Corporation under the supervision of the City
Clerk's Office and the City Attorney's Office.  A special thanks to Gary
Gillig, City Attorney; Paula Kimbrell, Assistant City Attorney; Delaina
Finch, Law Office Manager; Daniel Martinez, City Clerk; Jill Beaty, Assistant
City Clerk; Luly Lopez, Deputy City Clerk; and all other department heads,
division managers and other employees of the city contributing to this fine
effort.



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 2694



ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF OXNARD, CALIFORNIA, ADOPTING THE CODE OF THE CITY OF
OXNARD, CALIFORNIA



   WHEREAS, on March 10, 1962, the City Council adopted Ordinance No. 872,
adopting the Code of the City of Oxnard, California ("the City Code"); and



   WHEREAS, the City Code has been amended many times and would benefit
from being reorganized, revised to improve grammar and phrasing, and updated
to delete or replace obsolete material; and



   WHEREAS, most of such modifications are not substantive, with the
exception of four modifications that are identified in the negative
declaration prepared for this project; and



   WHEREAS, in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act,
the Planning and Environmental Services Manager provided public notice of the
intent of the City to adopt a negative declaration for this project, and the
City Council has considered the proposed negative declaration, together with
any comments received during the public review process, finds on the basis of
the whole record before it (including the initial study and any comments
received) that there is no substantial evidence that the project will have a
significant effect on the environment, further finds that the negative
declaration reflects the independent judgment of the City, and adopts the
negative declaration; and



   WHEREAS, the documents and other material that constitute the record of
proceedings upon which the decision to adopt the negative declaration are
based is located in the Planning and Environmental Services Division of the
Development Services Department, and the custodian of the record is the
Planning and Environmental Services Manager; and



   WHEREAS, the reorganized and revised City Code, including amendments
that became effective on or before June 30, 2004, is provided as Exhibit A
attached hereto and incorporated herein in full by this reference; and



   WHEREAS, a list of substantive and non-substantive modifications to the
current City Code, which are incorporated into Exhibit A, is attached hereto
as Exhibit B attached hereto and incorporated herein in full by this
reference; and



   WHEREAS, Exhibit A contains only those ordinances amending the City
Code that were adopted by the City Council as of June 30, 2004, and must be
supplemented by amendments to the City Code adopted thereafter; and



   WHEREAS, amendments that became effective after June 30, 2004 and
before adoption of this ordinance and that were not specifically repealed are
listed in Exhibit C, attached hereto and incorporated herein in full by this
reference; and



   WHEREAS, the amendments listed in Exhibit C are in full force and
effect, are not repealed or affected by the adoption of this ordinance, and
will be added to the City Code in due course by the publisher thereof,
together with amendments that become effective hereafter.



   NOW, THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of Oxnard does ordain as
follows:



   Part 1. Exhibit A, being a codification of ordinances of the City of
Oxnard, is adopted as the Code of the City of Oxnard, California; provided,
however, that subsection D of section 16-505 is deleted and further provided
that in the publisher's notes to section 1-26 the reference to "Ord. No. 381"
is deleted and replaced with a reference to "Ord. No. 1381."



   Part 2. The City Clerk is directed to request that the publisher of the
City Code add thereto the amendments listed in Exhibit C, as well as other
amendments that become effective after June 30, 2004, in locations and with
numerical designations appropriate to the new format of the City Code.



   Part 3. Ordinance No. 872 is repealed.



   Part 4. The City Clerk advised the City Council that it is not feasible
to prepare a fair and adequate summary of the proposed ordinance. Therefore,
as authorized by Government Code section 36933(c)(2), the City Council orders
the City Clerk to publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the City a
display advertisement of at least one-quarter of a page at least five days
prior to the meeting at which this ordinance is to be adopted. Within 15 days
after adoption of this ordinance, the City Clerk shall publish a display
advertisement of at least one-quarter of a page. Such advertisements shall
indicate the general nature of, and provide information about, the proposed
or adopted ordinance, including information sufficient to enable the public
to obtain copies of the complete text of the ordinance, and the names of
those City Council members voting for and against the ordinance.



   Part 5. Ordinance No. 2694 was first read on   July 19  , 2005, and
finally adopted on   July 26 , 2005, to become effective thirty days
thereafter.



   AYES: Councilmembers Holden, Herrera, Maulhardt, Zaragoza and Flynn.



   NOES: None.



   ABSENT: None.



Dr. Thomas E. Holden /s/ 
Mayor



ATTEST:                     APPROVED AS TO FORM:



Lourdes A. Lopez /s/                   Gary L. Gillig /s/ 
for Daniel Martinez, City Clerk            City Attorney



CHAPTER 1:  GENERAL



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   1-1.   City code designations and citations



   1-2.   References to State law



   1-3.   Definitions and rules of construction



   1-4.   Rules of interpretation



   1-5.   Tie vote



   1-6.   Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances



   1-7.   Severability



   1-8.   Headings of chapters



   1-9.   Effect of repeal of ordinances



   1-10.   Violation of the code



   1-11.   Unlawful acts



   1-12.   City seal



   1-13.   Official flower



ARTICLE II.  UTILITY BILLING HEARINGS; CRIMINAL VIOLATIONS OF CODE



   1-20.   Policy and purpose



   1-21.   Review procedure prior to termination of utility services
for nonpayment of bills



   1-22.   Good cause for termination



   1-23.   Notice of delinquency; request for administrative hearing;
appeal of hearing officer decision



   1-24.   Appointment of hearing officer; nature of administrative
hearing



   1-25.   Appointment of appeal officer; appeal of decision of hearing
officer; nature of appeal hearing



   1-26.   Jail labor authorized; services of misdemeanant probationers



   1-27.   Notices



   1-28.   Proof of notice



   1-29.   Summons for violation of code provisions



   1-30.   Time to appear



   1-31.   Place to appear



   1-32.   Violator to sign consent



   1-33.   Posting of bail



   1-34.   Warrant not to be issued until failure of defendant to appear



   1-35.   Penalty for wilful failure to appear



   1-36.   Warrant for arrest



   1-37.   Applicability of summons procedure



   1-38.   Arresting officer



ARTICLE III.  JUDICIAL REVIEW



   1-45.   Judicial review



   1-46.   Actions to determine validity



   1-47.   Powers of hearing officers; subpoenas



ARTICLE IV.  MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS



   1-50.   Municipal election day



   1-51.   Commencement



ARTICLE V.  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS



   1-55.   Administrative hearings



   1-56.   Rules and regulations



   1-57.   Hearing officer



   1-58.   Appeal procedure



   1-59.   Conduct of hearing



   1-60.   Hearing officer authority



   1-61.   Decision



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 1-1.  CITY CODE DESIGNATIONS AND CITATIONS.



   The ordinances included in this and the following chapters, articles,
divisions,  and sections shall constitute and be designated as “The Code
of the City of Oxnard, California,” and may be so cited.  These ordinances
may also be cited as the “City Code.”



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-1)



SEC. 1-2.  REFERENCES TO STATE LAW.



   Unless otherwise expressly provided, all references to State law in
this code are to the California Codes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-2)



SEC. 1-3.  DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In this and all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and
rules shall be observed, unless such would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise:



      (A)   CITY - The City of Oxnard including the area within the
territorial city limits of the city and such territory outside of the city
over which the city council has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any
provision of law.



      (B)   CITY COUNCIL - The city council of the City of Oxnard.



      (C)   CITY MANAGER - The city manager of the city or designee.



      (D)   CODE - CITY CODE refers to the 2002 Code of the city and
its subsequent amendments. Otherwise, CODE refers to California Codes (for
example, Vehicle Code).



      (E)   COMPUTATION OF TIME - The time in which any act provided
by law is to be accomplished is computed by excluding the first day and
including the last, unless the day is a holiday and then that day is also
excluded.



      (F)   COUNTY - The County of Ventura.



      (G)   DAY - A calendar day, unless specified otherwise.



      (H)   DAYTIME - The period of time between sunrise and sunset.



      (I)   GENDER - The masculine gender includes the feminine and
neuter.



      (J)   MAY - A permissive term.



      (K)   MONTH - A calendar month.



      (L)   NIGHTTIME - The period of time between sunset and
sunrise.



      (M)   NUMBER - The singular number includes the plural, and
the plural the singular.



      (N)   OFFICIAL TIME - Either Pacific Standard Time or Pacific
Daylight Saving Time, as may be in current use in the city.



      (O)   PERSON - Any individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company.



      (P)   PERSONAL PROPERTY - Includes every species of property,
except real property, as defined in this section.



      (Q)   PROCESS - Includes a writ or summons issued in the
course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.



      (R)   PROPERTY - Includes real and personal property.



      (S)   REAL PROPERTY - Includes lands, tenements and
hereditaments.



      (T)   SHALL - A mandatory term.



      (U)   STAFF - The employees of the city.



      (V)   STATE - The State of California.



      (W)   TENANT - Any person holding a written or an oral lease
of, or a person occupying the whole or a part of a building or land, either
alone or with others.



      (X)   TENSES - The present tense includes the past and future
tenses, and the future includes the present.



      (Y)   UNDEFINED WORDS - Words and phrases not defined in this
code are construed according to the approved usage of the English language.



      (Z)   WEEK - Seven consecutive days, from Sunday to Saturday.



      (AA)   YEAR - A calendar year.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-3)



SEC. 1-4.  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, the provisions of the Civil Code,
Sections 13 and 1645, are hereby adopted in the interpretation of words and
phrases used in this code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-4)



SEC. 1-5.  TIE VOTE.



   Where affirmative approval is required by the city council to grant a
license, permit, application or privilege of any kind, a tie vote on the
matter shall be deemed a denial.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-4.1)  (Ord. No. 1197)



SEC. 1-6.  PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.



   The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as
those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code,
shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-5)



SEC. 1-7.  SEVERABILITY.



   The city council declares its intention that the sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases of this code are severable, and if any section,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code shall be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not
affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases of this code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-6)



SEC. 1-8.  HEADINGS OF CHAPTERS.



   Chapter, article, division and section headings contained in this code
shall not govern, limit, modify or affect the scope, meaning or intent of the
provisions of particular chapters, articles, divisions or sections.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-8)



SEC. 1-9.  EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in
force before or at the time the ordinances repealed became effective.



   (B)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal became effective, nor any suit,
prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense
committed under the ordinance repealed.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-9)



SEC. 1-10.  VIOLATION OF THE CODE.



   (A)   The violation of any provision of the code or other ordinance
shall be punishable by a fine of $1,000 or imprisonment of six months, or
both, as a general misdemeanor.



   (B)   Any violation of any provision of the code or other ordinance
may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be prosecuted as:



      (1)   An infraction;



      (2)   A civil citation; or



      (3)   A civil injunction.



   (C)   Every violation that the city attorney prosecutes as an
infraction shall be punishable as follows:



      (1)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation of a
code section or ordinance;



      (2)   A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of the
same code section or ordinance within one year; and



      (3)   A fine not exceeding $500 for the third and every
additional violation of the same code section or ordinance within one year.



   (D)   Each day that a violation of the code or other ordinance
continues shall constitute a new and separate offense and may be prosecuted
as such.



   (E)   No person shall cause, use, occupy or maintain any violation
of any code section or any ordinance or to cause the same to be done.



   (F)   The city council finds and determines that any continuing
violation of any code section or ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance
and may be summarily abated as such by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-10)  (Ord. No. 1393, 1568, 1616, 2056, 2394, 2489)



SEC. 1-11.  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   Whenever this code makes any act or omission unlawful that includes
causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of
such act or omission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-11)



SEC. 1-12.  CITY SEAL.



   The official seal of the city shall have inscribed thereon the
following words, to-wit: “City of Oxnard, State of California, incorporated
June 30, 1903,” and the same is hereby adopted as the common seal of the
city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-26)



SEC. 1-13.  OFFICIAL FLOWER.



   The official flower of the city shall be the geranium.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-27)  (Ord. No. 492)



ARTICLE II.  UTILITY BILLING HEARINGS; CRIMINAL VIOLATIONS OF CODE



SEC. 1-20.  POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   The city council hereby declares that in order to ensure that the
citizens of the city are given an administrative review opportunity, the
following hearing procedures, sections 1-21 through 1-25, are adopted which
shall be complied with prior to termination of utility services by the city
for nonpayment of bills by customers.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-12)  (Ord. No. 2302)



SEC. 1-21.  REVIEW PROCEDURE PRIOR TO TERMINATION OF UTILITY SERVICES FOR
NONPAYMENT OF BILLS.



   Prior to termination of a utility service for nonpayment of bills, the
city shall afford the customer an opportunity to be heard on the issue of
whether the city has good cause to terminate such service.  The review
procedures set forth in section 1-22 through section 1-25 are exclusively for
the termination of utility services due to nonpayment of bills.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-12.1)  (Ord. No. 2302)



SEC. 1-22.  GOOD CAUSE FOR TERMINATION.



   The city may terminate a utility service for good cause.  For the
purposes of section 1-23 through section 1-25, “good cause” shall mean a
customer's failure to fully and timely pay a delinquent utility service bill
without a compelling justification for nonpayment.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-12.2)  (Ord. No. 2302)



SEC. 1-23.  NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY; REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING;
APPEAL OF HEARING OFFICER DECISION.



   (A)   If a customer has not paid the customer's account within 15
days after the city has sent a bill for utility service to such customer,
then that account shall be deemed delinquent.  Prior to termination of any
utility service for nonpayment of a delinquent account, the city shall send
the customer a notice of delinquency.



   (B)   The notice of delinquency shall contain the following:



      (1)   The amount required to fully pay the account;



      (2)   A statement that the particular utility service will be
terminated on a date specified in the notice of delinquency unless the
customer fully pays the account prior to that date;



      (3)   A statement that the customer is entitled to an
administrative hearing to determine if the city has good cause to terminate
the utility service upon filing of a written request for such administrative
hearing with the city clerk on or before the date specified in the notice of
delinquency, which date shall be seven days after the date of the mailing of
the notice of delinquency;



      (4)   A statement that if the customer requests an
administrative hearing, the date for conducting the administrative hearing
will be at least five days prior to the date specified for termination of the
utility service and that the city will provide written notice of the date,
time, and place of the administrative hearing to the customer; and



      (5)   A statement that the customer may appeal the decision of
the hearing officer to an appeal officer by filing a written appeal,
specifying the grounds for the appeal, with the city clerk within 48 hours of
the city's delivery of the hearing officer's decision to the customer.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-12.3)  (Ord. No. 2302)



SEC. 1-24.  APPOINTMENT OF HEARING OFFICER; NATURE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.



   (A)   The city manager shall, as appropriate, appoint a person to be
the hearing officer for the administrative hearings provided for herein.  If
a customer requests an administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall
conduct such hearing.  The hearing officer shall hold the administrative
hearing on the date and at the time and place specified in the notice of
delinquency.



   (B)   At this administrative hearing, the city's representative
shall first present good cause to justify termination of the utility
service.  Thereafter, the customer or the customer's representative may
present evidence in opposition to the termination.  The hearing officer
shall conduct the administrative hearing in an informal fashion and shall not
be bound by the technical rules of evidence.



   (C)   After the administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall
prepare a written decision determining whether the city has established good
cause for termination of the utility service.  If the hearing officer
decides in favor of the customer, such decision shall be filed with the city
clerk and the city shall not terminate the utility service unless a new
notice of delinquency is prepared and served by the city.  The decision of
the hearing officer shall be binding upon the customer and the city unless
appealed pursuant to section 1-25.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-12.4)  (Ord. No. 2302)



SEC. 1-25.  APPOINTMENT OF APPEAL OFFICER; APPEAL OF DECISION OF HEARING
OFFICER; NATURE OF APPEAL HEARING.



   (A)   The city manager shall, as appropriate, appoint a person to be
the appeal officer for appeals from decisions made by the hearing officer as
provided herein.



   (B)   The customer may appeal the decision of the hearing officer by
filing a written appeal, specifying the grounds for such appeal, with the
city clerk within 48 hours of the city's delivery of the hearing officer's
decision to the customer.  Upon receipt of the appeal, the appeal officer
shall give written notice to the customer of the date, time, and place of the
appeal hearing.



   (C)   At the appeal hearing, the city's representative shall first
present good cause to justify termination of the utility service. 
Thereafter, the customer or the customer's representative may present
evidence in opposition to the termination.  The appeal officer shall conduct
the appeal hearing in an informal fashion and shall not be bound by the
technical rules of evidence.  After the appeal hearing, the appeal officer
shall prepare a written decision determining whether the city has established
good cause for termination of the utility service.  The decision of the
appeal officer shall be final and shall constitute an exhaustion of
administrative remedies. 



   (D)   If the appeal officer decides that the city has established
good cause, the city shall not terminate the utility service sooner than 48
hours after delivery of the decision to the customer.



   (E)   If the appeal officer decides in favor of the customer, such
decision shall be filed with the city clerk and the city shall not terminate
the utility service unless a new notice of delinquency is prepared and served
by the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-12.5)  (Ord. No. 2302)



SEC. 1-26.  JAIL LABOR AUTHORIZED; SERVICES OF MISDEMEANANT PROBATIONERS.



   (A)   Any person under city jurisdiction confined in jail may be
required by the police chief to labor on the streets, public safety buildings
and grounds, vehicles and other property or public works of the city situated
within the county.  The police chief may establish a "trustee system" to
regulate the conduct of working prisoners and may promulgate reasonable rules
and regulations for the purpose.



   (B)   To assist in the sentencing and rehabilitation of petty
offenders, the city may accept the services performed by misdemeanant summary
probationers who are assigned by the coordinator of the county's
probation-work program to work upon city property within the county. 



   (C)   The term “services,” as used in this subsection, includes
clerical services, menial labor and unskilled labor performed voluntarily and
without right of discipline reserved to the city.  The services performed by
summary probationers and accepted by the city shall be:



      (1)   Without compensation in any form from the city;



      (2)   Casual, and shall not impinge substantially upon regular
duties performed by city employees;



      (3)   Undertaken concurrently or within the usual working
shifts assigned to city employees; or



      (4)   Rendered at tasks requiring, if at all, simple tools
operated solely by human energy.



   (D)   No prisoner or probationer used or assigned to labor or
perform services in accordance with this section shall be considered an
employee of, or to be employed by, the city or any city department; nor shall
any such prisoner or probationer be covered by any of the provisions of the
workers' compensation law of the State or be entitled to any benefits
thereunder whether on behalf of himself/herself or that of any other person.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-13)  (Ord. No. 1381)



SEC. 1-27.  NOTICES.



   (A)   Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code,
unless different provisions are otherwise specifically made herein, such
notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be
notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope,
postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at the person's
last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public
records or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is
directed.



   (B)   Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the
time of deposit in the United States mail.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-14)



SEC. 1-28.  PROOF OF NOTICE.



   Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any
officer or employee of the city or by affidavit of any person over the age of
18 years, which demonstrates service in conformity with this code or other
provisions of law applicable to the subject matter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-15)



SEC. 1-29.  SUMMONS FOR VIOLATION OF CODE PROVISIONS.



   If any person is arrested for the violation of any ordinance of the
city and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate as
prescribed in the Cal. Penal Code, the arresting officer shall prepare in
duplicate a written notice to appear in court, upon such form as the city
attorney shall approve, containing the name and address of such person, the
offense charged including the section of the city ordinance charged to have
been violated, and the time and place where and when such person shall appear
in court.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-16)  (Ord. No. 587)



SEC. 1-30.  TIME TO APPEAR.



   The time specified in the notice to appear referred to in section 1-29
must be at least five days after the arrest.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-17)  (Ord. No. 587)



SEC. 1-31.  PLACE TO APPEAR.



   The place specified in the notice to appear mentioned in section 1-29
shall be before a judge of the Ventura County Superior Court.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-18)  (Ord. No. 587, 2063)



SEC. 1-32.  VIOLATOR TO SIGN CONSENT.



   The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear referred to
in section 1-29 to the arrested person, and the arrested person in order to
secure release must give his/her written promise so to appear in court by
signing the duplicate notice which shall be retained by the officer. 
Thereupon the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested
from custody.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-19)  (Ord. No. 587)



SEC. 1-33.  POSTING OF BAIL.



   (A)   Pursuant to sections 1-27 to 1-30, the officer shall, as soon
as practicable, file the duplicate notice with the magistrate specified
therein.  Thereupon the magistrate shall fix the amount of bail, which in
accordance with the provisions of Cal. Penal Code, Section 1275, will be
reasonable and sufficient for the appearance of the defendant and shall
endorse upon the notice a statement signed by the magistrate in the form set
forth in Cal. Penal Code, Section 815a. 



   (B)   The defendant may, prior to the date upon which the defendant
promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail
thus set. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment
before the magistrate, if the defendant does not appear, either in person or
by legal counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited, and may
order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case.



   (C)   Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be
had, all sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the county
treasury for distribution pursuant to Cal. Penal Code, Section 1463.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-20)  (Ord. No. 587)



SEC. 1-34.  WARRANT NOT TO BE ISSUED UNTIL FAILURE OF DEFENDANT TO APPEAR.



   No warrant shall be issued on any charge for the arrest of a person who
has given written promise to appear in court, unless and until such person
has violated such promise or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for
arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of
the judgment, as required by law.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-21)  (Ord. No. 587)



SEC. 1-35.  PENALTY FOR WILFUL FAILURE TO APPEAR.



   Any person wilfully violating a written promise to appear in court is
guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon
which the person was originally arrested.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-22)  (Ord. No. 587)



SEC. 1-36.  WARRANT FOR ARREST.



   When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place
specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as
provided in Cal. Penal Code, Section 853.1, the magistrate shall issue and
have delivered for execution a warrant for the person's  arrest within 20
days after the failure to appear as promised, or if such person promises to
appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate
and fails to do so on or before the date which the person  promises to
appear, then, within 20 days after the delivery of such written promise to
appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-23)  (Ord. No. 587)



SEC. 1-37.  APPLICABILITY OF SUMMONS PROCEDURE.



   The foregoing provisions shall apply to any provision of this code, the
violation of which is punishable as a misdemeanor as provided in section 1-10
of this code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-24)  (Ord. No. 587)



SEC. 1-38.  ARRESTING OFFICER.



   For the purposes of the preceding sections, the terms “arresting
officer” and “officer” mean any police officer of the city and any
other employee of the city whose duty is to enforce the provisions of this
code and who is authorized by the city manager to use the citation procedure
established in the performance of enforcement duties.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-25)  (Ord. No. 487)



ARTICLE III.  JUDICIAL REVIEW



SEC. 1-45.  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   Judicial review of any decision of the city or of any board,
commission, officer or agent thereof shall be subject to the provisions of
Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-28)  (Ord. No. 1666)



SEC. 1-46.  ACTIONS TO DETERMINE VALIDITY.



   An action may be brought pursuant to the Cal. Code of Civil Procedure
to determine the validity of any legislative act of the city council through
ordinance or resolution, involving bonds, contracts, indebtedness,
regulations, taxes, appointments, and all other matters relating to the
operation of the city and the welfare of its residents.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-29)  (Ord. No. 1968)



SEC. 1-47.  POWERS OF HEARING OFFICERS; SUBPOENAS.



   (A)   All hearing officers appointed by the city manager are
authorized to:



      (1)   Hear complaints;



      (2)   Administer oaths;



      (3)   Issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses;



      (4)   Issue subpoenas for the production of papers, books,
accounts, and documents (collectively “documents”);



      (5)   Inspect documents; and



      (6)   Certify all official acts.



   (B)   Subpoenas issued by the hearing officer extend to all parts of
the State and may be served by any person authorized to serve process in
courts of record or by any person designated for that purpose by the hearing
officer.



   (C)   A person is not obliged to attend a hearing as a witness at a
place out of the county in which the person resides unless the distance is
less than 50 miles from the place of residence of such person.



   (D)   If any person refuses to attend or testify or produce any
documents as required by a subpoena issued by a hearing officer, the hearing
officer may petition the superior court for an order compelling the person to
obey the subpoena.  The petition of the hearing officer shall allege that:



      (1)   The subpoena gave the person due notice of the time and
place of attendance at the hearing or the production of the documents;



      (2)   The person was subpoenaed in the manner prescribed
herein; and



      (3)    The person failed to attend or produce the documents
required by the subpoena or refused to answer questions propounded to the
person in the course of the hearing.



   (E)   The superior court has jurisdiction to compel the attendance
of a person, the giving of testimony, and the production of documents
required by any subpoena issued by a hearing officer.



   (F)   Upon the filing of the petition, the superior court shall
enter an order directing the person to appear before the court at a specified
time and place and then and there show cause why the person has not attended
or testified or produced the documents as required.  A copy of the order
shall be served upon such person.  If the court determines that the subpoena
was regularly issued by the hearing officer, the court shall enter an order
that the person appear before the hearing officer named in the subpoena, or
such alternate hearing officer as the city manager may have subsequently
appointed, at the time and place fixed in the order and testify or produce
the required documents.  Upon failure to obey the order, the person shall be
dealt with as for contempt of court.



   (G)   Any party to a hearing held by any hearing officer has the
right to the attendance of witnesses in such party's behalf at the hearing
upon making request therefor to the hearing officer, designating the person
sought to be subpoenaed, and upon depositing with the hearing officer a
certified check payable to the person to be subpoenaed for fees and mileage
calculated in the same amount established by law for a witness in a civil
case in the State.



(Ord. No. 2588)



ARTICLE IV.  MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS



SEC. 1-50.  MUNICIPAL ELECTION DAY.



   Pursuant to Cal. Elections Code, Section 1301(b)(1), the general
municipal election for all elected city officers shall be held on the same
day as the general Statewide election.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-40)  (Ord. No. 1904)



SEC. 1-51.  COMMENCEMENT.



   Code section 1-50 shall apply in each even-numbered year unless
repealed by the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 1-41)  (Ord. No. 1904)



ARTICLE V.  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS



SEC. 1-55.  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.



   Unless otherwise specifically set forth in this code, the procedures
set forth in sections 1-55 through 1-61 of this code shall be followed for
the denial, suspension, modification, or revocation of a permit applied for
or held pursuant to any provision of this code if the denial, suspension,
modification, or revocation of such permit involves the exercise of
administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of
the provisions of this code or any rules, regulations, policies, or
procedures adopted by the city council or the city manager.



(Ord. No. 2840)



SEC. 1-56.  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The city manager may adopt written rules, regulations, policies, and
procedures that are consistent with the intent or provisions of this article,
as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the administration or enforcement
of the provisions of this code.



(Ord. No. 2840)



SEC. 1-57.  HEARING OFFICER.



   The city manager shall appoint persons to serve as administrative
hearing officers.



(Ord. No. 2840)



SEC. 1-58.  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   City staff shall mail notice of a proposed denial, suspension,
modification, or revocation of any permit applied for or held to the
applicant or permittee, stating the reasons for the denial, suspension,
modification, or revocation of any permit applied for or held. The notice
shall inform the applicant or permittee that the permit will be denied,
suspended, modified, or revoked and the applicant or permittee will be deemed
to concur with such action if the applicant or permittee does not make a
written request for a hearing as provided in subsection (B) of this section.



   (B)   The applicant or permittee may make a written request for a
hearing. The request must be received by the party who signed the notice
within 14 days of the date of the notice and be accompanied by the hearing
fee set by resolution of the city council. A copy of the notice shall be
attached to the request for hearing, and the request for hearing shall state
the reasons that the permit should not be denied, suspended, modified, or
revoked.



   (C)   If a timely request for hearing, accompanied by the hearing
fee, is received by the party who signed the notice, the hearing shall be
conducted as set forth in section 1-59 of this code. If such a request is not
so received, the party who signed the notice shall mail to the applicant or
permittee a notice that the permit is denied, suspended, modified, or revoked.



   (D)   The party who receives the request for hearing shall send the
request to the hearing officer, and the hearing officer shall set the matter
for hearing. At least ten days before the hearing, the hearing officer shall
mail written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing to the
applicant or permittee.



   (E)   Unless otherwise provided by this code, the filing of a
request for hearing shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the notice
appealed from until the determination of the appeal as provided herein.



(Ord. No. 2840)



SEC. 1-59.  CONDUCT OF HEARING.



   (A)   At the hearing officer’s discretion or upon good cause
shown, the hearing officer may continue the hearing by written notice before
the scheduled hearing date or orally at or during the hearing.



   (B)   The hearing shall be open to the public.



   (C)   A representative of the city shall first present evidence to
justify the proposed denial, suspension, modification, or revocation of a
permit. Thereafter, the applicant or permittee may present evidence. The
burden of proof to justify the denial, suspension, modification, or
revocation is on the city.



   (D)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
fashion and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence.



   (E)   The hearing officer may continue any hearing to request
additional information from city staff, the applicant, or the permittee prior
to issuing a written decision. The hearing officer is not required to
continue the hearing on the date the administrative hearing is held. A
hearing is not concluded until the hearing officer receives any additional
information requested pursuant to this subdivision.



   (F)   Unless otherwise provided in this code, if the applicant or
permittee fails to appear for the hearing at the time and place noticed, the
hearing officer in his or her discretion may conduct the hearing to a
conclusion or may dismiss the appeal. If the appeal is dismissed, the notice
appealed from shall become final and effective on the date of the hearing.
Upon a showing of good cause, the hearing officer may set aside his or her
decision or dismissal upon the applicant’s or the permittee’s failure to
appear and may reschedule the appeal for hearing.



(Ord. No. 2840)



SEC. 1-60.  HEARING OFFICER AUTHORITY.



   (A)   At the request of the city, applicant, or permittee, the
hearing officer shall, on behalf of the city, issue subpoenas for attendance
of witnesses at the hearing.



   (B)   At the request of the city, applicant, or permittee, the
hearing officer shall, on behalf of the city, issue orders for the production
of documents on a date certain. In no event shall the date for the production
of documents be less than 15 days after the date the order was issued.



   (C)   The hearing officer may affirm or reverse the notice appealed
from.



   (D)   The hearing officer shall not have authority to waive any
requirements of this code or any other law, rule, or regulation.



(Ord. No. 2840)



SEC. 1-61.  DECISION.



   (A)   Within 15 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing
officer shall issue and mail to the applicant or permittee a written decision
containing a statement of the reasons on which the decision is based and
which decision shall be final and effective on the date issued. Within the
decision, the hearing officer shall include a statement that the time in
which judicial review may be sought is governed by Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure, Section 1094.6. The hearing officer shall give such decision to
appropriate city staff, who shall keep the decision with the notice of
proposed denial, suspension, modification, or revocation of any permit
applied for or held.



   (B)   The applicant or permittee may seek judicial review of the
decision of the hearing officer in accordance with Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure, Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.



(Ord. No. 2840)



CHAPTER 2:  ADMINISTRATION



ARTICLE I.  LEGISLATIVE BODIES



DIVISION 1.  CITY COUNCIL



   2-1.   Meetings; rules of procedure



   2-1.1.   Establishment of city council committees



   2-2.   Declaration of purpose regarding district elections



   2-2.5.   City council districts established



   2-3.   Election of members of the city council by district



   2-3.5.   Commencement of district elections



   App. A   City of Oxnard 2018 districting map 635



DIVISION 2.  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION



   2-5.   Established



DIVISION 3.  HOUSING AUTHORITY



   2-10.   Established



DIVISION 4.  REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY



   2-15.   Established



ARTICLE II.  COMMISSIONS/COMMITTEES



DIVISION 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS




[Reserved]




DIVISION 2.  CITIZEN ADVISORY GROUPS; GENERAL



   2-30.   Application



   2-31.   Certificate of appointment



   2-32.   Meeting locations



   2-33.   Notice of meetings; minutes



   2-34.   Resignation by absences



   2-35.   Removal of a member



   2-36.   Coordination between city council and citizen advisory groups



DIVISION 3.  SENIOR SERVICES COMMISSION



   2-45.   Established; qualifications



   2-46.   Appointment; terms; vacancy



   2-47.   Secretary



   2-48.   Rules of procedure; quorum



   2-49.   Powers and duties



DIVISION 4.  COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMISSION



   2-55.   Established; qualifications



   2-56.   Appointment; terms; vacancy



   2-57.   Secretary



   2-58.   Rules of procedure; quorum



   2-59.   Powers and duties



DIVISION 5.  LIBRARY BOARD



   2-65.   Public library established



   2-66.   Established; qualifications



   2-67.   Appointment; terms; vacancy



   2-68.   Secretary



   2-69.   Rules of procedure; quorum



   2-70.   Powers and duties



DIVISION 6.  PARKS AND RECREATION AND COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION



   2-80.   Established; qualifications



   2-81.   Appointment; terms; vacancy



   2-82.   Secretary



   2-83.   Rules of procedure; quorum



   2-84.   Powers and duties



DIVISION 7.  PLANNING COMMISSION



   2-95.   Duties



   2-96.   Composition



   2-97.   Rules of conduct



   2-98.   Finances



   2-99.   Televised proceedings



DIVISION 8. RELOCATION APPEALS BOARD




[Reserved]




DIVISION 9. YOUTH COMMISSION



   2-115.   Established; qualifications



   2-116.   Appointment; terms; vacancy



   2-117.   Secretary



   2-118.   Rules of procedure; quorum



   2-119.   Powers and duties



DIVISION 10.  COMMISSION ON HOMELESSNESS



   2-125.   Established; qualifications



   2-126.   Appointment; terms; vacancy



   2-127.   Secretary



   2-128.   Rules of procedure; quorum



   2-129.   Powers and duties



DIVISION 11.  CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION



   2-130.   Established; qualifications



   2-131.   Appointment; terms; vacancy



   2-132.   Secretary



   2-133.   Rules of procedure; quorum



   2-134.   Powers and duties



ARTICLE III.  DEPARTMENTS



DIVISION 1.  CITY ATTORNEY



   2-135.   Appointment of city attorney



   2-136.   Conflicts of interest of former employees



   2-137.   Conditions for public contract work generally



   2-138.   Provisions to be included in invitations to bid



DIVISION 2.  CITY CLERK



   2-145.   City clerk as department director



   2-146.   Benefits of city clerk



   2-147.   Bond of city clerk and assistant city clerk



   2-148.   Duties of city clerk



   2-149.   Compensation of city clerk



DIVISION 3.  CITY MANAGER



   2-155.   Position created; appointment; term



   2-156.   Compensation



   2-157.   Powers and duties; office



DIVISION 4.  CITY TREASURER



   2-165.   City treasurer as department director



   2-166.   Benefits of city treasurer



   2-167.   Bond of city treasurer and assistant city treasurer



   2-168.   Duties of city treasurer



   2-169.   Compensation of city treasurer



DIVISION 5.  DIRECTOR FINANCE DEPARTMENT



   2-175.   Creation



   2-175.5.   Chief financial officer



   2-176.   Financial and accounting duties



   2-177.   Bond



   2-178.   Fiscal year



   2-179.   Budget



   2-180.   Audit



   2-181.   Tort claims



   2-182.   Claims for refund of fees and charges



   2-183.   Claims for refund of taxes, assessments and utility fees



   2-184.   Procedure for payment of demands, warrants and checks



   2-185.   Presentation of demands; approval



   2-186.   Approval of warrants by director of finance; registered
warrants; payment of bonds and coupons



DIVISION 6.  FIRE



   2-205.    Established; volunteer force



DIVISION 7.  POLICE DEPARTMENT



   2-210.   Established; reserve officers



   2-211.   Fingerprint and identification services



ARTICLE IV. SUNSHINE ORDINANCE



   2-220.   Findings and purpose



   2-221.   Definitions



   2-222.   Meetings to be open and public; the Brown Act



   2-223.   Conduct of business; time and place of meetings



   2-224.   Agenda requirements for regular and special meetings



   2-225.   Agendas and related materials; public records



   2-226.   Closed sessions; permitted topics



   2-227.   Statements of reasons for closed sessions



   2-228.   Barriers to attendance prohibited



   2-229.   Video and audio recording, filming, and still photography



   2-230.   Public comment



   2-231.   Minutes



   2-232.   Sunshine ordinance supersedes other local laws



ARTICLE I.  LEGISLATIVE BODIES



DIVISION 1.  CITY COUNCIL



SEC. 2-1.  MEETINGS; RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Regular city council meetings - Unless otherwise approved by
city council action, city council shall conduct regular meetings on the first
and third Tuesdays of every month in the city council chambers at 305 West
Third Street at a time set by resolution of the city council.



   (B)   Rules of procedure -



      (1)   The rules for the conduct of proceedings of the city
council shall be established by resolution.



      (2)   Any violation of such rules shall be deemed to be a
violation of this code and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-10 of
this code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-1)  (Ord. No. 483, 1379, 1490, 1615, 1825, 1911, 2356,
2368, 2949)



SEC. 2-1.1.  ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY COUNCIL COMMITTEES.



   (A)   The following city council committees shall consist of three
city council members per committee, appointed by the mayor and approved by at
least four city councilmembers:



      (1)   The finance and governance committee;



      (2)   The public works and transportation committee;



      (3)   The public safety committee;



      (4)   The housing and economic development committee; and



      (5)   The community services committee.



   (B)   Regular city council committee meetings- Unless otherwise
approved by city council action, the city council committees shall conduct
regular meetings on the second and fourth Tuesdays of every month in the city
council chambers at 305 West Third Street at a time set by resolution of the
city council.



   (C)   The city council shall adopt bylaws for each committee setting
forth the powers and duties of the city council committees established in
this section.



(Ord. No. 2949)



SEC. 2-2.  DECLARATION OF PURPOSE REGARDING DISTRICT ELECTIONS.



   The city council of the City of Oxnard hereby declares that the change
of method of electing members of this city council is being made in
furtherance of the California Voting Rights Act of 2001.



(Ord. No. 2934)



SEC. 2-2.5.  CITY COUNCIL DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.



   Six city council districts are hereby established in the City of
Oxnard. The boundaries and identifying number of each district shall be
described on Map 635 codified as Appendix A, and incorporated herein by this
reference.



(Ord. No. 2934)



SEC. 2-3.  ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF THE CITY COUNCIL BY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Following the March 6, 2018 effective date of sections 2-2
through 2-3.5, and upon the commencement of “by district” elections in
the order established in section 2-3.5 of this code, members of the city
council shall be elected “by district” as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code,
Section 34871, or any successor statute. No term of any member of the city
council that commenced prior to March 6, 2018 shall be affected by the
adoption of sections 2-2 to 2-3.5 of the code. The mayor shall continue to be
separately elected on an at-large basis to a two year term.



   (B)   Registered voters signing nomination papers or voting for a
member of the city council shall be residents of the geographical area making
up the district from which the member is to be elected.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in section 2-3.5(B), the terms of
the office of each member elected to the city council shall remain four years.



(Ord. No. 2934)



SEC. 2-3.5.  COMMENCEMENT OF DISTRICT ELECTIONS.



   (A)   Commencing with the general municipal election in November
2018 and thereafter, the voters in districts one, two and five shall elect
members of the city council by district for full four year terms.



   (B)   For the general municipal election in November 2018 only, the
voters in district six shall elect their member of the city council by
district for a two year term.



   (C)   Commencing with the general municipal election in 2020 and
thereafter, the voters in districts three, four and six shall elect members
of the city council by district for full four year terms.



   (D)   Pursuant to Cal. Elections Code, Section 21606, the term of
office of any council member who has been elected and whose term of office
has not expired shall not be affected by any change in the boundaries of the
district from which he/she was elected.



(Ord. No. 2934)



Appendix A







 



(Ord. No. 2934)



DIVISION 2.  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION



SEC. 2-5.  ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The community development commission (CDC) is hereby
established, and shall consist of the members of the city council.



   (B)   The CDC shall have such powers and responsibilities relating
to redevelopment and community development as are from time to time
designated by motion, resolution, or ordinance of the city council and/or the
governing board of the redevelopment agency.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the CDC shall not act as a
housing authority or replace the Oxnard housing authority commission.



   (D)   This division shall neither:



      (1)   Affect any bond, indebtedness, or other obligation
authorized by the city council or the redevelopment agency prior to the
effective date hereof; nor



      (2)   Limit or diminish the general powers and authority of
the redevelopment agency.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-168)  (Ord. No. 2358)



DIVISION 3.  HOUSING AUTHORITY



SEC. 2-10.  ESTABLISHED.



   A housing authority, known as the Oxnard Housing Authority, exists in
the city pursuant to the “Housing Authorities Law” of the State.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-144)



DIVISION 4.  REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY



SEC. 2-15.  ESTABLISHED.



   A redevelopment agency, known as the Oxnard Redevelopment Agency, may
exist in the city pursuant to the “Community Redevelopment Laws” of the
State.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-144.5)  (Ord. No. 2270)



ARTICLE II.  COMMISSIONS/COMMITTEES



DIVISION 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS




[Reserved]




DIVISION 2.  CITIZEN ADVISORY GROUPS; GENERAL



SEC. 2-30.  APPLICATION.



   The following provisions shall apply to the following citizen advisory
groups: senior services commission, commission on community relations,
library board, parks and recreation commission, youth commission, and
cultural arts commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-100)  (Ord. No. 2467, 2553, 2657, 2886)



SEC. 2-31.  CERTIFICATE OF APPOINTMENT.



   Upon appointment or reappointment to a citizen advisory group, the city
clerk shall deliver to the person a certificate of appointment.  The
certificate, including the required oath of office, shall be signed and sworn
to by the person before the city clerk and filed with the records of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-101)  (Ord. No. 2467)



SEC. 2-32.  MEETING LOCATIONS.



   All citizen advisory group meetings shall be open to the public and
held in a publicly owned building.  The time, day and location of all
regular meetings of a citizen advisory group shall be filed with the city
clerk.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-102)  (Ord. No. 2467)



SEC. 2-33.  NOTICE OF MEETINGS; MINUTES.



   The secretary shall be responsible for properly noticing all regular
and special meetings of the citizen advisory group and maintaining minutes of
the meetings.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-103)  (Ord. No. 2467)



SEC. 2-34.  RESIGNATION BY ABSENCES.



   (A)   If any member of a citizen advisory group is absent without
good cause for more than three consecutive meetings, the member shall be
deemed to have resigned from the citizen advisory group. The secretary shall
notify the city clerk in writing of any such consecutive absences.  The
member shall be deemed to have resigned from the citizen advisory group on
the date that the city clerk receives notice from the secretary.



   (B)   The chairperson of the citizen advisory group shall determine
whether a member's absence is for good cause.  An absence due to illness
shall be considered an absence for good cause, provided, that the member
provides notice of such absence to the chairperson prior to the meeting.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-104)  (Ord. No. 2467)



SEC. 2-35.  REMOVAL OF A MEMBER.



   A citizen advisory group member may be removed at the pleasure of the
city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-105)  (Ord. No. 2467)



SEC. 2-36.  COORDINATION BETWEEN CITY COUNCIL AND CITIZEN ADVISORY GROUPS.



   (A)   The secretary shall promptly inform the city council, through
the city manager, of policy decisions or recommendations adopted by a citizen
advisory group.



   (B)   A copy of the portion of the minutes of each city council
meeting discussing a particular citizen advisory group shall be furnished by
the city clerk to the secretary.



   (C)   A copy of the minutes of all citizen advisory group meetings
shall be delivered promptly to the city manager by the secretary.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-106)  (Ord. No. 2467)



DIVISION 3.  SENIOR SERVICES COMMISSION



SEC. 2-45.  ESTABLISHED; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   There is hereby established a senior services commission
composed of nine members.



   (B)   A member shall serve without compensation, shall reside in the
city and shall be over the age of 49.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-107)  (Ord. No. 2467, 2657)



SEC. 2-46.  APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCY.



   (A)   The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall
appoint the members of the senior services commission.  Members shall be
appointed at the first meeting of the city council in every December after a
general election involving the office of mayor.



   (B)   The term of a member of the senior services commission shall
be two years and shall begin in January.



   (C)   In the event of a vacancy, the mayor, with the approval of the
city council, shall appoint a replacement to complete the term of the member
creating the vacancy.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-108)  (Ord. No. 2467, 2657)



SEC. 2-47.  SECRETARY.



   The city manager shall designate a city staff member to serve as a
nonvoting secretary to the senior services commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-109)  (Ord. No. 2467, 2657)



SEC. 2-48.  RULES OF PROCEDURE; QUORUM.



   (A)   The senior services commission shall follow rules of procedure
approved by the city council.



   (B)   A majority of the commission positions filled at the time of
the meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business by the
senior services commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-110)  (Ord. No. 2467, 2657)



SEC. 2-49.  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the senior services commission shall be as
follows:



   (A)   Analyze, define and investigate issues and the needs of senior
citizens in the city and advise the city council on such matters;



   (B)   Develop and recommend solutions for problems affecting senior
citizens to the city council and other appropriate community organizations
and agencies;



   (C)   Disseminate information and educational materials and reports
that will assist in enhancing the quality of life of senior citizens and the
treatment of senior citizens;



   (D)   Serve as a liaison between the city council and the community
in matters concerning senior citizens; and



   (E)   Prepare and submit an annual report of activities to the city
council and make such other reports and recommendations to the city council
from time to time as the senior services commission may determine necessary
to improve the quality of life for senior citizens in the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-111)  (Ord. No. 2467, 2657)



DIVISION 4.  COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMISSION



SEC. 2-55.  ESTABLISHED; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   There is hereby established a commission on community
relations composed of seven members.



   (B)   A member shall serve without compensation, shall reside in the
city and shall be at least 18 years of age.



   (C)   The commission on community relations shall be known as the
community relations commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-112)  (Ord. No. 2446, 2467, 2853)



SEC. 2-56.  APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCY.



   (A)   The city council shall appoint the members of the community
relations commission. Members shall be appointed at the first meeting of the
city council in every December after a general election involving the office
of mayor.



   (B)   The term of a member of the community relations commission
shall be two years and shall begin in January.



   (C)   In the event of a vacancy, the city council shall appoint a
replacement to complete the term of the member creating the vacancy.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-113)  (Ord. No. 2446, 2467, 2853)



SEC. 2-57.  SECRETARY.



   The city manager shall designate a city staff member to serve as a
nonvoting secretary to the community relations commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-114)  (Ord. No. 2446, 2467, 2853)



SEC. 2-58.  RULES OF PROCEDURE; QUORUM.



   (A)   The community relations commission shall follow rules of
procedure approved by the city council.



   (B)   Four members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business by the community relations commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-115)  (Ord. No. 2446, 2467, 2853)



SEC. 2-59.  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the community relations commission shall be as
follows:



   (A)   Analyze, define, and investigate community relations issues
and needs in the city and advise the city council on matters involving group
prejudices, racial tension, intolerance or differences in treatment or
favoritism of persons on a basis other than individual merit;



   (B)   Promote mutual understanding and respect among all residents
of the city and work to discourage and prevent practices involving group
prejudices, racial tension, intolerance or differences in treatment or
favoritism of persons on a basis other than individual merit;



   (C)   Disseminate information and educational materials and reports
that will assist in the elimination of practices involving group prejudices,
racial tension, intolerance or differences in treatment or favoritism of
persons on a basis other than individual merit;



   (D)   Investigate and study complaints of violations of State
statutes relating to practices involving group prejudices, racial tension,
intolerance or differences in treatment or favoritism of persons on a basis
other than individual merit in publicly assisted housing accommodations;



   (E)   Assist various groups and agencies within the city to
cooperate in educational campaigns devoted to the elimination of practices
involving group prejudices, racial tension, intolerance or differences in
treatment or favoritism of persons on a basis other than individual merit;



   (F)   Cooperate with enforcement agencies to ensure that no person
in the city is deprived of equal services furnished in the city by reason of
violation of any State law prohibiting differences in treatment or favoritism
of persons on a basis other than individual merit;



   (G)   Cooperate with city, State, federal and other agencies in
order to promote better community relations;



   (H)   Review the current equal employment opportunity status of the
city;



   (I)   Serve as an information resource between the city council and
community in matters concerning equal employment opportunity;



   (J)   With the prior written consent of the city manager, conduct
fund raising activities that improve community relations in the city and are
consistent with the duties of the community relations commission;



   (K)   Endorse community events, by resolution or proclamation
approved by a majority of the members present, that improve community
relations in the city and are consistent with the duties of the community
relations commission; and



   (L)   Prepare and submit an annual report of activities to the city
council and make such other reports and recommendations to the city council
from time to time as the community relations commission may determine
necessary to improve community relations in the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-116)  (Ord. No. 2446, 2467, 2853)



DIVISION 5.  LIBRARY BOARD



SEC. 2-65.  PUBLIC LIBRARY ESTABLISHED.



   A public library is hereby established in and for the city to be known
and designated as the Oxnard Public Library.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-117)  (Ord. No. 2467)



SEC. 2-66.  ESTABLISHED; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   There is hereby established a library board composed of five
members.



   (B)   A member shall serve without compensation, shall reside in the
city and shall be at least 18 years of age.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-118)  (Ord. No. 2467)



SEC. 2-67.  APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCY.



   (A)   The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall
appoint the members of the library board.  Members shall be appointed at the
first meeting of the city council in every December after a general election
involving the office of mayor.



   (B)   The term of office of a member of the library board shall be
two years and shall begin in January. A member of the library board may be
reappointed; however, no member of the library board may be appointed to
serve more than two consecutive terms. After completing two terms of office,
a member of the library board must vacate the library board for one year
before being eligible to reapply.



   (C)   In the event of a vacancy, the mayor, with the approval of the
city council, shall appoint a replacement to complete the term of the member
creating the vacancy.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-119)  (Ord. No. 2467, 2862)



SEC. 2-68.  SECRETARY.



   The city manager shall designate a city staff member to serve as a
nonvoting secretary to the library board.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-120)  (Ord. No. 2467)



SEC. 2-69.  RULES OF PROCEDURE; QUORUM.



   (A)   The library board shall follow rules of procedure approved by
the city council.



   (B)   Three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business by the library board.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-121)  (Ord. No. 2467)



SEC. 2-70.  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the library board shall be as follows:



   (A)   Advise the city council on policies and procedures relating to
the public library;



   (B)   Investigate the nature and scope of the needs of the public
library;



   (C)   Recommend policies and programs related to the public library
for consideration by the city council;



   (D)   Assist the public library staff in reviewing and evaluating
programs and services of the public library;



   (E)   Make recommendations to the city council for improvements to
the public library;



   (F)   Represent the needs and views of the community to the public
library staff and to the city council; and



   (G)   Prepare and submit an annual report of activities to the city
council and make such other reports and recommendations to the city council
from time to time as the library board may determine necessary to improve the
operations of the public library.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-122)  (Ord. No. 2467)



DIVISION 6.  PARKS AND RECREATION AND COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION



SEC. 2-80.  ESTABLISHED; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   There is hereby established a parks and recreation and
community services commission composed of seven members.



   (B)   A member shall serve without compensation, shall reside in the
city and shall be at least 18 years of age.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-123)  (Ord. No. 2467, 2863)



SEC. 2-81.  APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCY.



   (A)   (1)   The mayor, with the approval of the city council,
shall appoint the members of the parks and recreation and community services
commission.



      (2)   Members shall be appointed at the first meeting of the
city council in every December after a general election involving the office
of mayor.



   (B)   The term of office of a member of the parks and recreation and
community services commission shall be two years and shall begin in January.



   (C)   In the event of a vacancy, the mayor with the approval of the
city council, shall appoint a replacement to complete the term of the member
creating the vacancy.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-124)  (Ord. No. 2467, 2863)



SEC. 2-82.  SECRETARY.



   The city manager shall designate a city staff member to serve as a
nonvoting secretary to the parks and recreation and community services
commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-125)  (Ord. No. 2467, 2863)



SEC. 2-83.  RULES OF PROCEDURE; QUORUM.



   (A)   The parks and recreation and community services commission
shall follow rules of procedure approved by the city council.



   (B)   Four members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business by the parks and recreation and community services commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-126)  (Ord. No. 2467, 2863)



SEC. 2-84.  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the parks and recreation and community
services commission shall be as follows:



   (A)   Advise the city council on all matters pertaining to the parks
and recreation and community services activities in the city;



   (B)   Serve as a liaison between the city council and the community
in matters related to parks and recreation and community services activities;



   (C)   Advise city staff on future parks and recreation and community
services programs;



   (D)   Receive suggestions on general community parks and
recreational and community services policy issues and make recommendations to
the city council; and



   (E)   Prepare and submit an annual report of activities to the city
council and make such other reports and recommendations to the city council
from time to time as the parks and recreation and community services
commission may determine necessary to improve parks and recreation and
community services activities in the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-127)  (Ord. No. 2467, 2863)



DIVISION 7.  PLANNING COMMISSION



SEC. 2-95.  DUTIES.



   A planning agency consisting of planning commissioners, to be known
collectively as the planning commission (“commission”), is created and
established to perform the following functions and duties:



   (A)   The functions and duties assigned to the commission by the
code and other ordinances and resolutions of the city council;



   (B)   The functions set out in Cal. Gov't Code, Sections 65103,
65400, 65401 and 65402; and



   (C)   The duties imposed on a commission by Cal. Health and Safety
Code, Section 33000.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-145)  (Ord. No. 2359, 2402, 2445)



SEC. 2-96.  COMPOSITION.



   (A)   The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the
city council.  Members of the commission shall serve and may be removed and
replaced at the pleasure of the city council.



   (B)   The first four members of the commission appointed after this
division becomes effective shall serve until December 1, 1998, or until a
successor is appointed, unless the member is earlier removed by the city
council, dies, resigns or is deemed to have resigned pursuant to this code. 
The next three members of the commission appointed after this division
becomes effective shall serve until December 1, 2000, or until a successor is
appointed, unless the member is earlier removed by the city council, dies,
resigns or is deemed to have resigned pursuant to this code.  All members of
the commission appointed thereafter shall serve until December 1 of the
fourth year after the date of appointment or until a successor is appointed,
unless the member is earlier removed by the city council, dies, resigns or is
deemed to have resigned pursuant to this code.



   (C)   A member of the commission may be reappointed by the city
council.  However, no member of the commission may be appointed to serve
more than two consecutive terms.



   (D)   Each member of the planning commission shall have one vote. 
Four members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.



   (E)   Members of the commission shall select one of their number as
chair and another as vice-chair, both serving for one year or until their
successors are appointed, unless they are earlier removed from such positions
by a majority vote of the members of the commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-146)  (Ord. No. 2359, 2369, 2402, 2445)



SEC. 2-97.  RULES OF CONDUCT.



   The commission shall by resolution adopt rules of procedure for the
conduct of meetings.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-147)  (Ord. No. 2359, 2445)



SEC. 2-98.  FINANCES.



   The city council shall provide the funds and equipment necessary for
the work of the commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-148)  (Ord. No. 2359, 2445)



SEC. 2-99.  TELEVISED PROCEEDINGS.



   To the extent feasible, public proceedings of the commission shall be
televised.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-149)  (Ord. No. 2367, 2445)



DIVISION 8.  RELOCATION APPEALS BOARD




[Reserved]




DIVISION 9.  YOUTH COMMISSION



SEC. 2-115.  ESTABLISHED; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   There is hereby established a youth commission composed of 21
members.



   (B)   A member shall serve without compensation.  Fifteen members
shall be between the ages of 13 and 19 years old, two members shall be
members of the city council, and four members shall be at least 18 years of
age.  A member shall reside in the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-128)  (Ord. No. 2467)



SEC. 2-116.  APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCY.



   (A)   The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall
appoint the members of the youth commission.  Members shall be appointed at
the first meeting of the city council in every December after a general
election involving the office of mayor.



   (B)   The term of office of a member of the youth commission shall
be two years and shall begin in January.



   (C)   In the event of a vacancy, the mayor, with the approval of the
city council, shall appoint a replacement to complete the term of the member
creating the vacancy.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-129)  (Ord. No. 2467)



SEC. 2-117.  SECRETARY.



   The city manager shall designate a city staff member to serve as a
nonvoting secretary to the youth commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-130)  (Ord. No. 2467)



SEC. 2-118.  RULES OF PROCEDURE; QUORUM.



   (A)   The youth commission shall follow rules of procedure approved
by the city council.



   (B)   Eleven members shall constitute a quorum for transaction of
business by the youth commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-131)  (Ord. No. 2467)



SEC. 2-119.  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the youth commission shall be as follows:



   (A)   Analyze, define and investigate issues and needs affecting
youth in the city and advise the city council on such matters;



   (B)   Promote mutual understanding and respect among all youth in
the city and to work to encourage youth to actively participate in local
government in a positive and productive manner;



   (C)   Disseminate information and educational materials and reports
that will assist in enhancing the quality of life and treatment of youth in
the city;



   (D)   Develop and recommend solutions for problems affecting youth
to the city council and other appropriate community organizations and
agencies;



   (E)   Serve as a liaison between the city council and community in
matters concerning youth in the city; and



   (F)   Prepare and submit an annual report of activities to the city
council and make such other reports and recommendations to the city council
from time to time as the youth commission may determine necessary to improve
the quality of life for youth in the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-132)  (Ord. No. 2467)



DIVISION 10.  COMMISSION ON HOMELESSNESS



SEC. 2-125.  ESTABLISHED; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   There is hereby established a commission on homelessness
composed of 7 members.



   (B)   A member shall serve without compensation and shall be at
least 18 years of age.



(Ord. No. 2553, 2889)



SEC. 2-126.  APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCY.



   (A)   The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall
appoint the members of the commission on homelessness.  Members shall be
appointed at the first meeting of the city council in every December after a
general election involving the office of the mayor.



   (B)   The term of office of a member of the commission on
homelessness shall be two years and shall begin in March.



   (C)   In the event of a vacancy, the mayor with the approval of the
city council, shall appoint a replacement to complete the term of the member
creating the vacancy.



(Ord. No. 2553, 2889)



SEC. 2-127.  SECRETARY.



   The city manager shall designate a city staff member to serve as a
nonvoting secretary to the commission on homelessness.



(Ord. No. 2553)



SEC. 2-128.  RULES OF PROCEDURE; QUORUM.



   (A)   The commission on homelessness shall follow rules of procedure
approved by the city council.



   (B)   Four members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business by the commission on homelessness.



(Ord. No. 2553, 2889)



SEC. 2-129.  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the commission on homelessness shall be as
follows:



   (A)   Advise the city council on all matters pertaining to
homelessness in the city;



   (B)   Serve as a liaison between the city council and the community
in matters related to homelessness issues;



   (C)   Review and evaluate programs, requests for homeless funds, and
homeless services in the city;



   (D)   Recommend programs, strategies, and funding for preventing and
reducing the incidence of homelessness in the city; and



   (E)   Prepare and submit an annual report of activities to the city
council and make such other reports and recommendations to the city council
from time to time as the commission on homelessness or city council may
determine necessary to address homelessness issues.



(Ord. No. 2553)



DIVISION 11.  CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION



SEC. 2-130.  ESTABLISHED; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   There is hereby established a cultural arts commission
composed of nine members.



   (B)   A member shall serve without compensation, shall reside in the
city, shall be at least 18 years of age, and shall have a special knowledge
or interest in the arts.



(Ord. No. 2886)



SEC. 2-131.  APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCY.



   (A)   The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall
appoint the members of the cultural arts commission.  Members shall be
appointed at the first meeting of the city council in every December after a
general election involving the office of the mayor.



   (B)   The term of office of a member of the cultural arts commission
shall be two years and shall begin in January.



   (C)   In the event of a vacancy, the mayor, with the approval of the
city council, shall appoint a replacement to complete the term of the member
creating the vacancy.



(Ord. No. 2886)



SEC. 2-132.  SECRETARY.



   The city manager shall designate a city staff member to serve as a
nonvoting secretary to the cultural arts commission.



(Ord. No. 2886)



SEC. 2-133.  RULES OF PROCEDURE; QUORUM.



   (A)   The cultural arts commission shall follow rules of procedure
approved by the city council.



   (B)   Five members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business by the cultural arts commission.



(Ord. No. 2886)



SEC. 2-134.  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the cultural arts commission shall be as
follows:



   (A)   Advise the city council on all matters pertaining to the
cultural arts in the community;



   (B)   Recommend to the city council the adoption, amendment or
repeal of ordinances regarding public art, and/or art related projects and
proposals;



   (C)   Assist the cultural arts community in raising funds through
grants or other sources for the development, growth, incorporation, and
expansion of the arts;



   (D)   Provide a local, state and national network of support and
supporters of the local arts;



   (E)   Build a growth continuum of education, training and arts to
develop an incubator for home grown evaluators and evaluation training tools
so that congruity among mission, vision and requirements of requests for
proposals matches skills assessed by evaluators in the review process;



   (F)   Develop public arts projects that include developing written
materials for soliciting participation, appointing and training selection
panels, and reviewing and recommending funding to ensure integrity of such
processes;



   (G)   Receive recommendations from ad-hoc local panels to review art
actions in conjunction with the commission;



   (H)   Recommend to the city council the distribution of revenues
collected through fund raising, grants and public art funds consistent with
the needs of the community, including solicitation and analysis of cultural
arts grant proposals;



   (I)   Participate in the development of the strategic annual public
art plan and longer-ranged strategic public art plans;



   (J)   Cooperate with other commissions and civic organizations in
order to promote, market, and publicize the arts in order to increase and
foster public interest in the arts; and



   (K)   Perform other art, cultural and arts education duties as may
from time to time be prescribed by the city council.



(Ord. No. 2886)



ARTICLE III.  DEPARTMENTS



DIVISION I.  CITY ATTORNEY



SEC. 2-135.  APPOINTMENT OF CITY ATTORNEY.



   The city attorney shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city
council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-5)



SEC. 2-136.  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST OF FORMER EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   No former city employee designated herein shall, within one
year after termination of employment, for compensation represent or advise
any person in any proceeding to which the city is a party if the proceeding
is one in which the former employee participated as a city employee.



   (B)   The terms used in subsection (A) shall be defined as follows:



      (1)   “City employee designated herein” shall mean any
city officer or employee in any of the following classifications:



         (a)   City council member;



         (b)   City manager;



         (c)   Assistant city manager;



         (d)    Deputy city manager;



         (e)   City attorney;



         (f)   Assistant city attorney;



         (g)   Deputy city attorney;



         (h)   Development services director;



         (i)   Community development director;



         (j)   City planner;



         (k)   Principal planner;



         (l)   Building official;



         (m)   Plan check engineer;



         (n)   Supervising building inspector;



         (o)   Code enforcement official;



         (p)   Finance and management services director;



         (q)   Housing director;



         (r)   Public works director.



      (2)   “Termination of employment” shall mean voluntary
termination, involuntary termination, resignation at the city's request, or
retirement.



      (3)   “Proceeding to which the city is a party” shall mean
any application for any permit or entitlement, contract, claim,
investigation, negotiation, purchase and sale, or any other matter involving
the discretionary powers and responsibilities of the city or entities
governed by the city council.



      (4)   “Participated” means to have taken part personally
and substantially at a policy level in the proceeding through decision,
recommendation, investigation, or use of confidential information. 



      (5)   The term “policy level” shall include fact finding,
recommending, analyzing and other activities which would foreseeably
influence the decision or result in the proceeding.



   (C)   Subsection (A) shall not apply to the furnishing of technical,
expert, or specialized services to the city by a former city employee at the
city's request.



   (D)   In addition to any other available remedy, the city may
decline to deal with and may refuse to approve the entitlement sought by any
person represented or advised by a former city employee in violation of this
section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-6)  (Ord. No. 1886, 1964, 2004, 2062, 2107, 2137)



SEC. 2-137.  CONDITIONS FOR PUBLIC CONTRACT WORK GENERALLY.



   The city may require all contracts or specifications relating to public
works or improvements to be paid for directly by the city to contain the
following provisions:



   (A)   Preference to local labor - The contractor agrees that in the
employment of labor, other than foremen and office personnel, the contractor
will give preference to bona fide residents of the city who have been such
for at least six months prior to such employment as follows.  At least 75
percent of the laborers employed upon the project shall at all times be such
residents of the city; provided, however, that in the event there is not a
sufficient number of laborers available who are such residents of the city to
do the work without delay or efficiently, then, with the written approval of
the city engineer, a smaller proportion of resident laborers may be employed.



   (B)   List of workers to be furnished daily - The contractor further
agrees to furnish to the city engineer each day during the life of this
contract a complete list of all persons employed or discharged on the
previous day, together with the correct home address of each such person.



   (C)   Discharge of employees upon request of engineer - The
contractor further agrees to, within 24 hours of the receipt of notice from
the city engineer so to do, discharge any employee on the work who is, in the
opinion of the engineer, incompetent, careless, untrustworthy, unskillful, or
otherwise unfitted for the work, or who is a nonresident of the city when
more than 25 % of the laborers employed upon the work are nonresidents, and
residents are available to prosecute the work efficiently without delay; and
that the contractor will forfeit to the city a penalty of $5 per day for each
person retained upon the work after notice from the city engineer to
discharge such person for any of the causes mentioned herein.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-7)



SEC. 2-138.  PROVISIONS TO BE INCLUDED IN INVITATIONS TO BID.



   The city clerk, when directed so to do, shall include, in all notices
calling for bids on public works or improvements, the following provisions:



   (A)   Preference to local labor -



      (1)   In the proposal submitted by the bidder, the bidder must
agree, if awarded the contract, that in the employment of labor other than
foremen and office personnel, the bidder will give preference to bona fide
residents of the city who have been such for at least six months prior to
such employment.



      (2)   At least 75% of persons employed upon the work shall at
all times be such residents of the city; provided, however, that in the event
there is not a sufficient number of persons available who are such residents
of the city to do the work without delay or efficiently, then with the
written approval of the city engineer, a smaller proportion of resident
persons may be employed.



   (B)   List of workers to be furnished daily; penalty -



      (1)   The bidder must further set out in the proposal that if
the bidder is awarded the contract, the bidder will furnish to the city each
day during the life of the contract a complete list of all persons employed
or discharged on the previous day, together with the correct home address of
every such person; and that the bidder will, within 24 hours of the receipt
of notice from the city engineer so to do, discharge any employee on the work
who is, in the opinion of the city engineer, incompetent, careless,
untrustworthy, unskilled, or otherwise unfitted for the work, or who is a
nonresident of the city, when more than 25% of the persons employed upon the
work are nonresidents and residents are available to prosecute the work
efficiently without delay.



      (2)   The bidder will forfeit to the city a penalty of $5 per
day for each persons retained upon the work after notice from the city
engineer to discharge such person for any of the causes mentioned herein.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-8)



DIVISION 2.  CITY CLERK



SEC. 2-145.  CITY CLERK AS DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR.



   The person occupying the classification of city clerk is designated as
a department director and shall be the administrative head of the city
clerk's office.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-3)  (Ord. No. 2203, 2350)



SEC. 2-146.  BENEFITS OF CITY CLERK.



   (A)   The person occupying the city clerk classification shall
receive all benefits provided to top management employees, unless otherwise
provided by resolution.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the above, a person occupying the
classification of city clerk shall not be entitled to transfer to or be
promoted or demoted to any other classification in the city service.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-3.1)  (Ord. No. 2203, 2315, 2350)



SEC. 2-147.  BOND OF CITY CLERK AND ASSISTANT CITY CLERK.



   The bonds of the city clerk and the assistant city clerk are set at
$5,000 each.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-3.2)  (Ord. No. 2203)



SEC. 2-148.  DUTIES OF CITY CLERK.



   (A)   The city clerk shall perform such statutory duties as are
assigned to the city clerk of a general law city by the laws of the State and
confirmed by resolution.



   (B)   The city clerk shall also perform such administrative duties
as assigned by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-3.3)  (Ord. No. 2203, 2350)



SEC. 2-149.  COMPENSATION OF CITY CLERK.



   (A)   The city clerk shall receive compensation for the performance
of statutory duties as established by ordinance.



   (B)   The city clerk shall receive compensation for the performance
of administrative duties in accordance with the principles and guidelines of
the management pay system applicable to top management employees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-3.4)  (Ord. No. 2203, 2350)



DIVISION 3.  CITY MANAGER



SEC. 2-155.  POSITION CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERM.



   (A)   The city manager form of government is adopted and shall be
followed by the city.



   (B)   The office of city manager is established. 



   (C)   The city manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
city council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-9)



SEC. 2-156.  COMPENSATION.



   The city manager shall receive such compensation for services as shall
be fixed by the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-10)



SEC. 2-157.  POWERS AND DUTIES; OFFICE.



   (A)   The city manager shall be the chief executive and
administrative officer of the city and shall have all of the powers and
duties heretofore vested in the several ministerial, executive and
administrative and other subordinate officers heretofore appointed by the
city council except the city clerk, the city attorney and the city treasurer.



   (B)   The city manager shall maintain an office in the city to be
provided for by the city council and shall keep the same open during all
business hours.



   (C)   The city manager shall perform such other and further acts as
shall be provided for by resolution of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-11)



DIVISION 4.  CITY TREASURER



SEC. 2-165.  CITY TREASURER AS DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR.



   The person occupying the classification of city treasurer is designated
as a department director and shall be the administrative head of the city
treasurer's office.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-4)  (Ord. No. 2203, 2350)



SEC. 2-166.  BENEFITS OF CITY TREASURER.



   (A)   The person occupying the city treasurer classification shall
receive all benefits provided to top management employees, unless otherwise
provided by resolution.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the above, a person occupying the
classification of city treasurer shall not be entitled to transfer to or be
promoted or demoted to any other classification in the city service.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-4.1)  (Ord. No. 2203, 2315, 2350)



SEC. 2-167.  BOND OF CITY TREASURER AND ASSISTANT CITY TREASURER.



   The bond of the city treasurer and assistant city treasurer is set at
$50,000.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-4.2)  (Ord. No. 2203, 2350)



SEC. 2-168.  DUTIES OF CITY TREASURER.



   (A)   The city treasurer shall perform such statutory duties as are
assigned to the city treasurer of a general law city by the laws of the State
and confirmed by resolution.



   (B)   The city treasurer shall also perform such administrative
duties as assigned by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-4.3)  (Ord. No. 2203, 2350)



SEC. 2-169.  COMPENSATION OF CITY TREASURER.



   (A)   The city treasurer shall receive compensation for the
performance of statutory duties as established by ordinance.



   (B)   The city treasurer shall receive compensation for the
performance of administrative duties in accordance with the principles and
guidelines of the management pay system applicable to top management
employees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-4.4)  (Ord. No. 2203, 2350)



DIVISION 5.  DIRECTOR OF FINANCE



SEC. 2-175.  CREATION.



   There shall be a finance department, headed by a director of finance
who shall supervise such employees as are necessary to carry out the
functions and duties of the department.



(Ord. No. 2643)



SEC. 2-175.5.  CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.



   Effective April 14, 2008, all references to the classification of
director of finance, finance and management services director, or finance
director in the city code, and any in city resolutions, agreements,
contracts, rules, regulations or procedures shall incorporate the
classification and/or working title of chief financial officer.



(Ord. No. 2772)



SEC. 2-176.  FINANCIAL AND ACCOUNTING DUTIES.



   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code Section 37209, the duties imposed
on the city clerk by Chapter 4, Part 2, Division 3, Title 4 of the Cal. Gov't
Code are transferred to the director of finance.



   (B)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code Section 40805.5, the financial and
accounting duties imposed on the city clerk by Cal. Gov't Code Sections 40802
through 40805 are transferred to the director of finance.



   (C)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code Section 34004, the duties imposed
on the city treasurer by Cal. Gov't Code Section 41004 are transferred to the
director of finance.



   (D)   The powers and duties of the director of finance include
centralizing fiscal and accounting duties; controlling inventory; financial
reporting; and assisting in budgeting.



   (E)   The director of finance shall promote, secure and preserve the
financial and property interests of the city.



   (F)   The city manager may assign to the director of finance
additional powers and duties not set forth herein.



(Ord. No. 2643, 2804)



SEC. 2-177.  BOND.



   The director of finance shall file with the city clerk a bond covering
the faithful performance of his/her duties, in the penal sum of not less than
$20,000. The bond shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 3, Division 4,
Title 1 of the Cal. Gov't Code. The premium on the bond shall be paid by the
city.



(Ord. No. 2643)



SEC. 2-178.  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July and
end on the last day of June of each calendar year.



(Ord. No. 2643)



SEC. 2-179.  BUDGET.



   (A)   Before the beginning of each fiscal year for which the city
council has not adopted a budget, the city manager shall submit to the city
council a proposed operations and capital budget for the following fiscal
year or for more than one of the following fiscal years.



   (B)   At a minimum, the proposed budget shall include:



      (1)   An itemized statement of estimated revenues from all
sources for the year.



      (2)   An itemized statement of proposed expenditures for each
department and division.



      (3)   A statement of the amount required for the payment of
interest, amortization and redemption charges on the debt of the city.



      (4)   Provision for contingent expense.



      (5)   A general budget summary.



      (6)   A budget statement outlining the proposed financial plan
for the year.



      (7)   The appropriations limit and the total annual
appropriations subject to limitation as determined pursuant to Division 9 of
Title 1 of the Cal. Gov't Code, commencing with Section 7900.



   (C)   The city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
budget, at which all interested persons may be heard. At the conclusion of
the public hearing, the city council may make changes to the proposed budget.



   (D)   The city council shall adopt a budget for the following fiscal
year or for more than one of the following fiscal years. If the budget is not
adopted on or before the beginning of such fiscal year, the proposed budget
shall become effective without action by the city council.



   (E)   The city council may revise at any time an adopted budget or a
proposed budget that became effective without action by the city council.



(Ord. No. 2643)



SEC. 2-180.  AUDIT.



   After the end of each fiscal year, the director of finance shall cause
an audit of the city's financial reports for the previous fiscal year to be
prepared promptly by a certified public accountant. Within a reasonable time,
the director of finance shall present the audit to the city council at a
public meeting.



(Ord. No. 2643)



SEC. 2-181.  TORT CLAIMS.



   Demands against the city, its officers or employees, for money or
damages are governed by the Cal. Gov't Code, except as provided therein, or
by other statutes, ordinances or regulations expressly applicable thereto.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-87)  (Ord. No. 801)



SEC. 2-182.  CLAIMS FOR REFUND OF FEES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   If the procedure for refund of a fee or charge collected by
the city is not specifically otherwise provided for in this code or in the
ordinance or resolution imposing the fee or charge, a claim for refund of a
fee or charge shall not be allowed unless the claim is filed with, and in the
manner and form prescribed by, the department that originally collected the
fee.



   (B)   The department director or designee may authorize payment of a
claim for refund of a fee or charge if he/she determines that the fee or
charge was overpaid or that the service, license or permit for which the fee
or charge was paid was not received or used.



   (C)   A refund shall not exceed the amount of overpayment or
unearned fee or charge actually paid by the claimant.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-87.1)  (Ord. No. 1378, 2440)



SEC. 2-183.  CLAIMS FOR REFUND OF TAXES, ASSESSMENTS AND UTILITY FEES.



   (A)   The provisions of this section are enacted pursuant to Cal.
Gov't Code, Section 935 and shall apply to all claims presented to the city
for refund of taxes, assessments or utility fees levied or imposed by the
city. For purposes of this section, "utility fees" shall mean fees for water
services, wastewater services or solid waste collection services.



   (B)   A claim for refund shall be in writing, signed under penalty
of perjury by the claimant or the claimant's guardian, executor, conservator
or administrator and shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than one
year after the date the claimant paid the taxes, assessments or utility fees
of which refund is requested.



   (C)   A claim shall include the name and address of the claimant or
the name and address of the claimant's guardian, executor conservator or
administrator; the facts and reason on which the claim is based; the date and
method of payment of the taxes, assessments or utility fees of which refund
is requested; and the name and title of the person to whom such payment was
made.



   (D)   No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of claimants.



   (E)   No suit for refund of taxes, assessments or utility fees shall
be filed unless a claim has been filed and rejected in accordance with this
section. Any such suit shall be commenced within six months from and after
the date on which the city council rejects the claim. No recovery shall be
allowed in any such suit on any ground not specified in the claim.



   (F)   Prior to filing a claim pursuant to this section any party
seeking a refund or adjustment of utility fees that does not exceed $1,000
shall file for review of the dispute utilizing the administrative appeal
process adopted by City Council resolution.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-87.2)  (Ord. No. 2440; Ord. No. 2930)



SEC. 2-184.  PROCEDURE FOR PAYMENT OF DEMANDS, WARRANTS AND CHECKS.



   The finance director shall prepare a written form of demand and
proposed check for each approved invoice and claim.  Supporting documents
such as the purchase order, and invoice or claim for payment shall be
attached thereto.  Demands shall be individually audited by the finance
director or designee, who shall certify as to the accuracy of each demand and
the availability of funds for payment thereof.  Such demands may be in the
form of check-warrants and when approved by all officers as required by this
code, shall be delivered to the city treasurer.  The city treasurer shall
subscribe a direction to the depository of funds to pay the funds to the
order of the payee, which action shall convert the warrant, or demand, to a
bona fide check.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-88)  (Ord. No. 801)



SEC. 2-185.  PRESENTATION OF DEMANDS; APPROVAL.



   (A)   All demands against the city shall, before being paid, be
presented to and approved by the proper officer.



   (B)   Demands for which no appropriation has been made shall be
presented to the city council; and all other demands shall be presented to
the city manager; provided, that any person dissatisfied with the refusal of
the city manager to approve any demand, in whole or in part, may present the
same to the city council, and the approval of such demand by the city council
shall have the same effect as its approval by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-89)  (Ord. No. 801)



SEC. 2-186.  APPROVAL OF WARRANTS BY DIRECTOR OF FINANCE; REGISTERED
WARRANTS; PAYMENT OF BONDS AND COUPONS.



   (A)   All demands approved by the proper board, commission or
officers shall be presented to the city's finance director, who shall examine
the same; and if the amount thereof is legally due and there remains on the
books an unexhausted balance or an appropriation against which the same may
be charged, the finance director shall approve such demand and draw and sign
the warrant on the city treasury therefor, payable out of the proper fund.



   (B)   (1)   Objections of the finance director to any demand may
be overruled by the city council, and the finance director shall thereupon
draw the warrant as directed by the city council.



      (2)   Such warrants when presented to the city treasurer,
shall be paid by the finance director out of the fund therein designated, if
there be sufficient money in such fund for that purpose.



      (3)   A warrant not paid for lack of funds shall be
registered, and all registered warrants shall be paid in the order of
registration when funds are available therefor.



   (C)   The finance director shall draw warrants for payment of
municipal or other bonds payable out of funds in the treasury upon
presentation and surrender of the proper bonds and coupons, without approval
of any body or officer.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-90)  (Ord. No. 801)



DIVISION 6.  FIRE



SEC. 2-205.  ESTABLISHED; VOLUNTEER FORCE.



   (A)   There shall be a fire department, headed by a fire chief,
together with such subordinate employees as may be necessary to carry out the
functions of the department. 



   (B)   In the fire department, and subject to the authority of the
fire chief, there may be a volunteer force.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-91)



DIVISION 7.  POLICE DEPARTMENT



SEC. 2-210.  ESTABLISHED; RESERVE OFFICERS.



   (A)   There shall be a police department, headed by the police
chief, together with such subordinate employees as may be necessary to carry
out the functions of the department. The police chief may deputize or appoint
qualified persons as reserve officers who shall not be employees nor entitled
to compensation except as provided by resolution of the city council.



   (B)   The police chief is the department director of the Oxnard
Police Department and the head officer.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-92)  (Ord. No. 1668)



SEC. 2-211.  FINGERPRINT AND IDENTIFICATION SERVICES.



   The police chief shall have authority to provide fingerprint and
identification services upon request in accordance with a schedule of time
and fees approved by the city manager.  Such fees shall not exceed the
reasonable expense of providing the service.  No fee shall be charged for
required fingerprinting in connection with a city permit for which a person
has already paid a fee.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-92.1)  (Ord. No. 1279)



ARTICLE IV. SUNSHINE ORDINANCE



SEC. 2-220.  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   Democracy in our representative form of government requires that the
public have an opportunity to understand the government's activities and to
communicate its concerns to its elected and appointed representatives, and
that those representatives have an adequate opportunity to consider those
concerns and then act effectively and in a timely manner. This article
codifies the city's public policy concerning participation in the
deliberations of the city's policy bodies, and clarifies and supplements the
Brown Act. It is an affirmation of good government; and a continued
commitment to open and democratic procedures. It is an effort to expand our
residents' knowledge, participation and trust. As procedures of government
change and evolve, so also must the laws designed to guarantee the process
remains visible.



(Ord. No. 2948)



SEC. 2-221.  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words and phrases as used in this section are defined as
follows:



   (A)   AGENDA - A document that informs the public about a meeting,
published in advance of the meeting, which at a minimum: (i) identifies the
policy body conducting the meeting; (ii) specifies the time and location of
the meeting; and (iii) lists each item of business to be discussed or
transacted and describes the proposed action for such item.



   (B)   AGENDA PACKET - A complete set of materials that includes the
agenda and its relevant supporting documents.



   (C)   BROWN ACT - California Gov’t Code Sections 54950 et. seq.,
as those sections may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   CLOSED SESSION - A meeting or portion of a meeting that begins
with a public comment period, followed by a session that excludes the public
as permitted by state law, and ends with an open session at which a public
report is made to the extent required by State law.



   (E)   MEETING - Shall have the same meaning as defined in Section
54952.2 of the California Gov’t Code.



   (F)   POLICY BODY - Shall have the same meaning as "legislative
body" as defined in Section  54952 of the California Gov’t Code unless the
definition in this section applies to a broader range of boards, commissions,
committees or other bodies, and shall include the following:



      (1)   The city council;



      (2)   Any other board enumerated in the city code;



      (3)   Any board, commission, committee, or other body created
by ordinance or resolution of the city council;



      (4)   Any committee or body created by the initiative of a
policy body as a whole;



      (5)   Any standing committee of a policy body irrespective of
its composition; and



      (6)   Any committee consisting of city employees that was
established by city council ordinance or resolution that specified that the
meetings of such committee were to be open and public.



   (G)   SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS - All documents, regardless of form,
medium or author, that are provided to members of a policy body for their use
in considering agenda items for a meeting.



(Ord. No. 2948)



SEC. 2-222.  MEETINGS TO BE OPEN AND PUBLIC; THE BROWN ACT.



   All meetings of a policy body shall be open and public, and governed by
the provisions of the Brown Act and of this article. In case of inconsistent
requirements under the Brown Act and this article, the requirement which
would result in greater or more expedited public access shall apply.



(Ord. No. 2948)



SEC. 2-223.  CONDUCT OF BUSINESS; TIME AND PLACE OF MEETINGS.



   (A)   Each policy body shall establish by resolution or motion the
time and place for holding regular meetings.



   (B)   Unless otherwise required by State or federal law or necessary
to inspect real property or personal property which cannot be conveniently
brought within the territory of the city or to meet with residents residing
on property owned by the city, or to meet with residents of another
jurisdiction to discuss actions of the policy body that affect those
residents, all meetings of its policy bodies shall be held within the city.



   (C)   If, because of fire, flood, earthquake or other emergency, it
would be unsafe to meet at the regular meeting place, meetings may be held
for the duration of the emergency at some other place specified by the policy
body. The change of meeting site shall be announced, by the most rapid means
of communication available at the time, in a notice to the local media who
have requested written notice of special meetings pursuant to California
Gov’t Code Section 54956. Reasonable attempts shall be made to contact
others regarding the change in meeting location.



   (D)   Special meetings of any policy body may be called at any time
by the presiding officer thereof or by a majority of the members thereof, by
delivering personally or by electronic mail written notice to each member of
such body and the local media who have requested written notice of special
meetings in writing. Such notice of a special meeting shall be delivered as
described herein at least seven days before the time of such meeting as
specified in the notice, with the exception of the items described in section
2-224(A)(1)(a)-(e). Each special meeting shall be held at the regular meeting
place of the body except that the body may designate an alternate meeting
place provided that such alternate location is specified in the notice of the
special meeting.



   (E)   If a meeting must be canceled, continued or rescheduled for
any reason, notice of such change shall be provided to the public as soon as
is reasonably possible, including posting of a cancellation notice, and
electronically mailed notice if sufficient time permits.



(Ord. No. 2948)



SEC. 2-224.  AGENDA REQUIREMENTS FOR REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Twelve days before a regular meeting of the city council, and
seven days before a special city council meeting and any meeting of all other
policy bodies, the policy body shall post an agenda containing a meaningful
description of each item of business to be transacted or discussed at the
meeting. Agendas shall specify for each item of business the proposed action
or a statement the item is for discussion, information, or receive-and-file
only. These time requirements shall apply to posting on the internet.



      (1)   Notwithstanding section 2-224(A), items that may be
agendized less than 12 days before a regular city council meeting, or less
than seven days before other policy body meetings, include but are not
limited to the following:



         (a)   Urgency items, where the public interest and
necessity demand immediate city council action to avoid harm to or to
safeguard life, health or property, or to mitigate severe economic impacts;



         (b)   Grant opportunities;



         (c)   Consideration of appeals, final maps or parcel
maps, or other items requiring timely consideration pursuant to statute or
ordinance;



         (d)   Ceremonial items; and



         (e)   Closed session items as specified in section 2-226.



   (B)   A description is meaningful if it is sufficiently clear and
specific to alert a person of average intelligence and education whose
interests are affected by the item that he or she may have reason to attend
the meeting or seek more information on the item. The description should be
brief, concise and written in plain, easily understood English.



   (C)   The agenda shall specify the time and location of the regular
meeting and shall be posted in a location that is freely accessible to
members of the public.



   (D)   All agendas shall be posted on the city's website and the
city's cable channel and available at the kiosk outside of the city council
chambers. Complete agenda packets for each policy body shall be posted on the
city's website to the extent fiscally and technologically feasible and shall
be available for review at the city clerk's office during normal business
hours. The time for compliance with this section shall be in accordance with
the time of the posting of the agenda for the meeting.



   (E)   All supporting documents regarding an agenda item must be
included in the agenda packet.



   (F)   No action or discussion shall be undertaken on any item not
appearing on the posted agenda, except that members of a policy body may
respond to statements made or questions posed by persons exercising their
public testimony rights, to the extent of asking a question for
clarification, providing a reference to staff or other resources for factual
information, or requesting staff to report back to the body at a subsequent
meeting concerning the matter raised by such testimony.



   (G)   Notwithstanding section 2-224(F), the policy body may take
action on items of business not appearing on the posted agenda under any of
the following conditions:



      (1)   Upon a determination by a majority vote of the body that
an accident, natural disaster or work force disruption poses a threat to
public health and safety;



      (2)   Upon a good faith, reasonable determination by a  vote
of the policy body, or, if less than  of the members are present, a
unanimous vote of those members present, that (a) the need to take immediate
action on the item is so imperative as to threaten serious injury to the
public interest if action were deferred to a subsequent special or regular
meeting, or relates to a purely commendatory action; and (b) that the need
for such action came to the attention of the policy body subsequent to the
agenda being posted as specified in section 2-224(A); or



      (3)   The item was on an agenda posted pursuant to section
2-224(A) for a prior meeting of the policy body occurring not more than five
calendar days prior to the date action is taken on the item, and at the prior
meeting the item was continued to the meeting at which action is being taken.



   (H)   Information on this article shall be provided on the city
clerk's webpage, with hard copies provided free of charge upon request.



(Ord. No. 2948)



SEC. 2-225.  AGENDAS AND RELATED MATERIALS; PUBLIC RECORDS.



   (A)   Agendas of meetings and any other documents on file with the
clerk of the policy body, when intended for distribution to all, or a
majority of all, of the members of a policy body in connection with a matter
to be discussed or considered at an open session of a meeting shall be made
available to the public. To the extent possible, such documents shall also be
made available through the policy body's website. However, this disclosure
need not include any material exempt from public disclosure under the
California Public Records Act, or any other state or federal law.



   (B)   Records which are subject to disclosure under section 2-225(A)
and which are intended for distribution to a policy body prior to
commencement of a meeting shall be made available for public inspection and
copying upon request prior to commencement of such meeting, whether or not
actually distributed to or received by the body at the time of the request.



   (C)   Records which are subject to disclosure under section 2-225(A)
and which are distributed during a meeting but prior to commencement of their
discussion shall be made available for public inspection prior to
commencement of, and during, their discussion.



   (D)   Records which are subject to disclosure under section 2-225(A)
and which are distributed during their discussion at a meeting shall be made
available for public inspection immediately or as soon thereafter as is
practicable.



   (E)   A policy body may charge the direct cost of duplication for a
copy of a public record prepared for consideration at a meeting. There shall
be no charge for providing digital versions of documents (for example, PDFs)
via electronic mail.



(Ord. No. 2948)



SEC. 2-226.  CLOSED SESSIONS; PERMITTED TOPICS.



   The city council may hold closed sessions:



   (A)   With its negotiator prior to the purchase, sale, exchange or
lease of real property by or for the city to grant authority to its
negotiator regarding the price and terms of payment for the purchase, sale,
exchange, or lease.



   (B)   Based on advice of the city attorney, to confer with, or
receive advice from, its legal counsel regarding pending litigation when
discussion in open session concerning those matters would likely and
unavoidably prejudice the position of the city in that litigation.



   (C)   To discuss a claim for liability or losses.



   (D)   Based on the advice of the city attorney, to receive, discuss,
and take action concerning information obtained in a closed session of a
joint powers agency.



   (E)   With the attorney general, district attorney, city attorney,
or chief of police, or their respective deputies, or a security consultant or
a security operations manager on matters posing a threat to the security of
public buildings, a threat to the security of essential public services,
including water, drinking water, wastewater treatment, natural gas service,
and electric service, or a threat to the public's right of access to public
services or public facilities.



   (F)   To consider the appointment, employment, evaluation of
performance, discipline, or dismissal of a city employee, if the city council
has the authority to appoint, employ, or dismiss the employee, or to hear
complaints or charges brought against the employee by another person or
employee.



   (G)   With the city's designated representatives regarding the
salaries, salary schedules, or compensation paid in the form of fringe
benefits of its represented and unrepresented employees, and, for represented
employees, any other matter within the statutorily provided scope of
representation.



   (H)   For any other reason permitted by state law.



(Ord. No. 2948)



SEC. 2-227.  STATEMENTS OF REASONS FOR CLOSED SESSIONS.



   Prior to any closed session, the city council shall state the general
reason or reasons for the closed session, and shall cite the statutory
authority, including the specific section and subsection, or other legal
authority under which the session is being held. In the closed session, the
city council may consider only those matters covered in its statement.



(Ord. No. 2948)



SEC. 2-228.  BARRIERS TO ATTENDANCE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No policy body shall conduct any meeting, conference or other
function in any facility that excludes persons on the basis of actual or
presumed class identity or characteristics, or which is inaccessible to
persons with physical disabilities, or where members of the public may not be
present without making a payment or purchase. Whenever the city council, a
board or commission, or any committee thereof anticipates that the number of
persons attending the meeting will exceed the legal capacity of the meeting
room, any public address system used to amplify sound in the meeting room
shall be extended by supplementary speakers to permit the overflow audience
to listen to the proceedings in an adjacent room or passageway, unless such
supplementary speakers would disrupt the operation of a city office.



   (B)   Each policy body shall ensure that accessible seating for
persons with disabilities, including those using wheelchairs, is made
available for each regular and special meeting.



   (C)   Meetings of policy bodies shall adjourn no later than 10:00
p.m., unless the meeting is extended by a majority vote of the policy body.
No new items will begin after 10:00 p.m. unless 80% of the members present of
the policy body votes to allow the items to be heard.



(Ord. No. 2948)



SEC. 2-229.  VIDEO AND AUDIO RECORDING, FILMING AND STILL PHOTOGRAPHY.



   (A)   Any person attending an open and public meeting of a policy
body shall have the right to record the proceedings with an audio or video
recorder or a still or motion picture camera, or to broadcast the
proceedings, in the absence of a reasonable finding of the policy body that
the recording or broadcast cannot continue without such noise, illumination
or obstruction of view as to constitute a persistent disruption of the
proceedings.



   (B)   Every policy body shall audio or video record every noticed
regular or special meeting held in a city owned facility, except to the
extent that such facility may not be available for technical or other
reasons. All recordings will be archived in digital form at a centralized
location on the city's website within 72 hours of such meeting. Each
recording shall be a public record subject to inspection pursuant to the
California Public Records Act.



(Ord. No. 2948)



SEC. 2-230.  PUBLIC COMMENT.



   (A)   Every agenda for regular meetings shall provide, before
undertaking regular business, an opportunity for members of the public to
directly address a policy body on items not appearing on the agenda or for
non-action items, such as the ceremonial calendar, city manager reports, or
city council business. The city council agenda shall provide up to 30 minutes
for this use. If the number of speakers interested in speaking under "Public
Comment: Non-Agendized/Non-Action Items" exceeds the 30-minute period,
additional time will be made available at the end of the meeting.



   (B)   A policy body shall not abridge or prohibit public criticism
of the policy, procedures, programs or services of the city, or of any other
aspect of its proposals or activities, or of the acts or omissions of the
policy body, on the basis that the performance of one or more public
employees is implicated, or on any basis other than reasonable time
constraints adopted.



   (C)   Every agenda for regular or special meetings at which action
is proposed to be taken on an item shall provide an opportunity for any
member of the public to directly address the policy body concerning that item
before the policy body takes action. Public comments on closed session items
shall be taken before the closed session is convened. The presiding officer
of any policy body may request speakers representing similar views to
designate a spokesperson in the interest of time.



   (D)   To facilitate public input, any agenda changes or continuances
shall be announced by the presiding officer of a policy body at the beginning
of a meeting, or as soon thereafter as the change or continuance becomes
known to such presiding officer.



   (E)   All staff reports, presentations, and comments from parties
with a direct connection to the agenda item will be presented before the
public has an opportunity to speak so as to provide the fullest opportunity
for public input on all issues before the board, commission or council. City
council comments on the agenda item shall take place after public comments on
the agenda item.



(Ord. No. 2948)



SEC. 2-231.  MINUTES.



   (A)   The clerk or secretary of each policy body shall record the
minutes for each regular and special meeting of the policy body. The minutes
shall state the time the meeting was called to order, the names of the
members attending the meeting, the roll call vote on each matter considered
at the meeting, the time the board or commission began and ended any closed
session, a list of those members of the public who spoke on each matter if
the speakers identified themselves, and the time the meeting was adjourned.



   (B)   The draft minutes of each meeting shall be available for
inspection and copying upon request no later than ten working days after the
meeting. The officially adopted minutes shall be available for inspection and
copying upon request no later than ten working days after the meeting at
which the minutes are adopted.



(Ord. No. 2948)



SEC. 2-232.  SUNSHINE ORDINANCE SUPERSEDES OTHER LOCAL LAWS.



   The provisions of this article supersede other local laws. Whenever a
conflict in local law is identified, the requirement which would result in
greater access to public information shall apply.



(Ord. No. 2948)



CHAPTER 3:  EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE RELATIONS



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   3-1.   Department established; composition; duties of personnel
officer



   3-2.   Adoption of rules and regulations by city council



   3-3.   Competitive service system established



   3-4.   Employment; tests; appointment



ARTICLE II.  EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE RELATIONS



   3-35.   Short title



   3-36.   Purpose of article



   3-37.   Definitions



   3-38.   Employee rights



   3-39.   City rights



   3-40.   Meetings on matters within scope of representation; time off
for meeting



   3-41.   Consultations on certain matters



   3-42.   Notice to affected employee organizations of matters
proposed to city council



   3-43.   Procedure for recognition of majority representative; filing
of petition



   3-44.   Determination of appropriateness



   3-45.   Procedure for unit placement of new or modified classes




   3-46.   Procedure for recognition of majority representative; secret
ballot; formal recognition;  challenged recognition




   3-47.   Municipal employee relations officer



   3-48.   Resolution of impasse



   3-49.   Grievances



   3-50.   Memorandum of understanding



   3-51.   Effect of other laws, legal rights, etc.



ARTICLE III.  EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE RELATIONS FOR NON-FIRE AND NON-POLICE
PERSONNEL



   3-60.   Short title



   3-61.   Applicability of article



   3-62.   Purpose of article



   3-63.   Definitions



   3-64.   Employee rights



   3-65.   City rights



   3-66.   Rights of exclusive representation



   3-67.   Meetings on matters within scope of representation; time off
for meeting



   3-68.   Consultations on certain matters



   3-69.   Notice to affected employee organization of matters proposed
to city council



   3-70.   Procedure for recognition of majority representative; filing
of petition



   3-71.   Determination of appropriateness



   3-72.   Procedure for unit placement of new or modified classes




   3-73.   Procedure for recognition of majority representative; secret
ballot; formal recognition; challenged recognition




   3-74.   Municipal employee relations officer



   3-75.   Resolution of impasse



   3-76.   Memorandum of understanding



   3-77.   Effect of other laws, legal rights, etc.



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 3-1.  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION; DUTIES.



   A department of human resources is hereby established.  The department
shall consist of a human resources director and additional employees as
required.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-12)



SEC. 3-2.  ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS BY CITY COUNCIL.



   The city council, by resolution, shall promulgate such rules and
regulations as are necessary to carry into effect the purpose and intent of
the competitive service system established by this code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-16)



SEC. 3-3.  COMPETITIVE SERVICE SYSTEM ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   A competitive service system is hereby established to provide
a uniform and equitable standard for classifications, titles, wages,
appointments, promotions, disciplinary actions and other matters relating to
city employment.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-17)



   (B)   The provisions of the competitive service system shall apply
to all appointive officers and employees.  Members of the noncompetitive
service shall include all the elected officers, the city manager, assistant
city manager, deputy city manager, the city attorney, assistant city
attorney, deputy city attorney, department directors, all appointees on
boards, commissions, and committees, all part-time employees, all employees
paid on an hourly or per diem wage, and seasonal employees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-18, 2-19)  (Ord. No. 2052)



SEC. 3-4.  EMPLOYMENT; TESTS; APPOINTMENT.



   A procedure for obtaining employment under the competitive service
system shall be established by the human resources director.  The procedure
shall make provisions for a list of candidates for city positions under the
classification plan, for a competitive examination of all applicants to
determine their qualifications, for the approval of applicants by department
directors, and for the final appointment by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-26)



ARTICLE II.  EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE RELATIONS



SEC. 3-35.  SHORT TITLE.



   This article may be cited as “the employer-employee relations
procedure of the city.”



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.1)  (Ord. No. 1433)



SEC. 3-36.  PURPOSE OF ARTICLE.



   The purpose of this article is to implement Cal. Gov't Code, Sections
3500 et seq., captioned “Public Employee Organization,” by providing
orderly procedures for the administration of employer-employee relations
between the city and its employee organizations and for resolving disputes
regarding wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.2)  (Ord. No. 1433)



SEC. 3-37.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   APPROPRIATE UNIT - A unit established pursuant to section 3-44.



   (B)   CONSULT or CONSULTATION IN GOOD FAITH - Communication orally
or in writing for the purpose of presenting and obtaining views or advising
of intended actions.



   (C)   EMPLOYEE - Any person regularly employed by the city except
elected officials.



   (D)   EMPLOYEE, CONFIDENTIAL - An employee who is privy to
confidential decisions of city management affecting employer-employee
relations.



   (E)   EMPLOYEE, MANAGEMENT -



      (1)   Any employee having significant responsibilities for
formulating and administering city policies, including but not limited to the
city manager and department directors; and



      (2)   Any employee having authority to exercise independent
judgment to hire, transfer, suspend, lay-off, recall, promote or discharge
another employee, or having the responsibility to adjust grievances, or
effectively to recommend such action if in connection with the foregoing, the
exercise of such authority is not of a merely routine or clerical nature, but
requires the use of independent judgment.



   (F)   EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION - Any organization which includes
employees of the city and which has as one of its primary purposes,
representing such employees in their employment relations with the city.



   (G)   EMPLOYEE, PROFESSIONAL - Employees engaged in work requiring
specialized knowledge and skills attained through completion of a recognized
course of instruction, including, but not limited to, attorneys, physicians,
registered nurses, engineers, architects, teachers and various types of
physical, chemical and biological scientists.



   (H)   EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE RELATIONS - The relationship between the
city and its employees and their employee organization, or when used in a
general sense, the relationship between city management and employees or
employee organizations.



   (I)   EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATION - The right of a formally recognized
employee organization, which has shown that it represents a majority of
employees in an appropriate unit, to meet and confer in good faith as the
exclusive representative of employees in the appropriate unit.



   (J)   FACT-FINDING - The identification of the major issues in a
particular dispute, a review of the position of the parties, and the making
of findings of fact on the issues in dispute, without recommendation, unless
requested in writing by all parties to the dispute to make recommendations.



   (K)   FACT-FINDER - An impartial person or a three-member panel
skilled in matters of employer-employee relations and acceptable to the
disputing parties.



   (L)   IMPASSE -



      (1)   A deadlock in the annual or periodic discussions between
a majority representative and the city over any matters requiring the parties
to meet and confer in good faith, or over the scope of such subject matter; or



      (2)   Any unresolved complaint by an affected employee
organization, advanced in good faith, concerning a decision of the municipal
employee relations officer made pursuant to sections 3-43, 3-44 or 3-45.



   (M)   MAJORITY REPRESENTATIVE - An employee organization, or its
duly authorized representative, that has been granted formal recognition by
the municipal employees relations officer as representing the majority of
employees in an appropriate unit.



   (N)   MEDIATION or CONCILIATION - The efforts of an impartial third
person, functioning as intermediary, to assist the parties in reaching a
voluntary resolution to an impasse, through interpretation, suggestion and
advice.



   (O)   MEET AND CONFER IN GOOD FAITH - Performance by duly authorized
city representatives and duly authorized representatives of an employee
organization recognized as the majority representative of their mutual
obligation to meet at reasonable times and to confer in good faith regarding
matters within the scope of representation, including wages, hours and other
terms and conditions of employment, in an effort to:



      (1)   Reach agreement on those matters within the authority of
such representatives; and



      (2)   Reach agreement on what will be recommended to the city
council on those matters within the decision-making authority of the city
council, but does not require either party to agree to a proposal.



   (P)   MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEE RELATIONS OFFICER - The city's principal
representative in all matters of employer-employee relations designated
pursuant to section 3-47, or duly authorized representative.



   (Q)   PEACE OFFICER - Defined in Cal. Penal Code, Section 830.



   (R)   RECOGNIZED EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS - Formal recognition of an
employee organization which has been acknowledged by the city as an employee
organization that represents employees of the city with the exclusive right
to meet and confer in good faith as the majority representative in an
appropriate unit.



   (S)   SCOPE OF REPRESENTATION - All matters relating to employment
conditions and employer-employee relations, including, but not limited to,
wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.3)  (Ord. No. 1433)



SEC. 3-38.  EMPLOYEE RIGHTS.



   (A)   Employees of the city shall have the right to form, join and
participate in the activities of employee organizations of their own choosing
for the purpose of representation on all matters of employer-employee
relations including but not limited to wages, hours and other terms and
conditions of employment. 



   (B)   Employees of the city also shall have the right to refuse to
join or participate in the activities of employee organizations and shall
have the right to represent themselves individually in their employment
relations with the city. 



   (C)   No employee shall be interfered with, intimidated, restrained,
coerced or discriminated against by the city or by any employee organization
because of the exercise of these rights.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.4)  (Ord. No. 1433)



SEC. 3-39.  CITY RIGHTS.



   (A)   The rights of the city include, but are not limited to, the
exclusive right to determine the mission of its constituent departments,
commissions and boards, set standards of service, determine the procedures
and standards of selection for employment and promotion, direct its
employees, take disciplinary action, relieve its employees from duty because
of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons, maintain the efficiency of
governmental operations, determine the methods, means and personnel by which
government operations are to be conducted, determine the content of job
classifications, take all necessary actions to carry out its mission in
emergencies and exercise complete control and discretion over its
organization and the technology of performing its work.



   (B)   The exercise of such city rights shall not preclude employees
or their representatives from meeting and consulting with management or
filing grievances about the consequences that decisions on these matters may
have on wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.5)  (Ord. No. 1433)



SEC. 3-40.  MEETINGS ON MATTERS WITHIN SCOPE OF REPRESENTATION; TIME OFF FOR
MEETING.



   (A)   The city, through its representatives, shall meet and confer
in good faith with representatives of formally recognized employee
organizations with majority representation rights regarding matters within
the scope of representation including wages, hours and other terms and
conditions of employment within the appropriate unit.



   (B)   The employee representatives designated pursuant to section
3-43, shall be allowed reasonable time off without loss of compensation or
other benefits to formally meet and confer with representatives of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.6)  (Ord. No. 1433)



SEC. 3-41.  CONSULTATIONS ON CERTAIN MATTERS.



   All matters affecting employer-employee relations, including those that
are not subject to meeting and conferring, are subject to consultation.  The
city, through its representatives, shall consult in good faith with any
employee or his/her representative on employer-employee relations matters
which affect the employee.  Advance notice on matters subject to
consultation, but outside the scope of representation, is desirable but not
mandatory.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.7)  (Ord. No. 1433)



SEC. 3-42.  NOTICE TO AFFECTED EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS OF MATTERS PROPOSED TO
CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Reasonable written notice shall be given to each recognized
employee organization affected by any ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation directly relating to matters within the scope of representation
proposed to be adopted by the city council and each shall be given reasonable
opportunity to meet with such body prior to adoption.



   (B)   In cases of emergency when the city determines that as an
interim measure an ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation must be adopted
immediately without prior notice or meeting with a recognized employee
organization, the city shall provide reasonable notice and opportunity to
meet at the earliest practicable time following the adoption of such
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation.  The city shall promptly take
final action on the ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation following such
notice and opportunity to meet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.8)  (Ord. No. 1433)



SEC. 3-43.  PROCEDURE FOR RECOGNITION OF MAJORITY REPRESENTATIVE; FILING OF
PETITION.



   An employee organization that seeks formal recognition for purposes of
meeting and conferring in good faith as the majority representative of
employees in an appropriate unit shall file a petition with the municipal
employee relations officer containing the following information and
documentation:



   (A)   Name and address of the employee organization;



   (B)   Names and titles of its officers;



   (C)   Names of up to three employees and one professional
representative who as employee organization representatives are authorized to
speak on behalf of its members;



   (D)   A statement that the employee organization has, as one of its
primary purposes, representing employees in their employment relations with
the city;



   (E)   A statement whether the employee organization is a chapter or
local of, or affiliated directly or indirectly in any manner with, a
regional, State, national or international organization, and, if so, the name
and address of each such regional, State, national or international
organization;



   (F)   Certified copies of the employee organization's constitution
and bylaws;



   (G)   A designation of those persons, not exceeding three in number,
and one professional representative when designated, and their addresses, to
whom notice sent by regular United States mail will be deemed sufficient
notice on the employee organization for any purpose;



   (H)   The job classifications or titles of employees in the unit
claimed to be appropriate and the approximate number of member employees
therein;



   (I)   A statement that the employee organization has in its
possession written proof to establish that employees in the unit claimed to
be appropriate have designated the employee organization to represent them in
their employment relations with the city. (Such written proof shall be
submitted for confirmation to the municipal employee relations officer or to
a mutually agreed upon disinterested third party.); and



   (J)   A request that the municipal employee relations officer
recognize the employee organization as the majority representative of the
employees in the unit claimed to be appropriate for the purpose of meeting
and conferring in good faith on all matters within the scope of
representation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.9)  (Ord. No. 1433)



SEC. 3-44.  DETERMINATION OF APPROPRIATENESS.



   (A)   When a petition is filed by an employee organization seeking
formal recognition as majority representative, the city shall request the
State Conciliation Service to make the determination as to whether the unit
is an appropriate unit.  If for any reason, the State Conciliation Service
is unable to provide such a service, the determination shall be made by a
mutually agreeable third party.  The principal criterion in making the
determination is whether there is a community of interest among such
employees.  The following factors, among others, are to be considered in
making such determination:



      (1)   Which unit will assure employees the fullest freedom in
the exercise of rights set forth under this article;



      (2)   The history of employee relations:



         (a)   In the unit;



         (b)   Among other employees of the city; and



         (c)   In similar public employment.



      (3)   The effect of the unit on the efficient operation of the
city and sound employer-employee relations;



      (4)   The extent to which employees have common skills,
working conditions, job duties or similar educational requirements; and



      (5)   The effect on the existing classification structure of
dividing a single classification among two or more units.  Provided,
however, that no unit shall be established solely on the basis of the extent
to which employees in the proposed unit have organized.



   (B)   In the establishment of appropriate units:



      (1)   Professional employees shall not be denied the right to
be represented separately from nonprofessional employees; and



      (2)   Management and confidential employees who are included
in the same unit with non- management or non-confidential employees may not
represent such employees on matters within the scope of representation.



   (C)   The fees and expenses, if any, for the initial determination
of appropriate units, upon the implementation of this article, shall be paid
by the city.  In any future determination, the petitioning employee
organization shall pay the fees and expenses.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.10)  (Ord. No. 1433)



SEC. 3-45.  PROCEDURE FOR UNIT PLACEMENT OF NEW OR MODIFIED CLASSES.



   Notwithstanding any other sections in this article, the municipal
employee relations officer shall, after notice and upon request, consult with
affected employee organizations regarding removal or allocation of new or
modified classifications or positions into or out of units.  If, after such
consultation, an agreement is not reached concerning any such removal or
allocation issue, then a determination shall be made concerning said issue,
in the same manner in which the appropriateness of a unit is otherwise
determined in this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.10.1)  (Ord. No. 2028)



SEC. 3-46.  PROCEDURE FOR RECOGNITION OF MAJORITY REPRESENTATIVE; SECRET
BALLOTS FORMAL RECOGNITION; CHALLENGED RECOGNITION.



   (A)   The determination of the majority representative of city
employees in an appropriate unit shall be made by secret ballot election
conducted by the State Conciliation Service or by any other reasonable method
which is agreeable to the city and the employee organizations concerned and
is backed upon written proof, and is designed to ascertain the free choice of
a majority of such employees.  The employee organization found to represent
a majority of the employees in an appropriate unit shall be granted formal
recognition and is the only employee organization entitled to meet and confer
in good faith on matters within the scope of representation for employees in
such unit.  This shall not preclude individual employees from consulting
with management representatives on employer-employee relations matters of
concern to them.



   (B)   The recognition rights of a majority representative which has
been challenged shall be sustained or revoked through the process of a secret
ballot election in a manner that utilizes the same procedures as outlined in
the determination of formal recognition.



   (C)   The recognition rights of the majority representative
designated in accordance with this section shall not be subject to challenge
for a period of not less than 12 months following the date of such
recognition.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.11)  (Ord. No. 1483)



SEC. 3-47.  MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEE RELATIONS OFFICER.



   (A)   The city council shall designate, by resolution, an employee
of the city as municipal employee relations officer who shall be the city's
principal representative in all matters of employer-employee relations, with
authority to meet and confer in good faith on matters within the scope of
representation including wages, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment.  A copy of such designation shall be sent to persons specified
in section 3-43 above.



   (B)   The municipal employee relations officer so designated is
authorized to delegate these duties and responsibilities.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.12)  (Ord. No. 1433)



SEC. 3-48.  RESOLUTION OF IMPASSE.



   (A)   Impasse procedures may be invoked only after the possibility
of settlement by direct discussion has been exhausted.  The impasse
procedures are as follows:



      (1)   Mediation or conciliation - All mediation proceedings
shall be private.  The mediator shall make no public recommendations nor
take any public position concerning the issues.



      (2)   Fact-finding - All fact-finding shall be private.  The
fact finder shall make no public recommendations nor take any public position
concerning the issues.  The findings and recommendations of the fact-finder
may be released by either party subsequent to their being received by both
parties.



      (3)   Referral to the city council - After a public hearing on
the merits of the dispute, the city council may make a determination, or may
refer the matter to mediation or fact-finding.



      (4)   Other procedures - Any other dispute resolving
procedures to which the parties mutually agree.



   (B)   Any party may initiate the impasse procedures by filing with
the other party affected, a written request for an impasse meeting together
with a statement of its position on all disputed issues.  An impasse meeting
shall then be scheduled by the municipal employee relations officer forthwith
after the date of filing of the written request for such meeting, with
written notice to all parties affected.  The purpose of such impasse meeting
is twofold:



      (1)   To permit a review of the position of all parties in a
final effort to reach agreement on the disputed issues; and



      (2)   If agreement is not concluded, to mutually select the
specific impasse procedure to which the dispute may be submitted; in the
absence of agreement between the parties on this point, the matter may be
referred to the city council.



   (C)   The fees and expenses, if any, of mediators or of any other
impasse procedures, shall be payable one-half by the city and one-half by the
employee organization or employee organizations.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.13)  (Ord. No. 1433)



SEC. 3-49.  GRIEVANCES.



   (A)   A grievance is any dispute concerning the interpretation or
application of this article, or of rules or regulations governing personnel
practices or working conditions, or of the practical consequences of a city
rights' decision on wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment.



   (B)   Grievances shall be processed in accordance with existing
procedures or as amended by the city after consultation in good faith with
representatives of employee organizations.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.14)  (Ord. No. 1433)



SEC. 3-50.  MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING.



   (A)   When the meeting and conferring process is concluded between
the city and a formally recognized employee organization representing a
majority of the employees in an appropriate unit, all agreed upon matters
shall be incorporated in a jointly prepared written memorandum of
understanding signed by the duly authorized city and majority representatives.



   (B)   As to those matters within the authority of the city council,
the memorandum of understanding shall be submitted to the city council for
determination.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.15)  (Ord. No. 1433)



SEC. 3-51.  EFFECT OF OTHER LAWS, LEGAL RIGHTS.



   (A)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to deny any person
or employee the rights granted by federal and State laws and this code or
other city ordinance provisions, or to reduce or detrimentally affect any
benefits relating to wages, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment previously conferred on any employee.



   (B)   The rights, powers and authority of the city council in all
matters, including the right to maintain any legal action, shall not be
modified or restricted by this article.



   (C)   The provisions of this article are not intended to conflict
with the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code, Sections 3500 et seq., as amended in
1968.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.16)  (Ord. No. 1433)



ARTICLE III.  EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE RELATIONS FOR NON-FIRE AND NON-POLICE
PERSONNEL



SEC. 3-60.  SHORT TITLE.



   This article may be cited as “the miscellaneous employee relations
procedure of the city.”



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.20)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-61.  APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE.



   (A)   This article shall apply to all employees of the city except
employees within the police and fire appropriate units.



   (B)   The employer-employee relations procedures of sections 3-35
through 3-51 shall apply to the fire department and police department
employees within those appropriate units.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.21)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-62.  PURPOSE OF ARTICLE.



   The purpose of this article is to implement Cal. Gov't Code, Sections
3500 et seq., captioned “Public Employee Organization,” by providing
orderly procedures for the administration of employer-employee relations
between the city and its employee organizations, except the police and fire
appropriate units, and for resolving disputes regarding wages, hours and
other terms and conditions of employment of “clerical,” “blue collar”
and “miscellaneous” employees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.22)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-63.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   APPROPRIATE UNIT - A unit established pursuant to section 3-72.



   (B)   CONSULT or CONSULTATION IN GOOD FAITH - To communicate orally
or in writing for the purpose of presenting and obtaining views or advising
of intended actions.



   (C)   EMPLOYEE - Any person regularly employed by the city except
those persons elected by popular vote.



   (D)   EMPLOYEE, CONFIDENTIAL - An employee who is privy to
confidential decisions of city management affecting employer-employee
relations.



   (E)   EMPLOYEE, MANAGEMENT -



      (1)   Any employee having significant responsibilities for
formulating and administering city policies and programs, including but not
limited to the city manager and department directors; and



      (2)   Any employee having authority to exercise independent
judgment to hire, transfer, suspend, layoff, recall, promote or discharge
another employee, or having the responsibility to adjust their grievances, or
effectively to recommend such action if in connection with the foregoing, the
exercise of such authority is not of a merely routine or clerical nature, but
requires the use of independent judgment.



   (F)   EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION - Any organization which includes as
members employees of the city and which has as one of its primary purposes
representing such employees in their employment relations with the city.



   (G)   EMPLOYEE, PROFESSIONAL - Employees engaged in work requiring
specialized knowledge and skills attained through completion of a recognized
course of instruction, including, but not limited to, attorneys, physicians,
registered nurses, engineers, architects, teachers and various types of
physical, chemical and biological scientists.



   (H)   EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE RELATIONS - The relationship between the
city and its employees and their employee organization, or when used in a
general sense, the relationship between city management and employees or
employee organizations.



   (I)   EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE - An employee organization which has
been formally acknowledged by the city as an employee organization that
represents a majority of the employees in an appropriate unit.



   (J)   FACT-FINDING - The identification of the major issues in a
particular dispute, a review of the position of the parties, and the making
of findings of fact on the issues in dispute, without recommendation, unless
requested in writing by all parties to the dispute to make recommendations. 



   (K)   FACT-FINDER - An impartial person or a three-member panel
skilled in matters of employer-employee relations and acceptable to the
disputing parties.



   (L)   IMPASSE -



      (1)   A deadlock in the annual (or periodic) discussions
between a majority representative and the city over any matters requiring the
parties to meet and confer in good faith, or over the scope of such subject
matter; or



      (2)   Any unresolved complaint by an affected employee
organization, advanced in good faith, concerning a decision of the municipal
employee relations officer made pursuant to sections 3-70, 3-71 or 3-73.



   (M)   MEDIATION or CONCILIATION - The efforts of an impartial third
person, or persons, functioning as intermediaries, to assist the parties in
reaching a voluntary resolution to an impasse, through interpretation,
suggestion and advice.



   (N)   MEET AND CONFER IN GOOD FAITH - Performance by duly authorized
city representatives and duly authorized representatives of a recognized
employee organization of their mutual obligation to meet at reasonable times
and to confer in good faith regarding matters within the scope of
representation, including wages, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment, in an effort to:



      (1)   Reach agreement on those maters within the authority of
such representatives; and



      (2)   Reach agreement on what will be recommended to the city
council on those matters within the decision-making authority of the city
council, but does not require either party to agree to a proposal.



   (O)   MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEE RELATIONS OFFICER - The city's principal
representative in all matters of employer-employee relations designated
pursuant to section 3-66 or duly authorized representative.



   (P)   PEACE OFFICER - Defined in Cal. Penal Code, Section 830.



   (Q)   RECOGNIZED EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION - An employee organization
which has not been certified as representing a majority of employees in an
appropriate unit, but which has met the other requirements of this article.



   (R)   SCOPE OF REPRESENTATION - All matters relating to employment
conditions and employer-employee relations, including, but not limited to,
wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment; except however,
that the scope of representation shall not include proposed amendments to
this article, nor shall it include consideration of the merits, necessity or
organization of any service or activity provided by law as defined and
delineated by section 3-65.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.23)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-64.  EMPLOYEE RIGHTS.



   (A)   Employees of the city shall have the right as herein provided
to form, join and participate in the activities of employee organizations of
their own choosing for the purpose of representation on all matters of
employer-employee relations including but not limited to wages, hours and
other terms and conditions of employment. 



   (B)   Employees of the city also shall have the right as herein
provided to refuse to join or participate in the activities of employee
organizations and shall have the right to represent themselves individually
in their employment relations with the city. 



   (C)   No employee shall be interfered with, intimidated, restrained,
coerced or discriminated against by the city or by any employee organization
because of the exercise of these rights.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.24)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-65.  CITY RIGHTS.



   (A)   The rights of the city include, but are not limited to, the
exclusive right to determine the mission of its constituent departments,
commissions and boards; set standards of service; determine the procedures
and standards of selection for employment and promotion; direct its
employees; take disciplinary action; relieve its employees from duty because
of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons; maintain the efficiency of
governmental operations; determine the methods, means and personnel by which
government operations are to be conducted; determine the content of job
classifications; take all necessary actions to carry out its mission in
emergencies; and exercise complete control and discretion over its
organization and the technology of performing its work.



   (B)   That the exercise of such city rights shall not preclude
employees or their representatives from consulting with management or filing
grievances about the consequences that decisions on these matters may have on
wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.25)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-66.  RIGHTS OF EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATION.



   When an employee organization has been formally recognized as the
exclusive representative of the employees in an appropriate unit that
organization shall have the exclusive rights:



   (A)   To meet and confer in good faith as the representative of the
employees in the unit;



   (B)   To post information on designated bulletin boards for
employees in the unit; and



   (C)   To have its dues deducted from employees in the unit who
authorize such deduction.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.26)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-67.  MEETINGS ON MATTERS WITHIN SCOPE OF REPRESENTATION; TIME OFF FOR
MEETING.



   (A)   The city, through its representatives, shall meet and confer
in good faith upon request, except as provided in section 3-66, with
representatives of formally recognized employee organizations regarding
matters within the scope of representation including wages, hours and other
terms and conditions of employment within the appropriate unit.



   (B)   Provided, that nothing herein shall require meeting and
conferring between parties to a memorandum of understanding during the term
of such memorandum regarding any matter specifically covered by the
memorandum or any other matter unless it could not have been anticipated by
either party at the time the memorandum was signed.



   (C)   The employee representatives designated pursuant to section
3-70, subsection (C), shall be allowed reasonable time off without loss of
compensation or other benefits to formally meet and confer with
representatives of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.27)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-68.  CONSULTATIONS ON CERTAIN MATTERS.



   (A)   All matters affecting employer-employee relations, including
those that are not subject to meeting and conferring, are subject to
consultation.  The city, through its representatives, shall consult in good
faith with any exclusively recognized employee organization on
employer-employee relations matters which affect the employee.



   (B)   Advance notice on matters subject to consultation, but outside
the scope of representation, is desirable but not mandatory.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.28)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-69.  NOTICE TO AFFECTED EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION OF MATTERS PROPOSED TO
CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Reasonable written notice shall be given to each exclusively
recognized employee organization affected by any ordinance, resolution, rule
or regulation directly relating to matters within the scope of representation
proposed to be adopted by the city council and each shall be given reasonable
opportunity to meet with such body prior to adoption.



   (B)   In cases of emergency when the city determines that as an
interim measure an ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation must be adopted
immediately without prior notice or meeting with an exclusively recognized
employee organization, the city shall provide reasonable notice and
opportunity to meet at the earliest practicable time following the adoption
of such ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation.  The city shall promptly
take final action on the ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation following
such notice and opportunity to meet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.29)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-70.  PROCEDURE FOR RECOGNITION OF MAJORITY REPRESENTATIVE; FILING OF
PETITION.



   An employee organization that seeks formal recognition for purposes of
meeting and conferring in good faith as the exclusively recognized
representative of employees in an appropriate unit shall file a petition with
the municipal employee relations officer containing the following information
and documentation:



   (A)   Name and address of the employee organization;



   (B)   Names and titles of its officers;



   (C)   Names of up to three employees and one professional
representative who as employee organization representatives are authorized to
speak on behalf of its members;



   (D)   A statement that the employee organization has, as one of its
primary purposes, representing employees in their employment relations with
the city;



   (E)   A statement whether the employee organization is a chapter or
local of, or affiliated directly or indirectly in any manner with, a regional
or State, or national or international organization, and if so, the name and
address of each such regional, State or international organization;



   (F)   Certified copies of the employee organization's constitution
and bylaws;



   (G)   A designation of those persons, not exceeding three in number,
and one professional representative when designated, and their addresses, to
whom notice sent by regular United States mail will be deemed sufficient
notice on the employee organization for any purpose;



   (H)   The job classifications or titles of employees in the unit
claimed to be appropriate and the approximate number of member employees
therein;



   (I)   A statement that the employee organization has in its
possession written proof to establish that at least 30 % of the employees in
the unit claimed to be appropriate have designated the employee organization
to represent them in their employment relations with the city:



      (1)   Such written proof shall be submitted for confirmation
to the municipal employee relations officer or to a mutually agreed upon
disinterested third party.



      (2)   Where one organization has petitioned for an
“appropriate” unit and has met the required 30 % designation other
organizations may intervene and petition for the same unit by filing a
petition supported by 10 % of the employees in the unit.  Intervening
petitions must be filed within ten days of the date of the initial petition;
and



   (J)   A request that the municipal employee relations officer
recognize the employee organization as the exclusive representative of the
employees in the unit claimed to be appropriate for the purpose of meeting
and conferring in good faith on all matters within the scope of
representation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.30)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-71.  DETERMINATION OF APPROPRIATENESS.



   (A)   When a valid petition is filed by an employee organization
seeking formal recognition as majority representative, the city shall request
the State Conciliation Service to provide a list of persons qualified to make
a determination of the appropriate unit.  The principal criterion on making
this determination is whether there is a community of interest among such
employees.  In addition, the following factors, among others, are to be
considered in making such determination:



      (1)   The effect of the unit on the efficient operation of the
city and sound employer-employee relations.



      (2)   The history of employee relations:



         (a)   In the unit;



         (b)   Among other employees of the city; and



         (c)   In similar public employment.



      (3)   The extent to which employees leave common skills,
working conditions, job duties or similar educational requirements.



      (4)   The effect on the existing classification structure of
dividing a single classification among two or more units.



      (5)   Provided, however, that no unit shall be established
solely on the basis of the extent to which employees in the proposed unit
have organized.



   (B)   In the establishment of appropriate units:



      (1)   Professional employees shall not be denied the right to
be represented separately from nonprofessional employees; and



      (2)   Management and confidential employees will not be
included in the same unit with non- management or non-confidential employees.



   (C)   The fees and expenses, if any, for the initial determination
of appropriate units, upon the implementation of this article, shall be paid
by the city.  In any future determination, the petitioning employee
organization shall pay the fees and expenses.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.31)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-72.  PROCEDURE FOR UNIT PLACEMENT OF NEW OR MODIFIED CLASSES.



   Notwithstanding any other sections in this article, the municipal
employee relations officer shall, after notice and upon request, consult with
affected employee organizations regarding removal or allocation of new or
modified classifications or positions into or out of units.  If, after such
consultation, an agreement is not reached concerning any such removal or
allocation issue, then a determination shall be made concerning said issue,
in the same manner in which the appropriateness of a unit is otherwise
determined in this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.31.1)  (Ord. No. 2028)



SEC. 3-73.  PROCEDURE FOR RECOGNITION OF MAJORITY REPRESENTATIVE; SECRET
BALLOT; FORMAL RECOGNITION; CHALLENGED RECOGNITION.



   (A)   The determination of the exclusive representative of city
employees in an appropriate unit shall be made by secret ballot election
conducted by the State Conciliation Service.  The employee organization
found to represent a majority of the employees in an appropriate unit shall
be granted exclusive recognition and is the only employee organization
entitled to meet and confer in good faith on matters within the scope of
representation for employees in such unit.



   (B)   The recognition rights of a majority representative which has
been challenged shall be sustained or revoked through the process of
petitioning and a secret ballot election in a manner that utilizes the same
procedures as outlined in the determination of formal recognition.



   (C)   The exclusive recognition rights of the majority
representative designated in accordance with this section shall not be
subject to challenge until the later of either 12 months from the date of
certification, or a 30-day period running between 120 and 90 days before the
expiration of a current memorandum of understanding between the city and the
incumbent exclusive representative.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.32)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-74.  MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEE RELATIONS OFFICER.



   (A)   The city council shall designate, by resolution, an employee
of the city as municipal employee relations officer who shall be the city's
principal representative in all matters of employer-employee relations, with
authority to meet and confer in good faith on matters within the scope of
representation including wages, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment.  A copy of such designation shall be sent to persons specified
in section 3-70, subsection (G).



   (B)   The municipal employee relations officer so designated is
authorized to delegate these duties and responsibilities.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.33)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-75.  RESOLUTION OF IMPASSE.



   (A)   Impasse procedures may be invoked only after the possibility
of settlement by direct discussion has been exhausted.  The impasse
procedures are as follows:



      (1)   Mediation or conciliation - All mediation proceedings
shall be private.  The mediator shall make no public recommendations nor
take any public positions concerning the issues.



      (2)   Fact-finding - All fact-finding shall be private.  The
fact-finder shall make no public recommendations nor take any public position
concerning the issues.  The findings and recommendations of the fact-finder
may be released by either party subsequent to their being received by both
parties.



      (3)   Referral to the city council - After a public hearing on
the merits of the dispute, the city council may make a determination, or may
refer the matter to mediation or fact-finding.



      (4)   Other procedures - Any other dispute resolving
procedures to which the parties mutually agree.



   (B)   Any party may initiate the impasse procedures by filing with
the other party affected a written request for an impasse meeting together
with a statement of its position on all disputed issues. An impasse meeting
shall then be scheduled by the municipal employee relations officer forthwith
after the date of filing of the written request for such meeting, with
written notice to all parties affected.  The purpose of such impasse meeting
is twofold:



      (1)   To permit a review of the position of all parties in a
final effort to reach agreement on the disputed issues; and



      (2)   If agreement is not concluded, to mutually select the
specific impasse procedure to which the dispute may be submitted; in the
absence of agreement between the parties on this point, the matter may be
referred to the city council.



   (C)   The fees and expenses, if any, of mediators or of any other
impasse procedures, shall be payable one-half by the city and one-half by the
employee organization or employee organizations.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.34)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-76.  MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING.



   (A)   When the meeting and conferring process is concluded between
the city and an exclusively recognized employee organization representing a
majority of the employees in an appropriate unit, all agreed upon matters
shall be incorporated in a jointly prepared written memorandum of
understanding signed by the duly authorized city and majority representatives.



   (B)   As to those matters within the authority of the city council,
the memorandum of understanding shall be submitted to the city council for
determination.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.35)  (Ord. No. 1533)



SEC. 3-77.  EFFECT OF OTHER LAWS, LEGAL RIGHTS.



   (A)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to deny any person
or employee the rights granted by federal and State laws and city ordinance
provisions, and/or reduce or detrimentally affect any benefits relating to
wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment previously
conferred on any employee.



   (B)   The rights, powers and authority of the city council in all
matters, including the right to maintain any legal action, shall not be
modified or restricted by this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-42.36)  (Ord. No. 1533)



CHAPTER 4:  PUBLIC PROJECTS; PURCHASING AND CONTRACTING



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   4-1.   Definitions



   4-2.   Purpose



   4-3.   Purchasing agent



   4-4.   Conflict



   4-5.   Exemptions



   4-6.   No obligation to contract



ARTICLE II.  PUBLIC PROJECTS



   4-10.   Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act



   4-11.   Bids required



   4-12.   Tier 1 public projects



   4-13.   Tier 2 public projects



   4-14.   Tier 3 public projects



   4-15.   Rejecting all bids



   4-16.   Bonds



   4-17.   Contracts



   4-18.   Task orders



   4-19.   Change orders



   4-20.   Emergencies



ARTICLE III.  SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT



   4-30.   Applicability



   4-31.   Bids required



   4-32.   Brand and trade names



   4-33.   Informal solicitation



   4-34.   Formal solicitation



   4-35.   Publication



   4-36.   No responsive bids



   4-37.   Receipt or rejection of bids



   4-38.   Purchase orders and contracts



   4-39.   Purchase orders pursuant to contract



   4-40.   Change orders



   4-41.   Urgency



ARTICLE IV.  TRADE AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICES



   4-50.   Applicability



   4-51.   [Reserved for living wage policy]



   4-52.   Bids or proposals required



   4-53.   Brand and trade names



   4-54.   Informal solicitation



   4-55.   Formal solicitation



   4-56.   Publication



   4-57.   Receipt or rejection of bids or proposals



   4-58.   Contracts



   4-59.   Task orders



   4-60.   Change orders



   4-61.   Urgency



ARTICLE V.  ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES



   4-70.   Regular reporting



   4-71.   Small local business purchasing preference program



   4-72.   Annual authorization



   4-73.   Approval as to form



   4-74.   Contract term



   4-75.   Immediate need



   4-76.   Real property



   4-77.   Credit cards



ARTICLE VI.  SALE OF SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES



   4-80.   Sale of supplies, equipment and services



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 4-1.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of Chapter 4, the following definitions and rules
shall be observed, unless such would be inconsistent with the manifest intent
of the city council:



   (A)   ANNUAL AUTHORIZATION - The maximum annual value that the city
council delegates to an individual to award and execute a purchase order or
contract per vendor or consultant.



   (B)   ANNUAL VALUE - The value of the contract per year, or if the
contract does not list an annual amount, the total value of the contract
divided by the number of years in the term of that contract.



   (C)   BEST VALUE - The expected outcome of a solicitation that in
the city's estimation will provide the greatest overall benefit in response
to the requirement, where price, quality, durability, servicing, delivery
time, standardization, and/or other factors outlined in the purchasing manual
are considered in the evaluation and selection process to minimize negative
impacts and enhance the long-term performance and value of a solicitation
submission.



   (D)   EMERGENCY - Either of the following:



      (1)   Regarding public projects, as defined in this chapter,
the meaning provided in Cal. Pub. Con. Code, Section 22050.



      (2)   Regarding all procurement unrelated to public projects,
a condition or possible safety situation which makes bidding procedures,
either formal or informal, impractical or not in the best interests of the
city.



   (E)   FORCE ACCOUNT - Work performed on public projects using
internal city resources, including, but not limited to, labor, equipment,
materials, supplies and subcontracts of the city.



   (F)   FORMAL SOLICITATION - A bid or proposal that must be submitted
in a sealed envelope by mail, hand delivery or email or other electronic
means, and in conformance with a prescribed format to be opened in public at
a specified date and time or evaluated as delineated in the solicitation
released, as established in the purchasing manual.



   (G)   INFORMAL SOLICITATION - A competitive bid, price quotation, or
proposal for any procurement other than a public project that is conveyed by
mail, fax, email or other electronic means, or other written manner that does
not require a sealed bid or proposal, public opening or other formalities.



   (H)   MAINTENANCE or MAINTENANCE WORK - The meaning provided in Cal.
Pub. Con. Code, Section 22002(d) and 8 CCR 16000.



   (I)   NEGOTIATED CONTRACT - A contract in an amount up to $100,000
that is awarded on the basis of a direct contract with a contractor, vendor
or consultant without going through the competitive bidding process.



   (J)   PRINCIPAL BUSINESS OFFICE - The place where the principal
officers or owners generally transact business, where reports are prepared,
from which orders and payments are made, and that the business represents to
government authorities as its principal office or principal place of business.



   (K)   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES - All services performed by persons or
firms in a professional occupation, including, but not limited to, consulting
and performance services for accounting, financial, economic, auditing,
redevelopment, computer hardware and software support, engineering,
architectural, landscape architectural, planning, environmental, land
surveying, construction project management, personnel, social services,
animal control, lobbying, grant-writing, legal, management, communication and
other similar professional functions.



   (L)   PURCHASING AGENT - An employee whose responsibility it is to
procure all supplies, equipment, public projects and services for the city,
or that employee’s designee(s).



   (M)   PURCHASING MANUAL - The purchasing policies and procedures
manual for the purpose of implementation of this chapter, as drafted, amended
and adopted by the purchasing agent.



   (N)   PUBLIC PROJECT - The meaning provided in Cal. Pub. Con. Code.
Section 22002(c).



   (O)   SMALL LOCAL BUSINESS - A business entity that has for at least
36 months immediately preceding submittal of its bid held a current business
license issued by the city, and maintained its principal business office
within the city’s geographic boundaries, has average annual gross receipts
of $20,000,000 or less over the 36 months immediately preceding submittal of
its bid, and employs fewer than 100 employees, at least 50% of whom are
Oxnard residents and have been Oxnard residents for at least 90 days prior to
submission of the bid.



   (P)   TRADE SERVICE - A service that is not affiliated with a public
project and either:



      (1)   Does not require specialized skill or certification,
including, but not limited to, janitorial or maintenance work; or



      (2)   Requires manual skills and special training, but not
particular education or degrees, including, but not limited to, mechanical or
plumbing services.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-2. PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the city
establishes an efficient centralized procurement system, and that goods,
materials, public projects and services are procured at fair and competitive
prices.



   (B)   This chapter provides procedures for the performance of public
projects, the purchase of supplies and equipment, and contracting for
services.



   (C)   This chapter shall be interpreted and construed to be
consistent with State law.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-3.  PURCHASING AGENT.



   Except as otherwise ordered by city council, the purchasing agent shall
provide the services stated in this chapter on behalf of all city
departments.  In the performance of his/her duties, the purchasing agent
shall comply with applicable law and city council orders, including
limitations on purchasing procedures.  The purchasing agent may:



   (A)   Prepare and issue all solicitations.



   (B)   Issue a purchase order or award and execute a contract for
procurement required by any city department, in accordance with procedures
prescribed by this chapter up to the purchasing agent’s annual
authorization.



   (C)   Amend any contract for supplies, equipment and services in any
way that does not change the annual value, including, but not limited to,
amendments extending the contract term, changing a vendor, contractor or
consultant’s legal name, or authorizing higher costs and rates.



   (D)   Negotiate and recommend award of contracts for the purchase of
supplies, equipment and services.



   (E)   Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies,
equipment, and services at the best value to the city.



   (F)   Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and
open competition as possible on all purchases.



   (G)   Prepare and maintain for the city manager the purchasing
manual, procurement card manual, and recommend revisions to both of these
documents.



   (H)   Keep informed of current developments in the field of
purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products.



   (I)   Maintain such forms as reasonably necessary to the operation
of this chapter and other rules and regulations.



   (J)   Recommend to the city manager the transfer of surplus or
unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed, and the sale of
all supplies and equipment that cannot be used by any department or that have
become unsuitable for city use.



   (K)   Use cooperative purchasing, whereby multiple government
agencies, cooperative entities, or jurisdictions enter into a contract to
procure from each other or to collectively procure a vendor, contractor or
consultant.



   (L)   “Piggyback,” whereby the city utilizes another agency or
jurisdiction’s solicitation results, but enters into a separate contract or
issues a separate purchase order with the vendor.



   (M)   Award a negotiated contract when the purchasing agent
determines that obtaining bids, quotations and proposals is not in the
city’s best interest.



   (N)   Develop and maintain a list of contractors, vendors and
professionals identified according to categories of work.



   (O)   Prequalify or prescreen contractors, vendors and consultants.



   (P)   Maintain a list of the construction trade journals, as
determined for the county by the California Uniform Construction Cost
Accounting Commission, to which the city must deliver notice of all informal
and formal construction contracts being bid for work within the county.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-4.  CONFLICT.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the extent
that they conflict, and shall be interpreted and construed to be consistent,
with any applicable State or federal laws or regulations, or the terms and
conditions of any grant, contract, gift or bequest otherwise consistent with
law.



   (B)   Any evaluation or selection practice under this chapter that
would result in unlawful activity, including, but not limited to, any rebate,
kickback or unlawful consideration is expressly prohibited.  Any award of a
contract where a public official has used his/her official position to
influence a governmental decision in which he/she knows or has reason to know
that he/she has a financial interest in any person or entity who seeks such a
contract, or in the outcome of the selection process in any way, is expressly
prohibited.



   (C)   Prior to participating in any procurement, a staff member will
have to state the nature and length of his/her relationship, if any, to all
bidders or proposers as well as any other personal interest in the outcome of
the solicitation.  A staff member must immediately notify the purchasing
agent and not review any materials or attend any meetings regarding the
procurement until further instruction from the purchasing agent if that staff
member has, or reasonably should know that he/she has, a prior relationship
or personal interest in the outcome of the solicitation.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-5.  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The city manager may authorize, in writing, any department to
procure specified supplies, equipment, public projects and services
independently of the purchasing agent.



   (B)   The following are exempted from obtaining competitive bids and
proposals:



      (1)   Contracts unrelated to the procurement of goods,
materials, public projects or services.



      (2)   Advertising (e.g., air time and newspaper and magazine
advertising space, but not including advertising agencies or design services).



      (3)   Bank service fees.



      (4)   Government printed publications.



      (5)   Common carrier transportation.



      (6)   Travel payments directly to a hotel, motel, airline or
other transportation (but not a conference or meeting room rental).



      (7)   Insurance.



      (8)   Memberships in professional organizations.



      (9)   Credit card payments to a bank.



      (10)   Contracts with other governmental entities.



      (11)   Permit fees, including, but not limited to, those to
another governmental agency for operation of a city utility.



      (12)   Postage and United States Postal Service post office
box fees (not private mail companies).



      (13)   Real property purchases, escrow fees and lease payments.



      (14)   Subscriptions to publications.



      (15)   Any utilities the city uses, including, but not limited
to, payments for electricity or gas.



      (16)   Voting materials.



      (17)   Any other procurement exempted from bids or proposals
in State or federal law.



      (18)   Legal brief printing and transcription.



      (19)   Legal services and services relating to legal matters.



      (20)   Anything relating to a confidential, ongoing police
investigation and to other confidential police business.



   (C)   A purchase order, contract, or task order for legal services
or services relating to legal matters may be awarded and executed by the city
attorney, up to an annual authorization in the amount listed in Cal. Pub.
Con. Code, Section 22032(b), as may be changed from time to time, or may be
awarded and executed jointly by the city attorney and the most senior
available member of the city council if over that amount.



   (D)   A purchase order, contract, or task order relating to a
confidential, ongoing police investigation or other confidential police
business may be awarded and executed jointly by the police chief and city
manager up to an annual authorization in the amount listed in Cal. Pub. Con.
Code, Section 22032(b), as may be changed from time to time, or may be
awarded and executed jointly by the city manager and the most senior
available member of the city council if over that amount.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-6.  NO OBLIGATION TO CONTRACT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall require the city to authorize any
purchase order or enter into any contract with any person or firm.



(Ord. No. 2943)



ARTICLE II.  PUBLIC PROJECTS



SEC. 4-10.  UNIFORM PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION COST ACCOUNTING ACT.



   The city council has elected to subject the city to the Uniform Public
Construction Cost Accounting Act (Cal. Pub. Con. Code, Sections 22000 et
seq.) in the performance of public projects.  The procedures contained in
this chapter are intended to implement and be consistent with such Act.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-11.  BIDS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Other than for public projects in the amount listed in Cal.
Pub. Con. Code, Section 22032(a), as may be changed from time to time, that
are performed by force account, price quotations or bids shall be obtained
for all public projects that cost over $5,000.



   (B)   The purchasing agent, public works director and city manager
each may procure, without public bidding, public projects that cost up to
$5,000.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-12.  TIER 1 PUBLIC PROJECTS.



   (A)   A public project in the amount listed in Cal. Pub. Con. Code,
Section 22032(a), as may be changed from time to time, and costing over
$5,000 that is not performed by force account requires at least three written
bids. The purchasing agent shall use his/her discretion if three written bids
cannot be obtained.



   (B)   The purchasing agent, public works director and city manager
each may each award and execute such a contract.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-13.  TIER 2 PUBLIC PROJECTS.



   (A)   A public project in the amount listed in Cal. Pub. Con. Code,
Section 22032(b), as may be changed from time to time, shall be bid out using
the informal bidding procedures contained in Cal. Pub. Con. Code, Section
22034.  Notice shall be provided in accordance with Cal. Pub. Con. Code,
Section 22034(a)(2).  The purchasing agent and public works director may
award and execute Tier 2 public project contracts up to $100,000; the city
manager may award and execute any Tier 2 public project contracts.



   (B)   If all bids received are in excess of the amount listed in
Cal. Pub. Con. Code, Section 22032(b), as may be changed from time to time,
the city council may, by adoption of a resolution by a four-fifths vote,
award the contract up to the higher amount listed in Cal. Pub. Con. Code,
Section 22034(d) to the lowest responsible bidder if the council determines
the city’s cost estimate was reasonable.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-14.  TIER 3 PUBLIC PROJECTS.



   (A)   A public project in the amount listed in Cal. Pub. Con. Code,
Section 22032(c), as may be changed from time to time, shall be bid out using
the formal bidding procedures contained in Cal. Pub. Con. Code, Section 22037.



   (B)   The city engineer shall adopt plans, specifications and
working details for all Tier 3 public projects.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-15.  REJECTING ALL BIDS.



   The purchasing agent may at any time reject all bids.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-16.  BONDS.



   In awarding a contract involving an expenditure in excess of the amount
listed in Cal. Civil Code, Section 9550, the city shall require both faithful
performance and payment bonds, each in the amount required by Cal. Civil
Code, Section 9554.  Such bonds shall be issued by an admitted surety
insurer.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-17.  CONTRACTS.



   Any public project over the amount listed in Cal. Labor Code, Section
1771, as may be amended from time to time, per contractor, shall be made by
contract.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-18.  TASK ORDERS.



   The purchasing agent, public works director and city manager each may
approve and execute any task order thereto that, collectively with all other
task orders on the project, does not exceed the total contract value
previously approved for the project.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-19.  CHANGE ORDERS.



   The purchasing agent, public works director and city manager each may
award and execute any change order to a contract that, collectively with all
other change orders on the project, does not exceed the contract plus
contingency amount, if any, previously approved for the project.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-20.  EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   In cases of emergency, including, but not limited to, states
of emergency defined in Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 8558, when repair or
replacements are necessary, the city council may proceed at once to replace
or repair any public facility without adopting plans, specifications or
working details, or giving notice for bids to let contracts.  The work may
be done by day labor under the direction of the city council, by contractor,
or by a combination of the two.  Cal. Pub. Con. Code, Section 22050 shall
apply when a notice for bids to let contracts is not given.



   (B)   The city manager and purchasing agent each may order any
action pursuant to Cal. Pub. Con. Code, Section 22050.



(Ord. No. 2943)



ARTICLE III.  SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT



SEC. 4-30.  APPLICABILITY.



   This article shall not apply to supplies or equipment associated with a
public project.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-31.  BIDS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except when the supplies or equipment can be obtained from
only one source, or when the purchasing agent determines that obtaining bids
and price quotations is not in the city’s best interest, at least three
written price quotations or bids shall be obtained for all purchases or
leases of supplies or equipment that collectively cost over $5,000 per vendor
or consultant, per fiscal year.  The purchasing agent shall use his/her
discretion if quotes and bids should not or cannot be obtained.



   (B)   The purchasing agent and the director of each department may
procure, without public bidding, purchases or leases of supplies or equipment
that collectively cost up to $5,000 per vendor or consultant, per fiscal year.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-32.  BRAND AND TRADE NAMES.



   (A)   A request for quotations or bids shall not be drafted calling
for designated supplies and equipment by specific brand or trade names,
unless immediately followed by the words “or equal” so that bidders may
furnish any equal supplies or equipment.  A request to substitute equivalent
supplies or equipment must be in writing and submitted by the time listed in
the request for quotations or bids, or if no such time is written therein,
with the quotation or bid submission.  A request to substitute equivalent
supplies or equipment must include all data necessary to demonstrate
acceptability.  The burden of proof as to the comparative quality and
suitability of the alternative supplies or equipment shall be upon the
bidder, and the bidder shall furnish, at his/her/its own expense, all
information necessary or related thereto as required by the purchasing agent.



   (B)   Subsection (A) is not applicable if:



      (1)   The purchasing agent makes a written finding in the
request for quotations or bids that particular supplies or equipment are
designated by specific brand or trade names for any of the following purposes:



         (a)   In order that a field test or experiment may be
made to determine the supplies’ or equipment’s suitability for future use.



         (b)   In order to match other supplies or equipment in
use on a particular project, either completed or in the course of completion,
or on a service already provided or being provided.



         (c)   In order to obtain necessary supplies or equipment
that are only available from one source.



         (d)   In order to respond to an emergency declared by
the city, the State, a State agency, a political subdivision of the State or
the federal government.



      (2)   The individual or entity with the authority to award a
purchase order or contract determines that the purchase of supplies or
equipment of a particular brand or trade name are for a valid purpose.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-33.  INFORMAL SOLICITATION.



   The purchasing agent shall perform informal solicitations for the
purchases of supplies and equipment (unrelated to a public project) up to
$100,000.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-34.  FORMAL SOLICITATION.



   The purchasing agent shall perform formal solicitations for the
purchases of supplies and equipment (unrelated to a public project) over
$100,000.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-35.  PUBLICATION.



   Notice inviting bids shall be published either in a newspaper of
general circulation, an e-procurement website, and/or by any other method of
advertising that is recognized and accepted for public agency purchasing and
is consistent with applicable State law.  It shall be the responsibility of
the purchasing agent to encourage as wide a response as possible from
prospective vendors.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-36.  NO RESPONSIVE BIDS.



   When no responsive bids are received, the purchasing agent may elect to
award and execute a negotiated contract.  The purchasing agent is authorized
to negotiate for a written bid, and if the bid is for an amount over the city
manager’s annual authorization, this contract shall be presented to the
city council for award, and to the most senior available member of the city
council for execution.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-37.  RECEIPT OR REJECTION OF BIDS.



   (A)   The city may accept a bid or proposal on the basis of the
lowest bid or the best value.



   (B)   If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or
unit price, the city may accept the one it chooses on the basis of the lowest
bid made by negotiation or the best value.



   (C)   The purchasing agent may at any time reject all bids.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-38.  PURCHASE ORDERS AND CONTRACTS.



   (A)   Any supplies and equipment over $5,000 per vendor per fiscal
year shall be made only by a purchase order or contract.



   (B)   Every purchase order or contract shall be awarded either to
the most responsive, responsible bidder, or to the bidder offering the best
value.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-39.  PURCHASE ORDERS PURSUANT TO CONTRACT.



   Where a contract has been awarded, the purchasing agent and city
manager each may award and execute any purchase order thereto that,
collectively with ail other purchase orders, does not exceed the total
contract value.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-40.  CHANGE ORDERS.



   The purchasing agent and city manager each may approve and execute any
change order to a purchase order or contract that, collectively with all
other change orders on the project, does not exceed the contract plus
contingency amount, if any, previously approved for the purchase or lease of
supplies or equipment.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-41.  URGENCY.



   Sections 4-31 through 4-37 shall not apply to a situation that, at the
city manager’s discretion:



   (A)   Does not permit obtaining price quotations or bids; and



   (B)   Public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure
of public money to avoid harm to or to safeguard life, health or property, or
to mitigate severe economic expenses.



(Ord. No. 2943)



ARTICLE IV.  TRADE AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICES



SEC. 4-50.  APPLICABILITY.



   This article shall not apply to trade or professional services
associated with a public project.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-51.  [RESERVED FOR LIVING WAGE POLICY]



SEC. 4-52. BIDS OR PROPOSALS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except when the service can be obtained from only one source,
or when the purchasing agent determines that obtaining price quotations, bids
and proposals is not in the city’s best interest, at least three written
price quotations, bids or proposals shall be obtained for all trade or
professional services that collectively cost over $5,000 per vendor or
consultant, per fiscal year.  The purchasing agent shall use his/her
discretion if price quotations, bids and proposals should not or cannot be
obtained.



   (B)   The purchasing agent and the director of each department each
may procure, without public bidding, trade or professional services that
collectively cost up to $5,000 per vendor or consultant, per fiscal year.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-53.  BRAND AND TRADE NAMES.



   (A)   A request for quotations, bids or proposals regarding a
service shall not be drafted calling for designated supplies and equipment by
specific brand or trade names to be used in providing that service, unless
immediately followed by the words “or equal” so that bidders or proposers
may furnish any equal supplies or equipment in providing that service.  A
request to substitute equivalent supplies or equipment must follow the
process outlined in section 4-22, and the burden of proof is likewise on the
bidder or proposer as explained in that section.



   (B)   Subsection (A) is not applicable if any exemption listed in
section 4-22 applies.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-54.  INFORMAL SOLICITATION.



   The purchasing agent shall perform informal solicitations for the
purchase of trade and professional services (unrelated to a public project)
up to $100,000.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-55.  FORMAL SOLICITATION.



   The purchasing agent shall perform formal solicitations for the
purchase of supplies and equipment (unrelated to a public project) over
$100,000.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-56.  PUBLICATION.



   Notice inviting bids or proposals shall be published either in a
newspaper of general circulation, an e-procurement website, and/or by any
other method of advertising that is recognized and accepted for public agency
purchasing and is consistent with applicable State law.  It shall be the
responsibility of the purchasing agent to encourage as wide a response as
possible from prospective vendors or consultants.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-57.  RECEIPT OR REJECTION OF BIDS OR PROPOSALS.



   (A)   The city may accept a bid or proposal on the basis of the
lowest bid or the best value.



   (B)   In the case of bids for price only, if two or more bids
received are for the same total amount or unit price, the city may accept the
one it chooses on the basis of the lowest bid made by negotiation or the best
value.



   (C)   The purchasing agent may reject all bids or proposals.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-58.  CONTRACTS.



   (A)   Any trade services over the amount listed in Cal. Labor Code,
Section 1771, as may be amended from time to time, per vendor, per fiscal
year, shall be made only by contract.  Every contract shall be awarded
either to the most responsive, responsible bidder, or on the basis of
demonstrated competence and on the qualifications necessary for the
satisfactory performance of the services.



   (B)   Any professional services over $5,000 per consultant, per
fiscal year, shall be made only by contract.  Every contract shall be
awarded on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional
qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-59.  TASK ORDERS.



   The purchasing agent and city manager each may approve and execute any
task order that, collectively with all other task orders, does not exceed the
total contract value previously approved for the trade or professional
service.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-60.  CHANGE ORDERS.



   The purchasing agent and city manager each may approve and execute any
change order to a contract that, collectively with all other change orders
related to that contract, does not exceed the contract plus contingency
amount, if any, previously approved for this procurement.  Once the contract
plus contingency amount is met, any further change orders shall be submitted
for approval by the city council.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-61.  URGENCY.



   Unless otherwise required by law, sections 4-52 through 4-57 shall not
apply in a situation in which, at the city manager’s discretion:



   (A)   Does not permit obtaining price quotations, bids or proposals;
and



   (B)   Public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure
of public money to avoid harm to or to safeguard life, health or property, or
to mitigate severe economic expenses.



(Ord. No. 2943)



ARTICLE V.  ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES



SEC. 4-70.  REGULAR REPORTING.



   Each department shall provide the purchasing agent with an annual
report, listing all procurements awarded and/or executed by that department
within that reporting period.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-71.  SMALL LOCAL BUSINESS PURCHASING PREFERENCE PROGRAM.



   (A)   In cases where the city code requires a written competitive
bid for the purchase of goods or services, in determining the lowest
responsible bidder, when responsibility and quality are equal, a credit in a
percentage of the bid submitted by the lowest responsible bidder meeting
specifications shall be given to a bidder that meets the definition of a
“small local business” in this chapter as follows: 5% of the amount up to
$500,000; 4% of the amount between $500,001 and $750,000; 3% of the amount
between $750,001 and $1,000,000; 2% of the amount between $1,000,001 and
$1,250,000 and 1% of the amount between $1,250,001 and $1,500,000. For
example, if the lowest responsible bid is $1,000,000, the preference would be
$42,500 ($500,000 x .05 + $250,000 x .04 + $250,000 x .03). The preference
applies to all contracts, including contracts over $1,500,000, but the amount
of the preference is limited, as provided herein, so that the maximum
preference is $50,000.



   (B)   As an alternative to the employment requirements described in
the definition of a “small local business,” and only with respect to
trade services or construction contracts to perform for which the contractor
intends to hire employees or to subcontract, a contractor submitting a bid
shall satisfy the resident employment requirements for obtaining preference
as follows.  With the submission of its bid, the contractor shall submit a
certification, under penalty of perjury, that it has verified its own
proposed employee base for performance of the contract and confirmed with all
subcontractors providing bids used to formulate the contractor's bid, all of
whom have subcontracted with or will subcontract with the contractor, that at
least 50% of the labor hours devoted to performance of the contract will be
provided by residents of the city.  During or within one year after
performance of the contract, the city manager shall have the right to audit
all the contractor’s records to confirm the accuracy of the contractor’s
certification.  The contractor shall provide to the city all documents
(including subcontractors’ records) appropriate to perform such an audit. 
Should it be determined, after such audit by the city manager, that the
requirements of this subsection have not been met, or should the contractor
not upon request provide documents sufficient for the audit required by this
subsection to be performed, the contractor shall be required to pay upon
demand to the city the entire amount of any preference granted, which amount
may be withheld from any payment otherwise due the contractor.  The
foregoing is in addition to any other consequences that may be imposed upon
the contractor for violation of the provisions of a city ordinance. The city
manager’s determination under this subsection may be reviewed pursuant to
sections 1-55 et seq. of the city code.



   (C)   Subject to review by the city manager, the requirements to
obtain a small local business preference may be established by submission
with the bid of certification, under penalty of perjury, that the business
meets such requirement, including a list showing all employee addresses, and
affirming that the employees have granted permission for the use of their
addresses.



   (D)   The city manager shall determine whether a business is a small
local business under this section, including whether the principal office of
the business is in the city, and whether employees are residents of the
city.  The city manager's determination shall be final and not appealable
under any provision of the city code, except for the determination described
in subsection (B) of this section.



   (E)   The city manager may adopt, or instruct the purchasing agent
to adopt, such regulations, applications and forms as the city manager
determines are appropriate to implement the provisions of this section.



   (F)   The provisions of this section shall not apply when the small
local business preference described herein is contrary to or precluded by
requirements of State or federal law, or contrary to or precluded by
requirements of a State or federal funding source or program providing
assistance to the city for the particular project.



   (G)   In addition to any other consequence that may be imposed for
violation of a city ordinance, the city manager may prohibit a business
entity that he/she determines has falsely claimed to be a small local
business from bidding on city contracts for a period of up to five years. 
The city manager’s determination may be reviewed pursuant to sections 1-55
et seq. of the city code.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-72.  ANNUAL AUTHORIZATION.



   (A)   Other than for the rental, lease or license of real property
or a contract related to an exemption listed in section 4-5, the purchasing
agent may award and execute any procurement contract or purchase order up to
an annual authorization in the amount of $100,000.



   (B)   Other than for the rental, lease or license of real property
or a contract related to an exemption listed in section 4-5, the city manager
may award and execute any procurement contract or purchase order up to an
annual authorization in the amount listed in Cal. Pub. Con. Code, Section
22032(b), as may be changed from time to time.



   (C)   Any amendment that, collectively with the original purchase
order or contract and all amendments thereto, does not exceed an
individual’s annual authorization may be approved and executed by him or
her.



   (D)   If an individual has authority to award a purchase order or
contract, he/she has the authority to amend such purchase order or contract,
provided the total amount of that purchase order or contract, and all
amendments thereto, does not exceed his/her annual authorization.



   (E)   The purchasing agent may terminate any purchase order or
contract for procurement.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful to split or separate into smaller
purchase orders or contracts any procurement for the purpose of evading the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-73.  APPROVAL AS TO FORM.



   All purchase orders, contracts, amendments, task orders, change orders
and terminations shall be approved as to form by the city attorney.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-74.  CONTRACT TERM.



   The city may enter into a contract for a term consistent with the
industry standard term for that particular supply, equipment or service.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-75.  IMMEDIATE NEED.



   Other than for public projects, if the city council is not in session,
or if there exists in the view of the purchasing agent an immediate need to
do so, a purchase order, contract (including, but not limited to, a lease or
license), change order or task order that otherwise would be submitted to the
city council may be approved jointly by the city manager and the most senior
available member of the city council.  The city manager shall place the
jointly executed document on the agenda for ratification at one of the next
three regular city council meetings.  Any document that is jointly approved
in this way shall contain a provision that the authority to perform work
under that document will automatically terminate on the date that
ratification is denied, if it is.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-76.  REAL PROPERTY.



   The purchasing agent may award and execute up to an annual
authorization of $50,000, and the city manager may award and execute up to an
annual authorization of $100,000, any contract for the rental, lease or
license of real property for periods of time not to exceed three years.



(Ord. No. 2943)



SEC. 4-77.  CREDIT CARDS.



   City staff may use city-issued credit cards to pay for supplies and
equipment purchased for the city and for city-related training and travel. 
The purchasing agent shall develop and maintain a procurement card manual for
the issuance, oversight, and use of such credit cards.



(Ord. No. 2943)



ARTICLE VI.  SALE OF SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES



SEC. 4-80.  SALE OF SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES.



   (A)   The purchasing agent may sell, trade or otherwise dispose of
supplies and equipment that are no longer used or have become obsolete or
worn out, including awarding and executing contracts to sell, trade in or
otherwise dispose of such supplies and equipment.



   (B)   The city manager may award and execute contracts to provide
city staff s trade or professional services to another entity.



(Ord. No. 2943)



CHAPTER 5:  ANIMALS AND FOWL



ARTICLE I:  DOMESTICATED ANIMAL CONTROL



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



   5-1.   Definitions



   5-2.   Declaration of public nuisance; prohibited acts



   5-3.   Complaint



   5-4.   Hearing; notice



   5-5.   Impoundment pending hearing, preliminary hearing



   5-6.   Timing of hearings



   5-7.   Witnesses



   5-8.   Evidence



   5-9.   Subpoena power



   5-10.   Record of hearing



   5-11.   Findings



   5-12.   Order



   5-13.   Notice of order



   5-14.   Failure to comply with order



   5-15.   Finality of order



   5-16.   Reserved



   5-17.   Veterinarians and medical provider to report suspected rabid
animals and animal bites



   5-18.   Exemptions; special permits



DIVISION 2.  DOMESTICATED ANIMALS



   5-25.   Keeping bees unlawful; exceptions



   5-26.   Swine prohibited



   5-27.   Horses, cows, sheep



   5-28.   Stallions



   5-29.   Special permit; horses, cows, sheep



   5-30.   Rabbits or poultry



   5-31.   Reserved



   5-32.   Dogs in residential zone



   5-33.   Cats in residential zone



   5-34.   Livestock running at large prohibited



   5-35.   Animals at large prohibited



   5-36.   Inspection of animals



ARTICLE II.  DOGS AND CATS



DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY



   5-40.   Destruction of dangerous dogs or cats running at large



   5-41.   Dog or cat licenses



   5-42.   Dog leashing required



   5-43.   Exempted activities



   5-44.   Consent required to enter private property



   5-45.   Dog defecation



   5-46.   Penalty for violations



DIVISION 2.  LICENSING



   5-50.   Applicability of division



   5-51.   Dog exemption from wearing license tag



   5-52.   Cat exemption from wearing license tag



   5-53.   Exemption from license fee



   5-54.   Reserved



   5-55.   License required for dogs or cats over four months



   5-56.   Dog or cat license application



   5-57.   License period



   5-58.   Fees



   5-59.   Cat exemption from license fee



   5-60.   Due date and penalties



   5-61.   Issuance of license tag



   5-62.   Lost license tag



   5-63.   Transfer of license



   5-64.   Cat sterilization required



   5-65.   License violations



   5-66.   Dog kennel license required



   5-67.   Application



   5-68.   Inspection and approval



   5-69.   Issuance and fees



   5-70.   Term



   5-71.   Renewal



   5-72.   Revocation



   5-73.   Appeal of revocation



   5-74.   Compliance with zoning



DIVISION 3.  RABIES VACCINATION



   5-80.   Rabies vaccination requirements



   5-81.   Vaccination certificates



ARTICLE III.  IMPOUNDMENT



   5-85.   Impoundment of animals and poultry running at large



   5-86.   Notice of impoundment to be posted



   5-87.   Disposition of unredeemed animals



   5-88.   Reserved



   5-89.   Impoundment of unlicensed dogs or cats



   5-90.   Reserved



   5-91.   Reserved



   5-92.   Enforcement by city employees



   5-93.   Enforcement authority of poundmaster and deputies



   5-94.   Confinement regulations



   5-95.   Charges



   5-96.   Records



   5-97.   Interfering with poundmaster



   5-98.   Right of entry of poundmaster



   5-99.   Poundmaster to try to locate owner before entering private
property



   5-100.   Impoundment of dogs and cats running at large



   5-101.   Care of impounded dogs or cats; redemption procedure;
disposition



   5-102.   Reserved



   5-103.   Diseased or injured dog or cat



   5-104.   Disclaimer of liability by city



   5-105.   Suspected rabid dogs or cats to be isolated; place and
period of isolation



   5-106.   Isolation of biting animals; impoundment



   5-107.   By veterinarian, on private premises



   5-108.   Animal not properly isolated to be impounded



   5-109.   Redemption of isolated impounded animals; fee



ARTICLE IV.  WILD ANIMAL CONTROL



   5-115.   Provisions for keeping



   5-116.   Defined



   5-117.   Poundmaster regulations



   5-118.   Penalty for violation of article



   5-119.   Escaped animals; owner to notify poundmaster



   5-120.   Impoundment by city



ARTICLE I.  DOMESTICATED ANIMAL CONTROL



DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY



SEC. 5-1.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   ANIMAL - Any dog, cat, poultry, bird, reptile, fish or any
other mammal except a human being.



   (B)   ANIMAL POUND - Any dog pound, animal shelter, temporary pound
or pound vehicle owned or operated by the county or the city.



   (C)   COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER - The county health officer and
officers, employees and agents thereof.



   (D)   DOG KENNEL - Any place or premises wherein at least five or
more dogs over the age of six months are kept for the purpose of breeding,
training, boarding or holding for sale.



   (E)   HEARING OFFICER - A regular, full-time employee of the city
designated by the city manager to act as the finder of fact and decision
maker in any hearing required by this chapter.



   (F)   HOUSEHOLD PET - Cats, dogs, canaries, parrots and other
animals and birds usually and ordinarily maintained in or around a residence
for the enjoyment of the owner.



   (G)   KENNEL - Any premises whereon five or more dogs or cats over
the age of four months are maintained for the purpose of boarding, grooming,
breeding, training or sale.



   (H)   OWNER or KEEPER - Any person who possesses, harbors, or has
control or custody of an animal.



   (I)   PET SHOP - Any place of business where dogs under four months
of age, or cats, birds, reptiles, fish or any other animals to be used as
household pets are maintained for sale.



   (J)   POULTRY - Pigeons, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys and any
other fowl.



   (K)   POUND - Any temporary or permanent animal shelter or pound
vehicle owned or operated by the city.



   (L)   POUNDMASTER - Any person authorized by the city manager to
perform the duties and functions of animal control.



   (M)   PROVOKING - The deliberate incitement of an animal by teasing,
tormenting, abusing, or assaulting.



   (N)   RUNS AT LARGE - The act of an animal, being upon private
property without the permission of the owner or occupant of the property or
being upon public property and not upon a leash, except as exempted by §
5-43.



   (O)   TAX COLLECTOR - The county tax collector and the officers,
employees and agents thereof.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-1)  (Ord. No. 1571, 2239, 2388, 2639)



SEC. 5-2.  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE; PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   The city council hereby declares that each of the following
acts constitutes a public nuisance in the city:



      (1)   Maintaining any animal in a foul, offensive, obnoxious,
filthy or unsanitary condition;



      (2)   The infliction of physical injury upon any person by any
animal unless the person who, at the time the injury was sustained, was
either (a) provoking the animal, or (b) willfully trespassing or committing
some other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the
animal;



      (3)   The unprovoked infliction of physical injury by an
animal upon another animal that occurs off the property of the owner or
keeper of the animal inflicting the injury;



      (4)   Threatening behavior by an animal toward any person that
occurs in such circumstances as to cause such person reasonably to fear for
his/her physical safety unless the person who, at the time of the animal's
threatening behavior, was either (a) provoking the animal, or (b) willfully
trespassing or committing some other tort upon the premises occupied by the
owner or keeper of the animal;



      (5)   Any animal that runs at large;



      (6)   Any animal that damages real or personal property of any
person other than the owner or keeper and which occurs off the property of
the owner or keeper;



      (7)   The utterance of barks, cries, whines, or other sounds
of any animal that are so loud, so frequent and continued over so long a
period of time as to deprive persons residing in two or more residences of
the comfortable enjoyment of their residences;



      (8)   Maintaining any rooster more than four months old within
a residential zone; or



      (9)   Maintaining any animal in violation of an order issued
by a hearing officer pursuant to this division.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any animal
owned by a public entity and used for military or law enforcement purposes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-2)  (Ord. No. 1571, 2239, 2251, 2388, 2639)



SEC. 5-3.  COMPLAINT.



   Any person aggrieved by a public nuisance as set forth in section 5-2
may swear out a written complaint with the city clerk. Such complaint shall
state the date, time, and place where such nuisance exists or occurred, shall
describe the animal, the conduct creating the nuisance, and, if known to the
complainant, shall give the name and address of the owner or keeper of the
animal. The complaint shall be verified by the complainant and list the
address to which the complainant wishes all correspondence to be delivered
along with a telephone number at which the complainant may be reached if the
address is not within the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-2.1)  (Ord. No. 2239, 2375, 2388, 2639)



SEC. 5-4.  HEARING; NOTICE.



   Upon receipt of a complaint that alleges a public nuisance, or as soon
thereafter as the hearing officer may determine the name and address of the
owner or keeper of the animal, the hearing officer shall cause a notice of a
public nuisance hearing to be served upon the owner or keeper of the animal
and upon the complainant. The notice shall be in writing and may be served
either by personal delivery or by depositing a copy in the United States mail
addressed to the person to be served, postage prepaid, return receipt
requested. The notice shall:



   (A)   Include a copy of the complaint;



   (B)   State that a public nuisance hearing will be held to determine
whether the animal described in the complaint is a public nuisance and, if
the animal is found to be a public nuisance, how the public nuisance may be
abated in accordance with this division;



   (C)   State the location, time and date of the public nuisance
hearing, which shall be not more than 30 calendar days after the date of the
notice; and



   (D)   Include a copy of this division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-2.2)  (Ord. No. 2239, 2375, 2388, 2639)



SEC. 5-5.  IMPOUNDMENT PENDING HEARING, PRELIMINARY HEARING.



   (A)   If the poundmaster determines that probable cause exists to
believe that (1) an animal poses a threat to the safety of persons or
property or (2) an animal is being maintained in violation of a previously
issued order of a hearing officer, the poundmaster may seize the animal and
have the animal transported to and housed in an animal pound. If the
poundmaster does seize and impound an animal, the poundmaster shall promptly
either (1) give the notice set forth in subsection 5-5(B) to an owner or
keeper of the animal, or (2) if an owner or keeper of the animal is not
readily known or available, attempt to determine the name and address of an
owner or keeper of the animal and either personally serve such notice upon or
send such notice to an owner or keeper of the animal by United States mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested.



   (B)   Upon impoundment of an animal, a notice in the following form
shall be served or sent in accordance with subsection 5-5(A):



   Notice of Right to Preliminary Hearing



      Please take notice that on (insert the date) a (describe the
animal - for example - "a dog of approximately 18 inches in height at the
front shoulders with black and brown fur") was impounded by the City of
Oxnard as posing a public nuisance. A public nuisance hearing will be
scheduled in accordance with the Oxnard City Code to determine if the animal
is a public nuisance and, if so, how such public nuisance is to be abated. A
notice of the location, time and date of such public nuisance hearing will be
sent to you at a later date. If, prior to the public nuisance hearing, you
wish to retrieve the above described animal, you may request a preliminary
hearing to determine if the animal should be impounded until such time as a
final order is issued by the hearing officer after conducting the public
nuisance hearing.



      If you wish a preliminary hearing, please complete, sign and
return this Notice of Right to Preliminary Hearing to the Oxnard police chief
at (insert the address of the police department), and a preliminary hearing
will be scheduled within 48 hours (excluding holidays and weekends) from the
time of receipt of your request by the police chief.



      Dated:
___________               __________________________________



                                 Poundmaster



   Request for Preliminary Hearing



      I request a preliminary hearing in accordance with division 1 of
article I of chapter 5 of the Oxnard City Code as to the continued
impoundment of the animal described above. Please notify me by telephone at
__________________ and deliver all notices to the following address:



      Address:
_____________________________________________________________



      Printed name of owner/keeper:
___________________________________________



      Signature of owner/keeper:
______________________________________________



   (C)   Upon receipt of a request for a preliminary hearing, the
hearing officer shall immediately cause the requesting party to be notified
by telephone (if a telephone number is supplied by the requesting party) of
the location, time and date of the preliminary hearing and have delivered to
the requesting party's address (if such requesting party's address is within
the city of Oxnard) a notice of the location, time and date of the
preliminary hearing.



   (D)   At the location, time and date set forth in the notice, the
hearing officer shall conduct a preliminary hearing to determine whether
probable cause exists to believe that (1) the animal would pose a threat to
the safety of persons or property if returned to the owner or keeper during
the pendency of the public nuisance hearing, or (2) the animal was being
maintained in violation of a previously issued order of a hearing officer.



   (E)   The hearing officer shall allow testimony and evidence in
accordance with sections 5-7 and 5-8.



   (F)   In making such determination, the hearing officer shall
consider all evidence and testimony offered at the preliminary hearing,
including any proposals made by the owner or keeper (1) to secure the animal
in a manner so as to foreclose opportunities for injuring or threatening a
person or property or (2) to assure the animal will be maintained in
accordance with any previously issued order of a hearing officer.



   (G)   Within 24 hours (excluding holidays and weekends) of the
conclusion of the preliminary hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a
written order as to whether the impoundment shall continue or if the animal
may be returned to the owner or keeper.



   (H)   If the order is for the return of the animal, the order may
contain specific conditions upon which the animal shall be returned to the
owner or keeper, including the payment of animal pound fees.



   (I)   If the hearing officer determines the animal should be
impounded, the hearing officer shall permit the animal to be confined at the
owner's or keeper's expense in a kennel or veterinary hospital approved by
the hearing officer.



   (J)   A violation of an order or a condition in an order of the
hearing officer after a preliminary hearing shall be grounds for immediate
impoundment of the animal.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-2.3)  (Ord. No. 2239, 2375, 2388, 2639)



SEC. 5-6.  TIMING OF HEARINGS.



   (A)   The hearing officer shall conduct the public nuisance hearing
not later than 30 calendar days after service of the notice of hearing as set
forth in section 5-4. The hearing shall be held at the location, time and
date set forth in the notice.



   (B)   Upon the request of any party and the showing of good cause,
the hearing officer may grant a reasonable continuance of either the
preliminary hearing or public nuisance hearing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-2.4)  (Ord. No. 2239, 2375, 2639)



SEC. 5-7.  WITNESSES.



   The hearing officer may determine whether oral evidence shall be taken
under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall receive oral evidence
given in either a formal or informal style.  The hearing officer shall
permit the parties to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to
cross-examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues even though such
matter was not covered on direct examination, and to impeach any witness
regardless of which party first called the witness to testify.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-2.5)  (Ord. No. 2239, 2375, 2639)



SEC. 5-8.  EVIDENCE.



   The hearing officer shall admit any relevant evidence if the evidence
is the sort of evidence upon which responsible persons are accustomed to rely
in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common
law or statutory rule which might make such evidence improper.  The hearing
officer shall admit such improper evidence for any purpose but such evidence
shall not be sufficient itself to support a finding unless the evidence would
be admissible over objection in a civil action under the formal rules of
evidence or unless the evidence is corroborated by otherwise admissible
evidence.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-2.6)  (Ord. No. 2239, 2375, 2639)



SEC. 5-9.  SUBPOENA POWER.



   The hearing officer shall, at the request of any party, issue subpoenas
and subpoenas duces tecum for the attendance of witnesses or production of
documents at the preliminary hearing or public nuisance hearing.  Any person
duly subpoenaed to appear and testify or to produce any books and papers who
wrongfully neglects or refuses to appear or to testify or to produce such
books and papers shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-2.7)  (Ord. No. 2239, 2375, 2639)



SEC. 5-10.  RECORD OF HEARING.



   The hearing officer shall record the preliminary hearing and the public
nuisance hearing on a recording device and shall make such recording
available to the parties upon request.  The hearing officer shall provide a
copy of the recording or a transcript prepared therefrom to any party who
requests it and who deposits with the city treasurer the estimated cost of
making such copy or preparing such transcript.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-2.8)  (Ord. No. 2239, 2375, 2639)



SEC. 5-11.  FINDINGS.



   Within 15 days after the conclusion of the public nuisance hearing, the
hearing officer shall make written findings and render a decision on the
issues presented at the hearing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-2.9)  (Ord. No. 2239, 2375, 2639)



SEC. 5-12.  ORDER.



   (A)   The hearing officer shall determine what actions are
reasonably necessary in order to resolve the issues presented at the public
nuisance hearing. If the hearing officer determines that the animal in
question is a public nuisance in violation of subsections (A)(2) through
(A)(4) of section 5-2, the hearing officer shall order the animal humanely
destroyed.



   (B)   If the hearing officer determines that the animal in question
is a public nuisance in violation of another portion of section 5-2, the
hearing officer shall make an order with conditions that are reasonably
calculated to assure that the animal does not continue to be a public
nuisance.



   (C)   If the hearing officer determines that the animal in question
is a public nuisance, then the order of the hearing officer shall include the
requirement that the owner or keeper of the animal pay the animal pound fees
if the animal was impounded.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-2.10)  (Ord. No. 2239, 2375, 2639)



SEC. 5-13.  NOTICE OF ORDER.



   The hearing officer's findings and order shall be final when issued and
shall be served promptly on the parties.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-2.11)  (Ord. No. 2239, 2375, 2639)



SEC. 5-14.  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER.



   The failure of an owner or keeper of an animal to take any action
required by the order of the hearing officer within the applicable time limit
specified in the order shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction.  The humane
destruction of the animal by the owner within such time limit shall be deemed
compliance with the order regardless of the abatement action specified in the
order.  Each day or portion thereof that such noncompliance continues after
such time limit shall constitute a separate offense.  The poundmaster may
seize any animal being maintained in violation of any order of the hearing
officer.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-2.12)  (Ord. No. 2239, 2375, 2388, 2639)



SEC. 5-15.  FINALITY OF ORDER.



   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and constitutes the
exhaustion of available administrative remedies to review complaints of
public nuisances caused by animals.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-2.13)  (Ord. No. 2239, 2375, 2639)



SEC. 5-16.  RESERVED.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-3)



SEC. 5-17.  VETERINARIANS AND MEDICAL PROVIDER TO REPORT SUSPECTED RABID
ANIMALS AND ANIMAL BITES.



   (A)   Every veterinarian shall report immediately to the poundmaster
any animal which is diagnosed by the veterinarian as having rabies or which
the veterinarian has reason to suspect has rabies.



   (B)   Every medical provider or other person who treats any person
for a bite inflicted by any animal shall report immediately to the
poundmaster the name and address of each person receiving such treatment,
and, upon the request of the poundmaster, to report to poundmaster such
additional information relating to the bite or treatment as poundmaster may
deem to be helpful in rabies control.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-4)  (Ord. No. 1571, 1616, 2388)



SEC. 5-18.  EXEMPTIONS; SPECIAL PERMITS.



   (A)   The provisions of this article shall not apply to those
properties officially adopted by the city as agriculture preserves as
provided in Cal. Gov't Code, Sections 51200 et seq.



   (B)   Properties containing 20 acres or more that are used
exclusively for agriculture purposes may be exempted from the provisions of
this article pursuant to special permit.



   (C)   Where a special permit is required the applicant shall obtain
signatures of approval from all owners of property and residents within a
radius of 200 feet from the subject property. The application shall be
presented to the city clerk in writing.  The city clerk shall refer the
application to the poundmaster, building official and development services
department and conditions advisor who shall make an investigation and make
their written recommendations upon the application.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-5)  (Ord. No. 1571, 2239, 2388)



DIVISION 2.  DOMESTICATED ANIMALS



SEC. 5-25.  KEEPING BEES UNLAWFUL; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall maintain or cause or permit to be maintained
any bees in or upon any premises in the city; except, that bees necessary for
agricultural purposes may be maintained by special use permit.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to bees in
sealed containers in transit through the city or to bees within a schoolhouse
for the purpose of study or observation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-7)  (Ord. No. 1571, 2388)



SEC. 5-26.  SWINE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall maintain, cause or permit to be maintained swine, hogs
or pigs within the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-8)  (Ord. No. 1571, 2388)



SEC. 5-27.  HORSES, COWS, SHEEP.



   No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained upon any premises
in the city any horse, mule, jack, jenny, cow, bull, heifer, sheep or goat:



   (A)   On any lot containing less than 10,000 square feet; or



   (B)   In any corral or bar within a radius of 75 feet from any
dwelling or any zone precluding the maintaining of the above specified
animals.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-9)  (Ord. No. 1571, 2388)



SEC. 5-28.  STALLIONS.



   Upon approval of the poundmaster, a stallion may be maintained in the
city in a substantial corral of wood or other construction of six feet in
height and under conditions to prevent escape and protect people or other
animals.  A minimum substantial corral is defined as one constructed of
four-inch by four-inch posts, eight feet on center, anchored 24 inches in
heavy grade cement with two-inch by six-inch rails set two feet apart.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-9.1)  (Ord. No. 1616, 2388)



SEC. 5-29.  SPECIAL PERMIT; HORSES, COWS, SHEEP.



   If more than one of any of the animals mentioned in section 5-27 are to
be maintained within the city, before maintaining these animals, the person
shall obtain a special use permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-10)  (Ord. No. 1571, 2388)



SEC. 5-30.  RABBITS OR POULTRY.



   (A)   Except for registered homing pigeons, no person shall maintain
or permit to be maintained more than 25 in all of rabbits or poultry upon any
premises located in a residential or commercial zone of the city.



   (B)   No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained upon any
premises in a manufacturing zone of the city, more than 200 in all of rabbits
or poultry except by special use permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-11)  (Ord. No. 1571, 2388)



SEC. 5-31.  RESERVED.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-12)



SEC. 5-32.  DOGS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONE.



   No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained upon any premises
in a residential zone of the city more than four dogs over the age of six
months for any purpose.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-13)  (Ord. No. 1571, 2388)



SEC. 5-33.  CATS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONE.



   No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained upon any premises
in a residential zone of the city more than four cats over the age of four
months.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-13.1)  (Ord. No. 2388)



SEC. 5-34.  LIVESTOCK RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   No person owning any livestock shall permit such livestock to run at
large.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-14)  (Ord. No. 1616, 2388)



SEC. 5-35.  ANIMALS AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   No person owning any animal shall permit the animal to run at large
without reasonable control or to be pastured or maintained upon any public
property or upon any private property without the consent of the owner or
occupant thereof or in any manner or place to the injury of the owner or
occupant of any other property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-15)  (Ord. No. 1616, 2388)



SEC. 5-36.  INSPECTION OF ANIMALS.



   No owner of an animal shall willfully or maliciously fail or refuse to
exhibit such animal or any license therefor for inspection upon demand by the
poundmaster or any peace officer.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-16)  (Ord. No. 1616, 2388)



ARTICLE II.  DOGS AND CATS



DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY



SEC. 5-40.  DESTRUCTION OF DANGEROUS DOGS OR CATS RUNNING AT LARGE.



   Any dog or cat which is running at large and which is, by reason of its
vicious disposition, dangerous to persons or property may be shot by any
peace officer or taken up and destroyed in a humane manner by the poundmaster.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-22)  (Ord. No. 735, 2388)



SEC. 5-41.  DOG OR CAT LICENSES.



   Any person with custody or control of a dog or cat shall exhibit any
license therefor for inspection immediately upon demand by the poundmaster or
any peace officer.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-23)  (Ord. No. 745, 2388)



SEC. 5-42.  DOG LEASHING REQUIRED.



   No person shall permit any dog owned, harbored or controlled by that
person to be on any public beach, street, sidewalk, alley, park or place of
whatever nature open to and used by the public unless the dog is securely
leashed, and the leash is continuously controlled by a responsible person
capable of controlling such dog or unless such dog is securely confined in a
motor vehicle.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-24)  (Ord. No. 735, 2318)



SEC. 5-43.  EXEMPTED ACTIVITIES.



   Section 5-42 does not apply to dogs:



   (A)   Actively engaged in dog shows or field trials;



   (B)   Actively engaged in hunting game upon public property which is
open for such hunting;



   (C)   Maintained, trained and used exclusively for the working,
herding or guarding of other animals, while such dog is actively engaged in
such working, herding or guarding;



   (D)   Located in an area of any public beach designated and posted
by the city manager or designee as a leash-free area of the city; and



   (E)   Trained and authorized as police service dogs.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-24.1)  (Ord. No. 2318)



SEC. 5-44.  CONSENT REQUIRED TO ENTER PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   No person shall permit any dog owned, harbored, or controlled by that
person to be on private property without the consent of the person owning or
occupying the private property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-24.2)  (Ord. No. 2318)



SEC. 5-45.  DOG DEFECATION.



   (A)   No person shall, knowingly or by failure to exercise due care,
permit any dog owned, harbored or controlled by that person to defecate on
any public property or on any private property without the consent of the
person owning or occupying the private property.



   (B)   If the person owning, harboring or controlling the subject dog
immediately and properly removes such defecation material from such public or
private property, the person shall not be in violation of this section.



   (C)   Any person having the control or custody of a dog on public or
private property shall at all times have in his/her possession a wrapper,
bag, container or other receptacle suitable for pickup and removal of any
defecation material deposited by such dog.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-25)  (Ord. No. 735, 1811, 2318)



SEC. 5-46.  PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.



   Violation of sections 5-61, 5-63 and 5-66 shall be an infraction.  The
minimum penalty for a first conviction shall be a $100 fine; for a second
conviction within one year of the first conviction, the minimum penalty shall
be a $200 fine; for a third or subsequent conviction within one year of the
first conviction, the minimum penalty shall be a $500 fine.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-26)  (Ord. No. 735, 2318)



DIVISION 2.  LICENSING



SEC. 5-50.  APPLICABILITY OF DIVISION.



   The licensing provisions of this division do not apply to any dog or
cat:



   (A)   While in the immediate custody and control of a person who is
engaged in traveling through the city and who is not a resident of the city;



   (B)   Actively engaged in or training for dog or cat shows or field
trials;



   (C)   In the city for a period not exceeding 30 days for the purpose
of breeding or displaying the dog or cat at shows, exhibitions or field
trials; and



   (D)   Confined to the premises of a benevolent organization devoted
to the care of lost or homeless animals, or that is confined in an animal
hospital for treatment, or confined in a dog or cat kennel, licensed under
the provisions of this chapter; provided, that such dog or cat remains, at
all times, upon the premises of such benevolent organization, animal hospital
or dog or cat kennel.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-27)  (Ord. No. 735, 762, 2388)



SEC. 5-51.  DOG EXEMPTION FROM WEARING LICENSE TAG.



   The license tag need not be worn when the dog is:



   (A)   Securely confined in a cage or vehicle;



   (B)   Confined in a veterinary facility, licensed kennel, grooming
facility, or State chartered benevolent organization for the care of animals;
or



   (C)   Participating in or training for sporting events, field
trials, obedience classes, dog shows or herding livestock.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-27.1)  (Ord. No. 1043, 1616, 2388)



SEC. 5-52.  CAT EXEMPTION FROM WEARING LICENSE TAG.



   The license tag need not be worn when the cat is:



   (A)   Identified by a microchip implanted under the skin which is
acceptable to and readable by the poundmaster;



   (B)   Securely confined in a cage or vehicle;



   (C)   Confined in a veterinary facility, licensed kennel, cattery,
grooming facility or State chartered benevolent organization for the care of
animals; or



   (D)   Being shown or exhibited in any cat or pet show.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-27.2)  (Ord. No. 2388)



SEC. 5-53.  EXEMPTION FROM LICENSE FEE.



   A license tag shall be issued free of charge for the following:



   (A)   For a dog used as a guide dog for a blind person when an
affidavit attesting to the dog's use as a guide dog has been submitted to the
poundmaster; or



   (B)   A dog which has been honorably discharged from the armed
services of the United States.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-27.3)  (Ord. No. 1043, 1948, 2388)



SEC. 5-54.  RESERVED.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-28)



SEC. 5-55.  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR DOGS OR CATS OVER FOUR MONTHS.



   (A)   Every person who owns any dog or cat over the age of four
months for 30 days or longer shall obtain a current license and license tag
stamped with the year in which such license is issued.  The license tag
shall be attached to a substantial collar or harness which shall be worn by
the dog or cat at all times.



   (B)   Any dog or cat found without a current license tag or for
which there is no current license may be taken up and impounded by the
poundmaster or any peace officer.



   (C)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an
infraction.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-29)  (Ord. No. 735, 762, 1045, 1948, 2388)



SEC. 5-56.  DOG OR CAT LICENSE APPLICATION.



   The license and license tag may be obtained by presenting an acceptable
rabies vaccination certificate, furnishing the information required herein,
and paying the proper fee to the license collector or poundmaster.  The
information shall include the name, sex, breed, age and color of the dog or
cat and the name, address and, when available, telephone number of the person
owning such dog or cat.  A rabies vaccination certificate must show that the
vaccination has at least one year to run before its expiration date.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-30)  (Ord. No. 735, 2501, 1948, 2388)



SEC. 5-57.  LICENSE PERIOD.



   The license period for any license issued shall be specified on the
license application and for a period as determined by the poundmaster for
that particular license application.  The license period shall not be less
than one year nor more than two years from the date the license is issued and
such period shall not exceed beyond the expiration date of the applicable
rabies vaccination.



   A license shall expire, and such license and corresponding license tag
shall cease to be current, upon the expiration of the applicable license
period.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-31)  (Ord. No. 735, 1948, 2388)



SEC. 5-58.  FEES.



   The fees for any license or service of the poundmaster required by this
chapter shall be that established by the current schedule of rates and fees
as adopted by city council resolution.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-32)  (Ord. No. 735, 811, 1330, 1494, 1501, 1948, 2388)



SEC. 5-59.  CAT EXEMPTION FROM LICENSE FEE.



   A cat license shall be issued free of charge if the cat is owned by a
veterinarian who is licensed by the State and the cat is maintained on the
premises used by the veterinarian in his/her practice.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-32.1)  (Ord. No. 2388)



SEC. 5-60.  DUE DATE AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   The information and fees required by this article are due on
the thirtieth day after the day on which:



      (1)   The previous license, if any, expires;



      (2)   The dog or cat is acquired by the person owning the cat
or dog;



      (3)   The dog or cat is brought into the city; or



      (4)   The dog or cat attains the age of four months.



   (B)   Any person obtaining a license after the due date shall pay,
in addition to the license fee, a late license penalty in an amount equal to
100 % of the license fee which would be applicable if the license period were
one year, regardless of the actual license period for which such license is
issued.  Such penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty or sanction
which may be imposed pursuant to the city for failure to have a license.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-33)  (Ord. No. 735, 811, 814, 1330, 1501, 1948, 2388)



SEC. 5-61.  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE TAG.



   Upon receipt of the required information, payment of the proper fee and
submission of an acceptable rabies vaccination certificate, the dog or cat
shall be licensed, a written receipt shall be issued to the applicant, and a
metal license tag mailed to the applicant's address.  Each tag shall be
serially numbered and stamped with the words “City of Oxnard” and the
year issued.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-34)  (Ord. No. 735, 1501, 1948, 2388)



SEC. 5-62.  LOST LICENSE TAG.



   If a license tag is lost, a duplicate tag may be obtained from the
license collector upon payment of a lost license fee per the current
licensing schedule of rates and fees.  The licensee shall either surrender
the receipt obtained for the lost tag or certify under penalty of perjury
that a tag was obtained and that the receipt cannot be found.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-35)  (Ord. No. 735, 1501, 1948, 2388)



SEC. 5-63.  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   In the event that there is a change in ownership of a licensed dog or
cat during the license period, the new owner may have the current license
transferred to his/her name upon the payment of a transfer fee and surrender
of the license receipt.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-36)  (Ord. No. 735, 1501, 1948, 2388)



SEC. 5-64.  CAT STERILIZATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person owning a cat shall allow such cat to have access to
the out of doors unless such cat has been surgically sterilized.



   (B)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an
infraction.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-36.1)  (Ord. No. 2388)



SEC. 5-65.  LICENSE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall counterfeit a dog or cat license tag, or
attach a license tag issued under the provisions of this code to any dog or
cat other than the one for which such tag was issued, or obtain a dog or cat
license tag or dog or cat kennel license and, in doing so, state as true any
material matter which he/she knows to be false is guilty of an infraction.



   (B)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an
infraction.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-36.2)  (Ord. No. 2388)



SEC. 5-66.  DOG KENNEL LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Every person who owns, manages, or operates a dog kennel shall obtain a
dog kennel license.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-37)  (Ord. No. 2388)



SEC. 5-67.  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Every person required to obtain a dog kennel license shall
submit a written application to the poundmaster.  Such application shall
include the following:



      (1)   The name and address of the dog kennel;



      (2)   The name of the person owning, managing or operating the
dog kennel;



      (3)   The number and approximate age of the dogs maintained
therein as of the date of the application;



      (4)   The maximum number of dogs over the age of four months
and the maximum number of dogs under such age which will be maintained at the
dog kennel at any given time during the licensing period; and



      (5)   The purposes for which the dogs are maintained at the
dog kennel.



   (B)   Such application shall be accompanied by a certificate from
the city planner stating that a dog kennel is a permitted use or that a
conditional use permit has been issued for the dog kennel.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-38)  (Ord. No. 2388)



SEC. 5-68.  INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a dog kennel license application, the
poundmaster shall cause the dog kennel to be inspected to determine its
compliance with the poundmaster's minimum standards for operation.



   (B)   The poundmaster's minimum standards shall be in writing and
shall be made available for inspection during regular business hours at the
office of the animal control division of the crime protection program.



   (C)   If the poundmaster determines that the dog kennel meets such
minimum standards and that the application complies with all the requirements
of this section, the poundmaster shall approve the dog kennel license
application.



   (D)   The poundmaster shall notify the applicant of approval or
denial of the dog kennel license application within 30 days of the
poundmaster's receipt of the dog kennel license application.



   (E)   The decision of the poundmaster to approve or deny the dog
kennel license application shall be final and not subject to an appeal.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-38.1)  (Ord. No. 2388)



SEC. 5-69.  ISSUANCE AND FEES.



   Upon approval the poundmaster shall forward a copy of the dog kennel
license application to the license collector which will issue a dog kennel
license to the applicant upon payment of the fees to be prescribed by city
council resolution.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-38.2)  (Ord. No. 2388)



SEC. 5-70.  TERM.



   The dog kennel license shall be effective for one year, beginning
January 1 and ending December 31 of the calendar year of issuance.  Any dog
kennel license issued after January 1 shall expire on December 31 of that
calendar year.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-38.3)  (Ord. No. 2388)



SEC. 5-71.  RENEWAL.



   A dog kennel license may be renewed annually after an annual inspection
by the poundmaster and the payment of the fees to the license collector.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-38.4)  (Ord. No. 2388)



SEC. 5-72.  REVOCATION.



   (A)   Upon written notice to the licensee, a dog kennel license may
be revoked by the poundmaster for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   The dog kennel maintains a greater number of dogs than
the maximum number specified in the dog kennel license application;



      (2)   The dog kennel fails, at any time after issuance of a
license, to meet the poundmaster's minimum standards;



      (3)   The dog kennel is not being maintained in a sanitary and
healthful condition; or



      (4)   The dogs confined in the dog kennel are not provided
with adequate care and supervision.



   (B)   The license revocation shall become effective 30 days after
notice of revocation is deposited in the mail, postage prepaid, directed to
the person owning, operating or managing such dog kennel at the address shown
in the application.



      The license revocation shall be withdrawn if, within the 30-day
waiting period, the noticed condition is corrected to the satisfaction of the
poundmaster.



   (C)   The poundmaster shall notify the license collector promptly of
any revocation.  No part of the dog kennel license fee shall be refunded in
the event of such revocation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-39)  (Ord. No. 2388)



SEC. 5-73.  APPEAL OF REVOCATION.



   (A)   Within 14 days of the poundmaster's written notice of
revocation of the dog kennel license, a licensee may file a written notice of
appeal to the police chief setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal.



   (B)   Within 21 days after the notice of appeal is received, the
police chief will send a notice of the time and place of an appeal hearing to
the licensee.



   (C)   The formal rules of evidence and procedure shall not apply to
the appeal hearing, except to the extent required by the hearing officer.



   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may
either announce the decision or take the matter under submission and issue a
written decision within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing.  The
hearing officer's decision shall contain a statement of the reasons upon
which the decision was based.



   (E)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and
constitute the exhaustion of available administrative remedies to the
poundmaster's revocation of the dog kennel license.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-40)  (Ord. No. 2388)



SEC. 5-74.  COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING.



   A dog kennel license issued pursuant to this article shall cease to be
valid whenever the operation of the dog kennel becomes a prohibited use for
the zone in which such dog kennel is located.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-41)  (Ord. No. 2388)



DIVISION 3.  RABIES VACCINATION



SEC. 5-80.  RABIES VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS.



   Every person maintaining or having any dog or cat over four months of
age in the city shall cause such dog or cat to be vaccinated with rabies
vaccine, by a person licensed by the State, to practice veterinary medicine 
and shall cause such dog or cat to be re-vaccinated within a period of not
more than:



   (A)   Twelve months after the dog's or cat's initial vaccination, if
the dog or cat was between four months and one year of age at the time of
such vaccination; or



   (B)   Thirty months after each prior vaccination.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-42)  (Ord. No. 745, 1616, 2388)



SEC. 5-81.  VACCINATION CERTIFICATES.



   Every person practicing veterinary medicine who vaccinates a dog or cat
with rabies vaccine shall immediately issue to the person who owns the dog or
cat a certificate signed by a veterinarian which states the:



   (A)   Name and address of the owner of the vaccinated dog or cat;



   (B)   Kind of vaccine used, name of the manufacturer, the
manufacturers serial or lot number, and the date of vaccinations; and



   (C)   Breed, age, color, and sex of the vaccinated dog or cat.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-43)  (Ord. No. 735, 811, 2388)



ARTICLE III.  IMPOUNDMENT



SEC. 5-85.  IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS AND POULTRY RUNNING AT LARGE.



   The poundmaster, is hereby authorized and empowered to take up and
impound any animals running at large and to keep such animals confined at the
pound or at such other place as the poundmaster may provide, for not less
than three days.  If any impounded animals are reclaimed, the poundmaster
shall collect all applicable fees before delivering the same to the owner.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-44)  (Ord. No. 1212, 1948, 2388)



SEC. 5-86.  NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT TO BE POSTED.



   Notices containing a description of any animal impounded shall be
posted on the bulletin board of the city clerk's office for at least three
days.  The poundmaster may publish notices of the impounding of any animal
in an attempt to locate the owner thereof.  In such event, the cost of so
doing shall be added to the costs of the care of the animal.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-45)  (Ord. No. 2388)



SEC. 5-87.  DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS.



   At the expiration of three days, if the animal has not been redeemed,
the poundmaster shall be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction over the
animal, and the poundmaster is hereby authorized to destroy, sell, or
otherwise dispose of the same and any proceeds derived therefrom shall accrue
to the city, to be deposited in the general fund.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-46)  (Ord. No. 2388)



SEC. 5-88.  RESERVED.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-46.1)



SEC. 5-89.  IMPOUNDMENT OF UNLICENSED DOGS OR CATS.



   Any dog or cat found without a current license tag may be taken and
impounded by the poundmaster or any peace officer.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-47)  (Ord. No. 735, 762, 2388)



SEC. 5-90.  RESERVED.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-48)



SEC. 5-91.  RESERVED.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-49)



SEC. 5-92.  ENFORCEMENT BY CITY EMPLOYEES.



   In addition to any other persons authorized to enforce this chapter,
the code enforcement employees of the city are designated as deputies of the
poundmaster for the purpose of enforcement activities of the poundmaster.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-49.1)  (Ord. No. 1721, 1948, 2388)



SEC. 5-93.  ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY OF POUNDMASTER AND DEPUTIES.



   The poundmaster and deputies are designated as public officers and
employees and are authorized to make arrests according to Cal. Penal Code,
Section 836.5, during the period and for the purpose of enforcing and
carrying out the provisions of this chapter.  The poundmaster and deputies
are further authorized to carry and use weapons while actually engaged in the
performance of their duties.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-50)  (Ord. No. 735, 1616)



SEC. 5-94.  CONFINEMENT REGULATIONS.



   The poundmaster may regulate the size and type of cage or other means
of animal confinement and the distance from the place of confinement to
adjoining property.  The poundmaster may promulgate other regulations deemed
necessary, to carry out the purposes of this chapter and to ensure the
maintenance of humane, sanitary conditions and the safety of persons and
property.  A copy of the regulations shall be furnished by the poundmaster
upon request.  In applying the regulations to a given situation, the
poundmaster shall take into consideration the type, nature, disposition and
training of the animal involved.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-50.1)  (Ord. No. 1616, 2388)



SEC. 5-95.  CHARGES.



   The poundmaster may charge and collect fees for service rendered by the
poundmaster per the current licensing schedule of rates and fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-50.2)  (Ord. No. 1616, 1948)



SEC. 5-96.  RECORDS.



   The poundmaster shall maintain accurate and detailed records of:



   (A)   All dogs and cats licensed, impounded or sold by the
poundmaster;



   (B)   All animal bite cases reported to the poundmaster and the
investigation of the same; and



   (C)   All monies received by the poundmaster, which records shall be
open to inspection at all reasonable times by the police chief or designee.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-51)  (Ord. No. 735, 2388)



SEC. 5-97.  INTERFERING WITH POUNDMASTER.



   No person shall break open a pound, animal shelter, temporary pound or
pound vehicle, or refuse to give the poundmaster the person's name, address
and other identification upon the poundmaster's request when the information
is required to issue a citation, or in any other manner to obstruct the
poundmaster in the discharge of, or attempt to discharge, any duty of the
poundmaster.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-52)  (Ord. No. 735, 1616, 1917, 2388)



SEC. 5-98.  RIGHT OF ENTRY OF POUNDMASTER.



   The poundmaster or any peace officer may enter upon private property,
except dwellings located thereon, as follows:



   (A)   During daylight:



      (1)   When in pursuit of any animal which the poundmaster has
reasonable cause to believe is subject to impoundment;



      (2)   To impound or place in isolation any animal thereon
which the poundmaster has any cause whatsoever to believe or suspect has
rabies or is a biting animal; and



      (3)   To inspect or examine animals isolated thereon.



   (B)   At night:



      (1)   When in pursuit of any animal which the poundmaster has
reasonable cause to believe is subject to impoundment; and



      (2)   To impound or place in isolation any animal thereof
which the poundmaster has any cause whatsoever to believe or suspect has
rabies or is a biting animal.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-53)  (Ord. No. 735, 762, 2388)



SEC. 5-99.  POUNDMASTER TO TRY TO LOCATE OWNER BEFORE ENTERING PRIVATE
PROPERTY.



   As a condition of the authority set forth in the preceding section,
except where time does not permit in an emergency or when in fresh pursuit,
before entering upon private property a reasonable effort shall be made to
locate the owner or possessor thereof to request permission to enter upon
such property and to explain the purpose for such entry.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-54)  (Ord. No. 735, 762)



SEC. 5-100.  IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS AND CATS RUNNING AT LARGE.



   The poundmaster may take up and impound any dog or cat found running at
large.  Such dog or cat shall be disposed of, unless redeemed, as provided
in section 5-101.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-55)  (Ord. No. 735, 2388)



SEC. 5-101.  CARE OF IMPOUNDED DOGS OR CATS; REDEMPTION PROCEDURE;
DISPOSITION.



   (A)   The poundmaster shall feed and care for any dog or cat
impounded as provided in this chapter until the dog or cat is disposed of as
provided by law.



   (B)   If such dog or cat is not a “diseased or injured dog or
cat,” as defined in this chapter, and is not suspected of having rabies,
the owner of such impounded dog or cat may redeem the dog or cat at any time
within five days after being taken up by describing the cat or dog, proving
ownership to the satisfaction of the poundmaster, by paying all applicable
fees and by obtaining, when necessary, the dog or cat license tag.



   (C)   When the poundmaster knows the address of the owner of an
impounded dog or cat the five days for redemption shall begin when written
notice of such impounding is deposited in the mail, postage prepaid, directed
to such address.  However, an owner may waive the five-day redemption period
in writing.  If the impounded dog or cat bears a license tag, such notice
shall be mailed to the address shown on the copy of the receipt for such
license tag on file in the licensing services division.



   (D)   If any dog or cat impounded is not so redeemed within such
five days, or if the owner of such dog or cat is unknown to the poundmaster,
or fails, or refuses to comply with any of the requirements of redemption as
provided herein, or if the owner has waived the redemption period in writing,
the poundmaster shall dispose of such dogs or cats according to the
provisions of the city code.



   (E)   In disposing of an impounded dog or cat, the poundmaster may
destroy the dog or cat in a humane manner or may sell such dog or cat for a
pet to any person who obtains a license tag.



   (F)   When a dog or cat is returned to the pound within ten days of
such sale, the buyer or other person returning the dog or cat shall not be
given the discretion to determine what disposition shall be made of the dog
or cat.  The price to be charged for any dog or cat sold as a pet shall be
as prescribed by city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-56)  (Ord. No. 735, 1212, 2388)



SEC. 5-102.  RESERVED.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-57)



SEC. 5-103.  DISEASED OR INJURED DOG OR CAT.



   (A)   The poundmaster shall, after impounding any dog or cat,
determine whether the dog or cat is diseased or injured.  A “diseased or
injured dog or cat” is any dog or cat not suspected of rabies which either
is injured and apparently in pain or is apparently suffering from a disease.



   (B)   Every diseased or injured dog or cat shall be isolated at the
pound for 72 hours unless, before the expiration of such time, the dog or cat
is redeemed or is accepted for treatment.



   (C)   A diseased or injured dog or cat that does not bear a license
tag may be released into the custody of any licensed veterinarian to provide
treatment for such dog or cat at no expense to the city.



   (D)   The city shall not be obligated to provide treatment for such
dog or cat nor to procure treatment on behalf of its owner.  The city shall
not be liable for the cost of treatment or medical care rendered to any dog
or cat accepted for treatment.



   (E)   If the owner of any diseased or injured dog or cat taken up
and impounded as provided in this chapter is known, the poundmaster shall,
within 72 hours of such taking up, exercise reasonable diligence to give
notice of such fact to the owner.  Such notice may be given by mail or by
leaving written notice at the residence of such owner.  If any diseased or
injured dog or cat is neither redeemed nor accepted for treatment as provided
herein within such 72 hours, the poundmaster shall destroy the dog or cat in
a humane manner.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-58)  (Ord. No. 735, 2388)



SEC. 5-104.  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY BY CITY.



   All animals specified in this chapter which may be impounded shall be
kept at the risk of the owner, and the city, its officers, agents and
employees shall not, nor shall the poundmaster, be responsible to the owner
for the delivery in good faith of any such animal to a person claiming to be,
but not in fact being, entitled to reclaim the same.  Neither the city, its
officers, agents or employees, nor the poundmaster, shall be liable for
injury or disease to any animal, incurred while the animal is impounded.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-59)  (Ord. No. 735)



SEC. 5-105.  SUSPECTED RABID DOGS OR CATS TO BE ISOLATED; PLACE AND PERIOD
OF ISOLATION.



   (A)   The poundmaster shall take up and place in isolation any dog
or cat, licensed or not, which in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian or
the poundmaster, displays symptoms suggestive of rabies.  Such isolation
shall be at the dog or cat pound unless the owner of such dog or cat, with
the approval of the poundmaster, arranges with a licensed veterinarian for
such isolation in a private animal hospital or clinic.



   (B)   Any dog or cat, placed in such isolation, shall be kept
strictly confined and under such observation as may be required by the
poundmaster.  Such isolation shall continue for at least 14 days from the
date the symptoms suggestive of rabies were first observed.  Such isolation
may be continued for a longer period than 14 days if, in the opinion of any
licensed veterinarian or the poundmaster, such longer period is necessary.



   (C)   At the expiration of such 14 days or longer period, the dog or
cat shall be released upon payment of proper fees if, in the opinion of any
licensed veterinarian or the poundmaster, such dog or cat does not have
rabies.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-60)  (Ord. No. 735, 2388)



SEC. 5-106.  ISOLATION OF BITING ANIMALS; IMPOUNDMENT.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, the poundmaster shall take up,
impound and isolate for 14 days following the day of the alleged bite, any
animal of a type subject to rabies that is reported to have bitten any
person, whether or not such animal has been vaccinated with rabies vaccine
and whether or not such animal displays any symptoms suggestive of rabies. 
The animal shall be impounded and isolated in the manner provided for the
isolation of dogs and cats suspected of having rabies.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-61)  (Ord. No. 735, 2388)



SEC. 5-107.  BY VETERINARIAN, ON PRIVATE PREMISES.



   (A)   Any person, who is 21 years of age or older may make written
request to the poundmaster for the isolation of a biting animal either in
facilities provided by a licensed veterinarian or in a licensed kennel or
upon the private premises of the person making such request.  If such
request is approved by the poundmaster, such biting animal shall not be taken
up and impounded, but shall instead be strictly confined and isolated in such
veterinarian's facilities or on such private premises for the isolation
period.



   (B)   The poundmaster shall post such private premises, in a
conspicuous place thereon, with notice that an animal is being confined
thereon to be observed for rabies.  Upon termination of the isolation
period, animals isolated in the pound shall be released upon payment of
proper fees if, in the opinion of any licensed veterinarian or the
poundmaster, the animal does not have rabies.  Animals isolated upon private
property shall be released from such isolation if, in the opinion of any
licensed veterinarian or the poundmaster, the animal does not have rabies.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-62)  (Ord. No. 735, 2388)



SEC. 5-108.  ANIMAL NOT PROPERLY ISOLATED TO BE IMPOUNDED.



   Every person who, after requesting and obtaining approval for the
keeping of a biting animal confined and isolated upon private premises, as
provided in section 5-105, fails for any reason whatsoever to keep such
animal continuously confined and isolated upon his/her premises, either
indoors or inside some enclosure, for a period of 14 days after the day such
written request is presented to the poundmaster, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.  Any such animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, not
continuously confined and isolated as required in section 5-105 shall be
taken up forthwith by the poundmaster and impounded as provided in section
5-105.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-63)  (Ord. No. 735)



SEC. 5-109.  REDEMPTION OF ISOLATED IMPOUNDED ANIMALS; FEE.



   Any dog or cat isolated at an animal shelter and found not to have
rabies may be redeemed by the owner by paying to the poundmaster all
applicable fees and by obtaining any necessary license tag.  Any dog or cat
which is not so redeemed within 72 hours after the expiration of the
isolation period shall be deemed to have been abandoned and shall be disposed
of as provided in section 5-101 of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-64)  (Ord. No. 735, 1212, 2388)



ARTICLE IV.  WILD ANIMAL CONTROL



SEC. 5-115.  PROVISIONS FOR KEEPING.



   No person shall have, keep or maintain any wild animal or reptile
unless adequate provisions are made for its confinement and control to insure
the maintenance of public peace, health and safety.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-65)  (Ord. No. 1043)



SEC. 5-116.  DEFINED.



   A “wild animal” is an animal or reptile which is wild by nature and
not customarily domesticated in the city.  This definition does not include
birds, small rodents or small, nonpoisonous reptiles commonly used for
educational or experimental purposes or for pets.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-66)  (Ord. No. 1043)



SEC. 5-117.  POUNDMASTER REGULATIONS.



   The poundmaster may issue regulations concerning the size and type of
cage or other means of confinement, the distance from the place of
confinement to adjoining property and other regulations deemed reasonably
necessary by the poundmaster to insure the maintenance of humane, sanitary
conditions and the safety of persons and property.  A copy of the
regulations shall be furnished by the poundmaster upon request.  In applying
the regulations to a given situation, the poundmaster shall take into
consideration the type, nature, disposition and training of the animal
involved.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-67)  (Ord. No. 1043, 2388)



SEC. 5-118.  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ARTICLE.



   Except as otherwise provided, any person failing to comply with any
provisions of this article or any regulation of the poundmaster within ten
days after notice of such regulation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-68)  (Ord. No. 1043, 2388)



SEC. 5-119.  ESCAPED ANIMALS; OWNER TO NOTIFY POUNDMASTER.



   Any person maintaining a wild animal that escapes from its confinement
shall immediately notify the poundmaster of the escape.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-69)  (Ord. No. 1043, 2388)



SEC. 5-120.  IMPOUNDMENT BY CITY.



   (A)   Wild animals found running loose may be impounded.  However,
neither the city, nor its officers, agents or employees shall be liable for
injury or disease to any animal incurred while the animal is being captured,
transported or impounded.  Wild animals, when found to be at large and/or
threatening to injure or damage any person or property, will be deemed to be
a public nuisance and may be summarily destroyed without liability resulting
to the city, its officers, agents or employees.



   (B)   Reclamation by an owner or keeper of any impounded wild animal
will be permitted upon the payment to the poundmaster of the actual cost to
the city of the capture, impounding and care of such animal.



(`64 Code, Sec. 5-70)  (Ord. No. 1043, 2388)



CHAPTER 6:  EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS,
AND UNFAIR PRICING



   6-1.   Purposes



   6-2.   Definitions



   6-3.   Office of Emergency Services; Director duties



   6-4.   Termination of local emergency



   6-5.   Disaster council



   6-6.   Emergency organization



   6-7.   Expenditures



   6-8.   Violations and unfair pricing



   6-9.   Penalty



SEC. 6-1.  PURPOSES.



   The purposes of this chapter are to provide for the protection of
individuals and property within the city in the event of an emergency; the
direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the
emergency functions of the city with other public agencies, corporations,
organizations, and private individuals; and to ensure that citizens are
protected from excessive and unjustified increases in the prices charged,
during or shortly after a declared state of emergency, local emergency, or
state of war emergency, for goods and services that are vital and necessary
for the health, safety, and welfare of consumers.



(`64 Code, Sec. 10-1)  (Ord. No. 2429, 2916, 2942)



SEC. 6-2.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   BUILDING MATERIALS - Lumber, construction tools, windows, and
anything else used in the building or rebuilding of property.



   (B)   CONSUMER FOOD ITEM - Any article that is used or intended for
use for food, drink, confection, or condiment by an individual or animal.



   (C)   DISASTER SERVICE WORKER - A person defined as a disaster
service worker in Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 3101 and Cal. Labor Code,
Section 3211.92.



   (D)   EMERGENCY - Local emergency, state of emergency or state of
war emergency, depending of the context.



   (E)   EMERGENCY SUPPLIES - Includes, but is not limited to, water,
flashlights, radios, batteries, candles, blankets, soaps, diapers, temporary
shelters, tape, toiletries, plywood, nails and hammers.



   (F)   GASOLINE - Any fuel used to power any motor vehicle or power
tool.



   (G)   GOODS - Tangible chattels bought for use primarily for
personal, family, or household purposes, including certificates or coupons
exchangeable for these goods, and including goods that, at the time of the
sale or subsequently, are to be so affixed to real property as to become a
part of the real property, whether or not severable therefrom, but does not
include any vehicle required to be registered under the Vehicle Code, nor any
goods sold with this vehicle if sold under a contract governed by Cal. Civil
Code, Section 2982, and does not include any mobilehome, as defined in
Section 18008 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code, nor any goods sold with
this mobilehome if either are sold under a contract subject to Section
18036.5 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code.



   (H)   HOUSING - Any rental housing with an initial lease term no
longer than one year.



   (I)   LOCAL EMERGENCY - The actual or threatened existence of
conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safely of persons and
property within the city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire,
flood, tsunami, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy
shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the warning by the governor
of the State of an earthquake or volcanic eruption, an earthquake, or other
conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of
war, but not including conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which
conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services,
personnel, equipment, and facilities of the city, requiring the combined
forces of other public agencies to combat.



   (J)   MEDICAL SUPPLIES - Includes, but is not limited to,
prescription and nonprescription medications, bandages, gauze, isopropyl
alcohol, and antibacterial products.



   (K)   PERSON - A person, contractor, business, or other entity.



   (L)   REPAIR AND CONSTRUCTION SERVICES - Services performed by any
person who is required to be licensed under the Contractors’ State License
Law (Chapter 9 (commencing with section 7000) of Division 3 of the Cal.
Business and Professions Code), for repairs to residential or commercial
property of any type that is damaged as a result of a disaster.



   (M)   STATE OF EMERGENCY - An emergency proclaimed by the governor
of the State, as provided in Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 8558(b).



   (N)   STATE OF WAR EMERGENCY - The condition described in Cal.
Gov’t Code, Section 8558(a).



   (O)   TRANSPORTATION, FREIGHT AND STORAGE SERVICES - Any service
that is performed by any company that contracts to move, store, or transport
personal or business property, or rents equipment for those purposes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 10-2)  (Ord. No. 2429, 2815, 2916, 2942)



SEC. 6-3.  OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES; DIRECTOR DUTIES.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Office of Emergency Services
(OES). The director of the OES shall be the city manager. The assistant
director shall be the designated assistant city manager. The deputy director
shall be the fire chief. An emergency services manager shall be appointed by
the deputy director.



   (B)   The director shall:



      (1)   Develop and recommend for adoption by the city council,
emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances and
resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such
plans and agreements. Such plans, agreements, ordinances and resolutions
shall provide, to the extent possible, for the effective mobilization of the
resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any condition
constituting a local emergency, a state of emergency or a state of war
emergency;



      (2)   If the city council is in session, request the city
council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local
emergency;



      (3)   If the city council is not in session, proclaim the
existence or threatened existence of a local emergency. A local emergency
proclaimed by the director shall not remain in effect for more than seven
days unless ratified by the city council;



      (4)   If the city council is not in session, request the
governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the
director, locally available resources are inadequate to cope with an
emergency; and



      (5)   Control and direct the emergency services of the city
and resolve questions of authority and responsibility arising therefrom.



   (C)   In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency, a state
of emergency or the proclamation or existence of a state of war emergency,
the director shall:



      (1)   Promulgate orders and regulations necessary to provide
for the protection of life and property and, at the earliest practicable
time, request the city council to ratify such orders and regulations;



      (2)   Obtain supplies, equipment and other property needed for
the protection of life and property, and bind the city for the fair value
thereof, and, if required immediately, commandeer the same for public use;



      (3)   Require emergency services of any city officer or
employee;



      (4)   Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city
program or agency; and



      (5)   Exercise his/her ordinary powers as city manager, the
special powers conferred on him/her by this chapter or by resolution or
emergency plan adopted by the city council, and powers conferred on him/her
by statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other
lawful authority.



   (D)   In the event of an emergency, the director may repair or
replace a public facility, take any directly related and immediate action
required by that emergency, and procure the necessary equipment, services and
supplies for those purposes, without giving notice for bids to let contracts.
If the director orders any such action, the director shall report to the city
council, at its next meeting, the reasons justifying why the emergency did
not or will not permit a delay resulting from a competitive solicitation for
bids, and why the action was or is necessary to respond to the emergency.



   (E)   The assistant director shall have such other powers and duties
as may be assigned by the director, and shall be acting director if the
director is unavailable during an emergency.



   (F)   The deputy director shall have such other powers and duties as
may be assigned by the director, will oversee the emergency management
program, and shall be acting director if the director and assistant director
are unavailable during an emergency.



   (G)   The emergency services manager shall, under the supervision of
the deputy director, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency
management programs of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 10-3)  (Ord. No. 2429, 2916, 2942)



SEC. 6-4.  TERMINATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY.



   After a local emergency is proclaimed by the city council or the
director, the city council shall review, at least every 30 days until the
local emergency is terminated, the need for continuing the local emergency
and shall proclaim the termination of the local emergency at the earliest
possible date that conditions warrant.



(`64 Code, Sec. 10-4)  (Ord. No. 2429, 2916)



SEC. 6-5.  DISASTER COUNCIL.



   (A)   There is hereby established a disaster council, consisting of
the following:



      (1)   The director of the OES, who shall be the chair;



      (2)   The assistant director of the OES, who shall be vice
chair;



      (3)   The deputy director of the OES;



      (4)   The emergency services manager;



      (5)   The section coordinators designated in the city’s
emergency plan;



      (6)   The mayor; and



      (7)   The chair of the Inter Neighborhood Council Organization.



   (B)   The disaster council shall meet no less than once per year,
and will be responsible for reviewing and recommending plans, policies and
ordinances that will aid in the preparedness, response and recovery from
disasters, including, but not limited to, earthquakes, tsunamis, floods and
other natural or manmade disasters. In the event of the proclamation of a
state of emergency in the county or the proclamation or existence of a state
of war emergency, the disaster council may command the aid of disaster
service workers to assist the director and the emergency organization. The
emergency services manager, under the authority of the disaster council,
shall register and direct the activities of disaster service workers. The
disaster council shall apply for certification by the California Emergency
Council, as provided in Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 8612, and become an
accredited disaster council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 10-5)  (Ord. No. 2429, 2916, 2942)



SEC. 6-6.  EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION.



   All officers and employees of the city, together with volunteers and
all groups, organizations and persons, including disaster service workers,
who may by agreement or operation of law be charged with duties incidental to
the protection of life and property in the city during an emergency, shall
constitute the emergency organization of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 10-6)  (Ord. No. 2429, 2916, 2942)



SEC. 6-7.  EXPENDITURES.



   Any expenditures made by the emergency organization in connection with
emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed
conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants
and property of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 10-7)  (Ord. No. 2429, 2916, 2942)



SEC. 6-8.  VIOLATIONS AND UNFAIR PRICING.



   (A)   During a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war
emergency, no individual shall:



      (1)   Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the
emergency organization in the enforcement of any rule, regulation, order or
directive issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty
imposed on him/her by virtue of this chapter.



      (2)   Do any act forbidden by any rule, regulation, order or
directive issued pursuant to this chapter, including violation of any curfew
so established. However, an affirmative defense to violation of such a curfew
shall be that the person charged was traveling to or from work or school, was
homeless, or was seeking medical treatment.



      (3)   Wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or other
means of identification as a member of the emergency organization of the
city, the county, or the State, unless authority to do so has been granted to
such person by the proper official.



   (B)   Goods and services.  Upon the declaration of an emergency,
and for a period of 30 days following that declaration, it is unlawful for a
person to sell or offer to sell any consumer food items or goods, goods or
services used for emergency cleanup, emergency supplies, medical supplies,
home heating oil, building materials, housing, transportation, freight, and
storage services, or gasoline or other motor fuels for a price of more than
10% above the price charged by that person for those goods or services
immediately prior to the declaration, unless that person can prove that the
increase in price is directly attributable to additional costs imposed upon
it by the supplier of the goods, or directly attributable to additional costs
for labor or materials used to provide the services.



   (C)   Hotels, motels and other short-term rentals.  Upon the
declaration of an emergency, and for a period of 30 days following that
declaration, it is unlawful for any person to rent or lease a hotel or motel
room, or other short-term rental unit, including a vacation rental unit, in
the city for more than 10% above the hotel, motel or other short-term
rental’s regular rates, as advertised immediately prior to declaration of
emergency, unless that person can prove that the increase in price is
directly attributable to additional costs imposed on it for goods or labor
used in the businesses, to seasonal adjustments that are regularly scheduled,
or to previously contracted rates.



   (D)   Construction goods and services.  Upon the declaration of an
emergency, and for a period of 180 days following that declaration, it is
unlawful for a contractor to sell or offer to sell any repair or
reconstruction services, or any services used in emergency cleanup for a
price of more than 10% above the price charged by that person for those
services immediately prior to the proclamation or declaration of emergency,
unless that person can prove that the increase in price was directly
attributable to additional costs imposed on it by the supplier of the goods,
or directly attributable to additional costs for labor or materials used to
provide the services.



   (E)   The provisions of this section may be extended for additional
30-day period by the city council if deemed necessary to protect the lives,
property, or welfare of its citizens.



(`64 Code, Sec. 10-8)  (Ord. No. 2429, 2916, 2942)



SEC. 6-9.  PENALTY.



   Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine of not to exceed $1,000, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six
months, or both.



(`64 Code, Sec. 10-9)  (Ord. No. 2429, 2916, 2942)



CHAPTER 7:  NUISANCES



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   7-1.   Nuisances



   7-2.   Weeds



   7-3.   Unlawful to maintain nuisance



   7-4.   Notice



   7-5.   Form of notice



   7-6.   Abatement by owner



   7-7.   Appeal of notice



   7-8.   Appeal hearing



   7-9.   Conduct of hearings



   7-10.   Decision



   7-11.   Judicial action



   7-12.   Abatement by city



   7-13.   Cost of abatement by city



   7-14.   Costs of abatement as lien



   7-15.   Cost report



   7-16.   Posting notice



   7-17.   Cost report hearing



   7-18.   Filing with county auditor



ARTICLE II.  ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES



   7-25.   Purpose



   7-26.   Definitions



   7-27.   Exceptions



   7-28.   Enforcement



   7-29.   Right of entry



   7-30.   Costs



   7-31.   Authority of manager



   7-32.   Notice to owners



   7-33.   Exceptions to notice to owners



   7-34.   Disposition of low valued vehicle



   7-35.   Forms of notice



   7-36.   Request for public hearing



   7-37.   Hearing procedures



   7-38.   Decision



   7-39.   Judicial action



   7-40.   Abatement by city manager



   7-41.   Notice of abatement to department of motor vehicles



   7-42.   Costs as lien



ARTICLE III.  CIVIL FINES



   7-50.   Application



   7-51.   Definition



   7-52.   Civil citation



   7-53.   Building Code violations



   7-54.   Contents of civil citation



   7-55.   Service



   7-56.   Amount



   7-57.   Payment



   7-58.   Preliminary review



   7-59.   Waiver of fine deposit



   7-60.   Administrative hearings



   7-61.   Hearing procedures



   7-62.   Decision



   7-63.   Judicial review



   7-64.   Collection of delinquent fines



ARTICLE IV.  CURFEW



   7-70.   Curfew; definitions



   7-71.   Curfew; violations



   7-72.   Curfew; exceptions



   7-73.   Parents responsible



ARTICLE V.  GRAFFITI



   7-80.   Declaration of graffiti as a public nuisance



   7-81.   Definitions



   7-82.   Graffiti prohibited



   7-83.   Graffiti removal



   7-84.   Removal of graffiti by private party



   7-85.   Removal of graffiti by city



   7-86.   Prohibition of specified graffiti implements in designated
areas



   7-87.   Prohibition of sale of specified graffiti implements to
minors



   7-88.   Required signs



   7-89.   Storage requirements for graffiti implements



   7-90.   Rewards



   7-91.   Fine for violation



   7-92.   Liability for cost of graffiti abatement; lien procedures



   7-93.   Collection of graffiti abatement costs through the juvenile
court



ARTICLE VI.  LARGE PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR ASSEMBLAGES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



   7-100.   Definitions



   7-101.   Prohibited parties, gatherings or assemblages



   7-102.   Issuance of written warning



   7-103.   Content of warning



   7-104.   Costs for special response services



   7-105.   Collection of costs



   7-106.   Debt owed to city



ARTICLE VII.  NEWSRACKS



   7-110.   Purpose



   7-111.   Findings



   7-112.   Definitions



   7-113.   Regulations for newsracks located on public property



   7-114.   Application for newsrack permit



   7-115.   Indemnity; insurance



   7-116.   Identification decal



   7-117.   Newsrack removal



ARTICLE VIII.  OFFENSES



   7-125.   Consumption and possession of alcohol



   7-126.   Community events exception



   7-127.   Terminal sale; defined



   7-128.   Permit required; exceptions



   7-129.   Prohibited conduct



   7-130.   Golf clubs in public parks



   7-131.   Warning of approach of law enforcement officers prohibited



   7-132.   Obstruction of movement on public ways



   7-133.   Begging prohibited



   7-134.   Proprietor responsible



   7-135.   Parades prohibited without permit



   7-136.   Parks to be closed at dusk; violation



   7-137.   Application for permission to be in a park or recreation
area



   7-138.   Sale of confection, candy, liquid or other refreshment in
wax containers prohibited



   7-139.   Uncapped well prohibited



   7-140.   Abatement by city



   7-141.   Discharge of firearms and other weapons



   7-141.1.   Reporting lost or stolen firearms



   7-142.   Interference with police service dogs prohibited



   7-143.   Urination and defecation prohibited in public



   7-144.   Skateboarding, bicycling, roller skating, inline skating or
razor scooting in public parking lots and on private property



   7-145.   Use of off-street parking



   7-146.   Trespassing on River Ridge Golf Course



   7-147.   Taking off or landing of ultralight vehicles



   7-147.1.   Fireworks



   7-148.   Alcohol consumption by minors prohibited – purpose and
intent



   7-148.1.   Definitions



   7-148.2.   Consumption of alcohol by minor prohibited in public
place, place open to public, or place not open to public



   7-148.3.   Hosting, permitting, or allowing a party, gathering, or
event where minors consuming alcoholic beverages prohibited



   7-148.4.   Protected activities



   7-148.5.   Fines



   7-148.6.   Civil liability for enforcement services



   7-148.7.   Reimbursement for cost of enforcement services



   7-148.8.   Reservation of legal options



   7-148.9.   Administrative hearings



   7-148.10.   Hearing procedures



   7-148.11.   Decision



   7-148.12.   Judicial review



   7-148.13.   Collection of delinquent fines



   7-149.   Residential yard sales



ARTICLE IX.  PROPERTY CONSERVATION



   7-150.   Findings, purpose, and intent



   7-151.   Nuisances; general



   7-152.   Attractive nuisances



   7-153.   Appeal officer



   7-154.   Notices to abate; voluntary abatement; appeal



   7-155.   Appeal procedure



   7-156.   Abatement by city



   7-157.   Abatement and related administrative costs incurred by city



   7-158.   Abatement and related administrative costs as lien



   7-159.   Penalties



   7-160.   Judicial remedies



ARTICLE X.  SHOPPING CARTS



   7-165.   Declaration of public nuisance



   7-166.   Definitions



   7-167.   Abandoned shopping cart



   7-168.   Administration and enforcement



   7-169.   Assessments for shopping cart removal; notice, hearings,
sale



   7-170.   Identification by owner



   7-171.   Removal from premises prohibited; exceptions



   7-172.   Abandonment prohibited



   7-173.   Unlawful possession



ARTICLE XI.  SOUND REGULATION



   7-180.   Declaration of policy



   7-181.   Excessive sound as public nuisance



   7-182.   Definitions



   7-183.   Decibel measurement criteria



   7-184.   Designated sound zones



   7-185.   Exterior sound standards



   7-186.   Interior sound standards



   7-187.   Sound level measurement



   7-188.   Exemptions for specified activities



   7-189.   Air conditioning and refrigeration systems



   7-190.   Broadcasting in certain areas



   7-191.   Penalties for violations on public property



   7-192.   Violation



   7-193.   Conviction; misdemeanor



   7-194.   Lien on property



ARTICLE XI.  INLAND WATERWAYS



DIVISION 1.  IN GENERAL



   7-200.   Definitions



   7-201.   Seaworthiness required



   7-202.   Public way; watercourse identification



   7-203.   City manager's powers



   7-204.   Public access; permits for special events



   7-205.   Marking, removing sunken vessels



   7-206.   Responsibility of owner



DIVISION 2.  REGULATION OF VESSELS



   7-210.   Operation of vessels



   7-211.   Living aboard and discharge of refuse prohibited



   7-212.   Moorage; abandonment of vessels; obstruction



   7-213.   Disposition of abandoned, stray, grounded or sunken vessels



   7-214.   Use of inflammables on moored vessel



DIVISION 3.  REGULATION OF CONDUCT



   7-220.   Unauthorized boarding or tampering with vessels



   7-221.   Commercial activity; moorage of commercial vessel; dock
rental



   7-222.   Limited commercial moorage permit



   7-223.   Docking permit required; issuance; prohibited activities



   7-224.   Revocation of permits



   7-225.   Request for public hearing



   7-226.   Hearing procedures



   7-227.   Decision



   7-228.   Judicial action



   7-229.   Fishing restricted



   7-230.   Construction of floats and structures; dredging



   7-231.   Storage on floats and seawalls



   7-232.   Prohibited activities



   7-233.   Permit fees



ARTICLE XIII.  GRANDFATHERED ESTABLISHMENTS SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



   7-240.   Purpose



   7-241.   Applicability



   7-242.   Declaration of nuisance



   7-243.   Unlawful to maintain nuisance



   7-244.   Notice



   7-245.   Form of notice



   7-246.   Abatement by owner



   7-247.   Appeal of notice



   7-248.   Hearing



   7-249.   Conduct of hearing



   7-250.   Decision



   7-251.   Judicial action



   7-252.   Abatement by city



   7-253.   Cost of abatement by city



   7-254.   Cost of abatement as lien



   7-254.   Cost report



   7-256.   Hearing on cost report; imposition of special assessment



ARTICLE XIV.  REGULATION OF PRIVATE PATROL OPERATORS, PROPRIETARY PRIVATE
SECURITY OFFICERS, AND SECURITY OFFICERS



   7-260.   Definitions



   7-261.   Uniforms



   7-262.   Reports of violations of laws



ARTICLE XV.  PUBLIC LIBRARY RULES OF CONDUCT AND EXCLUSION PROCESS



   7-270.   Purpose



   7-271.   Definitions



   7-272.   Rules of conduct



   7-273.   Rules of conduct enforcement



   7-274.   Appeal procedure



   7-275.   Violation of warning or exclusion notice



ARTICLE XVI. CANNABIS AND MEDICAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES



   7-280.   Definitions



   7-281.   Cannabis dispensaries and medical cannabis dispensaries
prohibited



   7-282.   Cannabis cultivation prohibited



   7-283.   Recreational cannabis delivery prohibited



   7-284.   Medical cannabis delivery



   7-285.   Remedies



ARTICLE XVII.  REGULATION OF SMOKING



   7-290.   Definitions



   7-291.   Smoking regulations



   7-292.   Other restrictions



   7-293.   Posting of signs



   7-294.   Violations



ARTICLE XVIII.  ORMOND BEACH REGULATIONS



   7-300.   Purpose and scope



   7-301.   Prohibited activities



   7-302.   Violations



   7-303.   Other applicable laws



ARTICLE XIX.  RECORDING NOTICES OF VIOLATIONS



   7-310.   Purpose



   7-311.   Qualifying violations



   7-312.   Procedures



   7-313.   Service of notice of violation



   7-314.   Appeal process



   7-315.   Appeal hearing



   7-316.   Notice of compliance



   7-317.   Prohibition against issuance of city permits



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 7-1.  NUISANCES.



   The city council declares that the following things, conditions, acts
or omissions are nuisances and authorizes the city manager to abate any such
nuisance in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.



   (A)   All weeds growing upon any private property or sidewalks or
streets adjacent to private property having attained such a large growth and
being dry as to become a fire menace or are otherwise noxious or dangerous.



   (B)   All rubbish, dirt and tree leaves found upon private property
or sidewalks or streets adjacent to private property which are dangerous or
injurious to neighboring property or the public health and welfare.



   (C)   Any structure, grass, dirt, or thing which in any manner
interferes with, obstructs or endangers the free passage of pedestrians or
vehicles upon, along or in public sidewalks, alleys, thoroughfares,
buildings, parks or places.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-1)  (Ord. No. 1898, 2399)



SEC. 7-2.  WEEDS.



   WEEDS includes all of the following:



   (A)   Plants which bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature;



   (B)   Sagebrush, chaparral, dry grass, stubble or brush; and



   (C)   Poison oak and poison ivy.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-2)  (Ord. No. 1898, 2061, 2399)



SEC. 7-3.  UNLAWFUL TO MAINTAIN NUISANCE.



   The owner of any property on or adjacent to which any nuisance is
located shall promptly abate such nuisance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3)  (Ord. No. 1898, 2399)



SEC. 7-4.  NOTICE.



   The city manager may require the owner of any property, on or adjacent
to which any nuisance is located, to abate the nuisance. The notice to abate
nuisance shall be written and mailed to each person to whom such property is
assessed in the last equalized assessment role available.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3.1)  (Ord. No. 2399)



SEC. 7-5.  FORM OF NOTICE.



   The form of notice shall be substantially similar to the following:



NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE



Please be advised that on                                  
,               , (brief description of nuisance) was/were found upon
or in front of the property located at                          
      , and that, pursuant to Chapter 7 of the Oxnard City Code, this
constitutes a nuisance which must be abated. If the nuisance is not abated
within ten days from the date of this notice, the city will abate the
nuisance.  The costs of such abatement shall be assessed upon the above
described property and will constitute a lien upon such property until paid.



If any owner of such property has an objection to the proposed abatement,
that owner shall file with the city clerk a written request for an appeal
before a hearing officer within ten days of receiving this notice from the
city manager.



Dated this               day of                          
                              ,                 .



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3.2)  (Ord. No. 2399)



SEC. 7-6.  ABATEMENT BY OWNER.



   Upon receipt of a notice, the property owner may abate the nuisance at
his/her own expense. 



   Nevertheless, in any case in which a notice to abate is issued, the
city manager may impose a lien on the property limited to the costs incurred
by the city in enforcing abatement upon the property, including
investigation, boundary determination, measurement, clerical, preparation and
service of notice, and other related costs (“notice costs”).



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3.3)  (Ord. No. 2399)



SEC. 7-7.  APPEAL OF NOTICE.



   Any property owner having an objection to a notice to abate nuisance
shall file with the city clerk a written request for an appeal before a
hearing officer within ten days of receiving a notice from the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3.4)  (Ord. No. 2399)



SEC. 7-8.  APPEAL HEARING.



   On receiving a request for an appeal hearing, the city clerk shall send
the request to the hearing officer.  The hearing officer shall promptly
schedule and conduct the matter for hearing.  At least ten days before the
hearing, the hearing officer shall mail written notice of the date, time and
place of hearing to the property owner.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3.5)  (Ord. No. 2399)



SEC. 7-9.  CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.



   (A)   All hearings shall be open to the public.



   (B)   The property owner shall first present evidence to justify his
or her failure to comply with the notice to abate nuisance.  Thereafter, a
representative of the city may present evidence.  The burden of proof to
justify noncompliance with the notice to abate nuisance is on the property
owner.



   (C)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
fashion and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3.6)  (Ord. No. 2399)



SEC. 7-10.  DECISION.



   Within 14 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
shall issue and mail to the property owner a written decision containing a
statement of the reasons on which the decision is based.  The hearing
officer shall serve a copy of such decision on the city manager.  If, after
an appeal hearing, the hearing officer reduces the abatement requirements of
the notice, the decision of the hearing officer shall be final.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3.7)  (Ord. No. 2399)



SEC. 7-11.  JUDICIAL ACTION.



   The property owner may seek judicial review of the decision of the
hearing officer in accordance with Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, Sections
1094.5 and 1094.6.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3.8)  (Ord. No. 2399, 2493)



SEC. 7-12.  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   If the nuisance is not abated within the time specified in the notice,
or within ten days from the date of the denial of a property owner's appeal,
the city manager shall abate the nuisance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3.9)  (Ord. No. 2399)



SEC. 7-13.  COST OF ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   The costs of abatement of a nuisance, including notice costs and appeal
costs, if any, shall be paid by the person creating, causing, committing or
maintaining the nuisance and shall be collectible by the city as a civil debt.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3.10)  (Ord. No. 2399)



SEC. 7-14.  COSTS OF ABATEMENT AS LIEN.



   The costs of abatement, including notice costs and appeal costs, if
any, shall be a lien against the property on which such nuisance is
maintained or against the property adjacent to the place where such nuisance
exists, as well as a personal obligation of the owner of such property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3.11)  (Ord. No. 2399)



SEC. 7-15.  COST REPORT.



   The city manager shall prepare a nuisance abatement cost report
containing the following information:



   (A)   Description of the property on which the nuisance exists or
which is adjacent to the place on which the nuisance exists;



   (B)   The name and address of the person creating, causing,
committing or maintaining the nuisance;



   (C)   Name and address of the owner of the property;



   (D)   Date of serving notice;



   (E)   Date of hearing and decision on appeal, if any; and



   (F)   Costs of abatement, including notice costs and appeal costs.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3.12)  (Ord. No. 2399)



SEC. 7-16.  POSTING NOTICE.



   The city manager shall post the cost report for at least three days
prior to its submission to the city council on or near the city council
chambers, with a notice of the time of submission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3.13)  (Ord. No. 2399)



SEC. 7-17.  COST REPORT HEARING.



   At a public hearing, the city council shall consider the cost report
with any objections of any property owner liable to be assessed for the costs
stated in the report.  The city council may modify the cost report as
appropriate.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3.14)  (Ord. No. 2399)



SEC. 7-18.  FILING WITH COUNTY AUDITOR.



   Upon approval by the city council, the city manager shall file a
certified copy of the cost report with the county auditor.  The city manager
shall request the county auditor to enter each assessment on the county tax
roll and to collect the amount of the assessment at the time and in the
manner of ordinary municipal taxes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-3.15)  (Ord. No. 2399)



ARTICLE II.  ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES



SEC. 7-25.  PURPOSE.



   The city council finds that the accumulation or storage of abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof (“abandoned
vehicles”) on private or public property, not including highways, creates a
condition that reduces the value of private property, promotes blight and
deterioration, invites plundering, creates fire hazards, constitutes an
attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors,
creates a harborage for rodents and insects and is injurious to the health,
safety and general welfare.  Therefore, any abandoned vehicle, on private or
public property, not including highways, is hereby declared to constitute a
public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions
of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-23)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-26.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   HIGHWAY - Any place publicly maintained and open to the use by
the public for vehicular travel.



   (B)   OWNER - The person shown on the last equalized assessment roll
as owner of the property on which an abandoned vehicle is located.



   (C)   VEHICLE - Any device that may propel any person or property
upon a highway, except any device moved by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.



   (D)   VEHICLE OWNER - The last registered owner or legal owner of
record of an abandoned vehicle.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-24)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-27.  EXCEPTIONS.



   This article does not apply to:



   (A)   A vehicle or parts thereof that is completely within an
enclosed structure or that is located behind a solid fence six feet or more
in height and not visible from public or private property.



   (B)   A vehicle or parts thereof that is stored in a lawful manner
in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, vehicle dealer, or
junk dealer, or when such storage is necessary to the operation of a lawfully
conducted business or commercial enterprise.



   (C)   These exceptions shall not, however, authorize the maintenance
of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than
this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-25)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-28.  ENFORCEMENT.



   This article shall be administered and enforced by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-26)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-29.  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   In the enforcement of this article, any authorized city employee or
contractor may enter upon private property to examine an abandoned vehicle,
or obtain information as to the identity of an abandoned vehicle or to abate
an abandoned vehicle.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-27)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-30.  COSTS.



   The city council may by resolution determine and fix an amount to be
assessed as administrative costs and the cost of abatement of an abandoned
vehicle.  In any case in which a ten-day notice of intention to abate is
issued, the city manager may impose a lien on the subject property limited to
the costs incurred by the city in the abatement of the abandoned vehicle,
including towing, and the costs of investigation, clerical, preparation and
service of notice, and other related costs (“administrative costs”).



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-28)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-31.  AUTHORITY OF MANAGER.



   The city manager shall have the authority to abate an abandoned vehicle
on private property or public property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-29)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-32.  NOTICE TO OWNERS.



   (A)   Prior to abatement of an abandoned vehicle, the city manager
shall serve a ten-day notice of intention to abate such vehicle on the
owner.  The ten-day notice of intention to abate shall be mailed by
registered or certified mail to the owner.



   (B)   If the identification numbers are available to determine
ownership, prior to abatement of an abandoned vehicle, the city manager shall
serve a ten-day notice of intention to abate such vehicle owner.  The
ten-day notice of intention to abate shall be mailed, by registered or
certified mail, to the vehicle owner.



   (C)   In all cases, the city manager shall post the ten-day notice
of intention on the vehicle.



   (D)   The notice shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of
the owner and the vehicle owner. The notice shall inform the owner and
vehicle owner that he/she may appear in person at a hearing or may submit a
sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of such
vehicle on the property, with his/her reasons for such denial, in lieu of
appearing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-30)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-33.  EXCEPTIONS TO NOTICE TO OWNERS.



   (A)   A ten-day notice of intention is not required if the owner has
signed a disclaimer/waiver of liability and/or the vehicle owner has signed a
release of interest waiving further interest in the abandoned vehicle.



   (B)   The ten-day notice of intention is not required if the
abandoned vehicle is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission,
or wheels, or is incapable of being towed, or is valued at less than $200
(“low valued vehicle”) by an authorized city employee, and is determined
by the city manager to present an immediate threat to public health or safety.



   (C)   This section applies only to abandoned vehicles located upon
property that is zoned for agricultural use or not improved with a
residential structure.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-31)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-34.  DISPOSITION OF LOW VALUED VEHICLE.



   (A)   Prior to final disposition of a low valued vehicle, which
evidence of registration was covered pursuant to section 7-41, the city
manager shall provide a notice to such vehicle owner of the city's intent to
dispose of such vehicle.  The notice shall be mailed by registered or
certified mail to the vehicle owner.



   (B)   If such vehicle is not claimed and removed within 12 days
after the notice is mailed, from a location specified in Cal. Vehicle Code,
Section 22662, the city manager may proceed with final disposition.  The
city or contractor shall not be liable for damage caused to such vehicle
disposed of pursuant to this section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-32)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-35.  FORMS OF NOTICE.



   All notices required by this article shall be in a form as approved by
the city attorney.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-33)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-36.  REQUEST FOR PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   A request for hearing shall be filed with the city clerk. 
Upon receiving a request for hearing, the city clerk shall send the request
to the hearing officer.  The hearing officer shall promptly schedule and
conduct a hearing.



   (B)   The hearing officer shall mail the notice of the hearing at
least ten days before the hearing to the owner and to the vehicle owner,
unless the identification numbers are not available to determine vehicle
ownership.



   (C)   If a timely request for a hearing is not received, the city
manager shall have the authority to abate the abandoned vehicle without
holding a public hearing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-34)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-37.  HEARING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   All hearings shall be open to the public.



   (B)   The owner or vehicle owner may first present evidence to
justify his/her failure to comply with the ten-day notice of intention to
abate nuisance.  This evidence may be presented by live testimony or sworn
written statement.  Thereafter, a representative of the city may present
evidence.



   (C)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
fashion and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-35)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-38.  DECISION.



   Within 14 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
shall issue and mail to the owner and/or vehicle owner a written decision
containing a statement of the reasons on which the decision is based. The
hearing officer shall serve a copy of such decision on the city manager. 
The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and shall exhaust
available administrative remedies.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-36)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-39.  JUDICIAL ACTION.



   The owner and/or vehicle owner may seek judicial review of the decision
of the hearing officer in accordance with the Cal. Code of Civil Procedure,
Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-37)  (Ord. No. 2410, 2493)



SEC. 7-40.  ABATEMENT BY CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   Five days from the date of mailing of notice to the owner
and/or vehicle owner of a decision of the hearing officer that an abandoned
vehicle is a public nuisance, the city manager may abate such vehicle.



   (B)   After the city manager abates a vehicle no person thereafter
shall reconstruct or make operable the vehicle, unless the vehicle qualifies
for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license
plates, pursuant to Cal. Vehicle Code, Section 5004, in which case the
vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-38)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-41.  NOTICE OF ABATEMENT TO DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES.



   Within five days after the date of abatement of an abandoned vehicle,
the city manager shall provide notice to the department of motor vehicles
identifying such vehicle and any evidence of registration available,
including but not limited to, the registration card, certificate of
ownership, or license plate of such vehicle.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-39)  (Ord. No. 2410)



SEC. 7-42.  COSTS AS LIEN.



   If the administrative costs and the cost of abatement that are charged
against the owner are not paid within 30 days of the date of the decision of
the hearing officer, such costs plus the administrative costs of assessment
shall be assessed against the property pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Section
38773.5.  All such costs shall have the same priority as city taxes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-39.1)  (Ord. No. 2410)



ARTICLE III.  CIVIL FINES



SEC. 7-50.  APPLICATION.



   (A)   This chapter makes a violator of any code provision subject to
a civil fine.



   (B)   By adopting this chapter, the city council does not intend to
limit the discretion of an enforcement officer to impose any remedy
available, civil or criminal, for violations of the code.



   (C)   The issuance of a civil citation shall be solely at the
discretion of the enforcement officer and shall be one of several remedies
available to the enforcement officer.



   (D)   Notwithstanding any lease, license or any other instrument or
agreement, the owner of real property has the right to enter upon his/her own
property to the extent reasonably necessary to abate any public nuisance or
to correct any violation of the code existing thereon.



   (E)   The provisions of this chapter shall be an implied term of any
instrument affecting the right to possession of real property located in the
city.



   (F)   Because violations of the code may seriously impact the
health, safety and welfare of the general public, this chapter imposes strict
civil liability upon violators of the code.



   (G)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the record owners
of a parcel according to the last equalized assessment roll and a lessee or
sublessee of a parcel have notice of any code violation existing on the
parcel.



(`64 Code, Sec. 21-1)  (Ord. No. 2488)



SEC. 7-51.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   BUILDING CODE VIOLATION - Any violation of a code adopted by
the city as set forth in Chapter 14 of this City Code.



   (B)   CODE VIOLATION - Any violation of the code or other ordinance.



   (C)   CITY MANAGER - The city manager or designee.



   (D)   CIVIL CITATION - A notice issued by an enforcement officer
pursuant to this chapter that there has been a violation of the code.



   (E)   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER - An individual designated by the city
manager to enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   (F)   HEARING OFFICER - The individual designated by the city
manager to serve as the hearing officer for administrative hearings.



   (G)   ISSUANCE DATE - The day a civil citation is personally served
on a responsible person, is mailed to a responsible person, or is posted on
real property where a property related violation occurs.



   (H)   ISSUED - The giving, mailing, or posting of a civil citation.



   (I)   NOTICE OF DECISION - A notice that informs a responsible
person of a decision made regarding provisions of this chapter.



   (J)   RESPONSIBLE PERSON - Any of the following:



      (1)   An individual causing or committing a code violation;



      (2)   An individual, by his/her action or failure to act,
maintains or allows a code violation to continue;



      (3)   An individual whose agent, employee, or independent
contractor causes or commits a code violation by his/her action or failure to
act;



      (4)   An owner of or a lessee or sublessee with the current
right of possession of real property on which a code violation occurs;



      (5)   An on-site manager of a business customarily working
daily at the site when the business is open and responsible for the
activities at such business; and



      (6)   A natural person or legal entity, and the owners,
majority stockholders, corporate officers, trustees, and general partners of
a legal entity.



(`64 Code, Sec. 21-2)  (Ord. No. 2488, 2764)



SEC. 7-52.  CIVIL CITATION.



   (A)   After determining that a responsible person has violated a
provision of the code, an enforcement officer may issue a civil citation to
that person.



   (B)   If, following an investigation, the enforcement officer has
determined that a responsible person committed a code violation, an
enforcement officer may issue a civil citation for a violation the officer
did not see occur.



   (C)   A responsible person receiving a civil citation shall be
liable for and shall pay to the city the fine imposed in the civil citation
on the date specified in the civil citation.



   (D)   Every individual who applies for and receives a permit,
license, or other approval (e.g., subdivision map, special use permit,
variance, zoning clearance), shall comply with all conditions imposed upon
the issuance of the permit, license or other approval.  If an individual
violates any condition of such permit, license or other approval, an
enforcement officer may issue such individual a civil citation and that
individual shall be liable for payment of any civil fines.



   (E)   Each day a responsible person allows a code violation to exist
shall be a separate violation and that person shall be subject to a separate
fine.



   (F)   A civil citation may charge a code violation for one or more
days on which a violation exists and for violation of one or more code
sections.



   (G)   The city council, hearing officer or staff may consider the
fact that an individual has been issued civil citations when determining
whether to grant, suspend, revoke, or deny any permit, license, or other
approval for the individual and such civil citation is evidence that the
individual has committed acts that are a threat to the health, safety and
welfare of the general public.



(`64 Code, Sec. 21-3)  (Ord. No. 2488)



SEC. 7-53.  BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   When a responsible person is issued a notice of a building
code violation that does not create an immediate danger to health or safety,
the enforcement officer shall provide a 14-day correction period to allow the
responsible person time to correct the violation. Notwithstanding section
7-52, no responsible person issued a notice of a building code violation
shall be issued a civil citation unless the violation continues after the 14
days allowed for its correction, including any extensions granted.



   (B)   A responsible person issued a notice of a building code
violation may request an extension of the correction period provided that
such request is filed with the city manager prior to the expiration of the
original 14-day period.



   (C)   The city manager may grant a reasonable extension of the
period of time to correct a violation if the responsible person has submitted
substantial evidence showing that the correction cannot be made within the
14-day period. The city manager's decision to grant or deny the request for
an extension shall be in writing and shall be final.



   (D)   The filing for an extension does not, unless granted, extend
the 14-day correction periods.



   (E)   If a building code violation has not been corrected by the end
of the correction period, the enforcement officer may issue a civil citation.
The enforcement officer may issue additional citations and impose fines for
every day the building code violation continues uncorrected from the date the
civil citation is issued.



(`64 Code, Sec. 21-4)  (Ord. No. 2488, 2764)



SEC. 7-54.  CONTENTS OF CIVIL CITATION.



   (A)   Every civil citation shall contain the following:



      (1)   Name of the responsible person;



      (2)   Date on which an inspection established the code
violation;



      (3)   The code section violated;



      (4)   Address where the code violation occurred;



      (5)   Description of the code violation;



      (6)   The amount and effective date of the fine;



      (7)   Procedures to pay the fine;



      (8)   For building code violations, the date that the 30-day
correction period expires and the procedure to request an extension of the
30-day period;



      (9)   Description of the procedure for requesting a waiver of
fine deposit and administrative hearing to contest a civil citation;



      (10)   Hearing date, time and location in the event that a
responsible person requests a hearing regarding the waiver of fine deposit
and/or an administrative hearing;



      (11)   A statement that the code violation is a public
nuisance and that collection of any unpaid fines and/or nuisance abatement
costs may be placed as a special assessment or lien against the property
where a violation occurs;



      (12)   Signature of the enforcement officer issuing the civil
citation;



      (13)   Date of issuance; and



      (14)   Any other information deemed necessary by the city
attorney for enforcement or collection purposes.



   (B)   A self-addressed envelope in which the responsible person may
mail to the city the fine or request a hearing regarding the waiver of fine
deposit and/or an administrative hearing shall accompany any civil citation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 21-5)  (Ord. No. 2488)



SEC. 7-55.  SERVICE.



   A civil citation may be served as follows:



   (A)   An enforcement officer may personally serve the civil citation
on the responsible person.



   (B)   A citation may be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid,
to the responsible person's last known address. For a property related
violation, an address shown on the county's last equalized property tax
assessment rolls is deemed to be a valid address for service. For all other
violations, any address known for the responsible person is deemed to be a
valid address for service. A declaration of service shall be completed and
attached to the copy of the citation mailed to the responsible person.



   (C)   In the case of a property related code violation, an
enforcement officer may post the property in a conspicuous location with a
copy of the citation. A copy of the citation shall also be mailed to the
responsible person's last known address. An address shown on the county's
last equalized property tax assessment rolls is deemed to be a valid address
for service.



   (D)   Service is deemed accomplished on the date the citation is
personally served, mailed, or posted in accordance with this section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 21-6)  (Ord. No. 2488, 2824)



SEC. 7-56.  AMOUNT.



   (A)   The amount of the fines imposed for violating provisions of
the code shall be established in a schedule of fines adopted by resolution of
the city council.  The schedule of fines may include escalating fine amounts
for repeat code violations occurring within specified periods of time.



   (B)   The schedule of fines may specify the amount of interest and
penalties owed for any fine not timely paid.



(`64 Code, Sec. 21-7)  (Ord. No. 2488)



SEC. 7-57.  PAYMENT.



   (A)   Fines are due on the day specified in the civil citation or,
in the event of an appeal, on the date specified by the hearing officer.



   (B)   Fines shall be paid in a manner as specified on the civil
citation issued to the responsible person.



   (C)   Payment of a fine shall not excuse the responsible person from
correcting the code violation or abating a public nuisance.  The issuance of
a civil citation and/or payment of a fine does not bar the city from pursuing
any other enforcement action regarding a code violation that is not
corrected, including issuing additional civil citations and/or criminal
complaints.



(`64 Code, Sec. 21-8)  (Ord. No. 2488, 2764)



SEC. 7-58.  PRELIMINARY REVIEW.



   (A)   If the request is made within 14 days of the date the civil
citation is issued, any responsible person issued a civil citation may
request a preliminary review.



   (B)   A request for preliminary review shall be made on a
preliminary review request form and shall include all information that the
responsible person desires the individual conducting the preliminary review
to consider.  The request for preliminary review shall be filed with the
city manager.



   (C)   The preliminary review shall be conducted by an individual
designated in writing by the city manager.  The purpose of the preliminary
review is to identify and dismiss any improperly issued civil citation.



   (D)   The preliminary review shall include a review of the civil
citation, a review of the written request for preliminary review and a review
of any evidence submitted by the responsible person.



   (E)   The responsible person shall be notified of the results of the
preliminary review within ten working days of submitting a preliminary review
request form.  The decision at the preliminary review shall not be subject
to judicial review.



   (F)   A request for preliminary review shall not extend any time
periods for compliance, the due date of any fine imposed, or the time to
request an administrative hearing.



   (G)   If the individual conducting the preliminary review concludes
that no code violation occurred or that the individual was not responsible
for the code violation, the civil citation shall be dismissed, without
prejudice.



(`64 Code, Sec. 21-9)  (Ord. No. 2488, 2764)



SEC. 7-59.  WAIVER OF FINE DEPOSIT.



   (A)   A responsible person requesting an administrative hearing may
also request a waiver of the fine deposit. The request for waiver of fine
deposit must be received by the city manager within 30 days of the issuance
of the civil citation. The city manager shall designate an address to submit
or mail requests for waivers of fine deposits.



   (B)   The hearing officer shall set the date, time, and location for
hearings regarding requests for waivers of fine deposits. A responsible
person requesting a waiver of a fine deposit bears the burden of establishing
by substantial evidence that he/she does not have the financial ability to
deposit the fine. Unless the hearing is otherwise continued, failure of the
responsible person to attend the hearing shall constitute an abandonment of
the request for a waiver of the fine deposit.



   (C)   All requests for waiver of the fine deposit shall be granted
or denied by the hearing officer at the hearing. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the hearing officer shall set the date for the administrative
hearing which shall be within 45 days of the conclusion of the hearing
regarding the request for waiver of the fine deposit. A copy of the notice of
decision shall be delivered or mailed to the responsible person within five
working days of the conclusion of the hearing.



   (D)   If the waiver is denied, the responsible person shall deposit
the fine amount within 30 days of the date on the notice of decision. Failure
of a responsible person to make the deposit within the time required shall be
deemed an abandonment of the administrative hearing.



   (E)   A request for a waiver of the fine deposit does not extend any
time periods set forth in this chapter, except the time for deposit of the
fine. The hearing officer's decision shall be final and is not subject to
judicial review.



(`64 Code, Sec. 21-10)  (Ord. No. 2488, 2764)



SEC. 7-60.  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.



   (A)   A responsible person receiving a civil citation may request an
administrative hearing. Any request for an administrative hearing shall be
filed with the city manager within 30 days of the issuance of the civil
citation. The city manager shall designate an address to submit or mail
requests for administrative hearings.



   (B)   A request for an administrative hearing shall be made on an
administrative hearing request form and shall include the grounds for
requesting an administrative hearing. The request shall be accompanied by a
deposit of the fine amount imposed in the civil citation.



   (C)   The hearing officer shall set the date, time, and location for
administrative hearings. Unless the hearing is otherwise continued, a
responsible person requesting an administrative hearing shall attend the
hearing on the date, time, and location set by the hearing officer. Failure
to attend the hearing shall constitute an abandonment of the request for an
administrative hearing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 21-11)  (Ord. No. 2488, 2764)



SEC. 7-61.  HEARING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The administrative hearing shall be conducted by a hearing
officer on the date, time, and location set by the hearing officer.



   (B)   The city manager shall ensure that all information relevant to
the civil citation is provided to the hearing officer prior to the hearing
date.  The city manager shall provide the responsible person with a copy off
all information provided to the hearing officer.



   (C)   The responsible person shall be allowed to testify and to
present evidence relevant to any financial hardship or any code violation
specified in the civil citation.



   (D)   The civil citation and any other reports prepared by the
enforcement officer concerning the code violation or attempted correction of
the code violation provided to the hearing officer shall be accepted by the
hearing officer as prima facie evidence of the code violation and of the
facts stated in such documents.



   (E)   Neither the enforcement officer nor any other representative
of the city shall be required to attend an administrative hearing.  The
hearing officer shall not require that the enforcement officer submit any
evidence other than a copy of the civil citation.  The enforcement officer
may, in his/her discretion, appear at an administrative hearing and/or submit
additional evidence.



   (F)   If a request is made by the responsible person or a
representative of the city setting forth good cause for a continuance, the
hearing officer may continue an administrative hearing.



   (G)   If a continuance is granted, a new hearing date shall be set
within 45 days and shall be specified in the notice of continuance.  If a
continuance is denied, the administrative hearing shall proceed as
scheduled.  The decision of the hearing officer to grant or deny a
continuance shall be final and is not subject to judicial review.



   (H)   An administrative hearing shall be conducted informally
without strict adherence to the legal rules of evidence.



   (I)   Failure of the responsible person to appear at a hearing shall
constitute an abandonment of the hearing and a failure to exhaust
administrative remedies concerning the violation set forth in the civil
citation.  Failure to appear by the responsible person shall be noted on the
notice of decision by the hearing officer which will be mailed to the
responsible person.



   (J)   The hearing officer may continue any hearing to request
additional information from the enforcement officer, the responsible person,
or representatives of such persons prior to issuing a written decision.  The
hearing officer is not required to continue the hearing on the date the
administrative hearing is held.  A hearing is not closed until the hearing
officer receives any additional information requested pursuant to this
subdivision.



(`64 Code, Sec. 21-12)  (Ord. No. 2488, 2764, 2824)



SEC. 7-62.  DECISION.



   (A)   Within 15 working days after closing the hearing, the hearing
officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or dismiss the civil
citation. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final.



   (B)   The hearing officer may not increase or reduce any fine
specified in a civil citation.



   (C)   The notice of decision shall be personally delivered or mailed
to the responsible person.



   (D)   If the hearing officer dismisses the civil citation, the city
shall, within 30 days of the date of the notice of decision, refund to the
responsible person any fine deposited with the city.



   (E)   If the hearing officer upholds a civil citation when the fine
deposit has been waived, the hearing officer shall specify in the notice of
decision the due date for payment of the fine.



(`64 Code, Sec. 21-13)  (Ord. No. 2488, 2824)



SEC. 7-63.  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   (A)   The responsible person may seek judicial review of the hearing
officer's decision by filing an appeal with the Ventura County Superior Court
Clerk within 20 calendar days after the responsible person receives a copy of
the notice of decision in accordance with Cal. Gov't Code, Section 53069.4. 
Any appeal filed with the superior court shall contain a proof of service
showing that a copy of the appeal was served upon the city.  The responsible
person must pay the appropriate filing fees.



   (B)   Judicial review is not available for the following:



      (1)   An administrative decision at the conclusion of a
preliminary review;



      (2)   An administrative decision regarding a request to extend
the 14-day correction period for building code violations;



      (3)   An administrative decision regarding a waiver of the
fine deposit; or



      (4)   An abandonment of an administrative hearing by a
responsible person by failing to appear at the administrative fearing or
failing to deposit the appropriate fine amount.



   (C)   Within 15 days of any request, the city attorney or designee
shall forward to the superior court, the appropriate notice of decision and
civil citation for any matter appealed to the superior court.  If the
superior court reverses any decision of the hearing officer, the city shall
refund the superior court filing fee and any fine deposit paid by a
responsible person.



(`64 Code, Sec. 21-14)  (Ord. No. 2488, 2764)



SEC. 7-64.  COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT FINES.



   (A)   The city manager may pursue any and all legal and equitable
remedies for the collection of delinquent fines, including interest and
penalties.



   (B)   If an individual has any delinquent fines, interest,
penalties, liens or assessments, the city manager may refuse to issue,
extend, or renew a permit, license, or other approval pertaining to the
property that is the subject of the civil citation and delinquent fines.



   (C)   The city attorney may issue a criminal citation or complaint
against any responsible person not timely paying any fine due to the city.



   (D)   Any code violation shall constitute a public nuisance.  To
gain compliance, the city manager may seek to abate the public nuisance and
collect the costs incurred by the city by recording a nuisance abatement lien
and/or special assessment against the property where a property-related code
violation occurred pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Sections 38773.1 and 38773.5.



   (E)   Any delinquent fines, interest and penalties may be recovered
as a lien or special assessment against the property of the responsible
person.



   (F)   Prior to recording a lien or special assessment, the city
manager shall prepare a cost report itemizing the amount owed by the
responsible person.



   (G)   The city manager shall notify each responsible person of the
time, date and location that the city council shall consider any cost report
imposing a lien or special assessment on the property of the responsible
person.



   (H)   At a public hearing, the city council shall consider the cost
report with any objections of any responsible person liable to be assessed
for the costs stated in the report.  The city council may modify the cost
report as appropriate.



   (I)   Upon approval by the city council, the city manager shall file
a certified copy of the cost report with the county auditor.  The city
manager shall request the auditor to enter each assessment on the county tax
roll and to collect the amount of the assessment at the time and in the
manner of ordinary municipal taxes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 21-15)  (Ord. No. 2488, 2764)



ARTICLE IV.  CURFEW



SEC. 7-70.  CURFEW; DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this article, the following words have the following
meanings:



   (A)   CURFEW HOURS - The time between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of
the following day.



   (B)   EMERGENCY - An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action, including but not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.



   (C)   ESTABLISHMENT - Any privately-owned place of business operated
for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to,
any place of amusement or entertainment.



   (D)   GUARDIAN -



      (1)   A person who, under court order, is responsible for the
care and maintenance of a minor; or



      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been
placed by a court.



   (E)   MINOR - Any person under the age of 18 years.



   (F)   OPERATOR - Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment, including
the members of partners of an association or partnership and the officers of
a corporation.



   (G)   PARENT - A person who is:



      (1)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of
another person; or



      (2)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or
guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.



   (H)   PUBLIC PLACE - Any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.



   (I)   REMAIN -



      (1)   To stay behind, to linger and to stay unnecessarily upon
the streets, including the congregating groups (or of interacting minors)
totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be using
the streets for one of the exemptions listed in this chapter.



      (2)   To fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a
law enforcement officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of
premises.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-9)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-71.  CURFEW; VIOLATION.



   No minor shall be in or remain in or upon public property, a public
place, on the premises of any establishment or vacant lot within the city
during curfew hours.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-10)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-72.  CURFEW; EXCEPTIONS.



   This prohibition set out in section 7-71 shall not apply if the minor
is:



   (A)   Accompanied by his/her parent or guardian;



   (B)   On an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by
his/her parent or guardian;



   (C)   Going directly to, returning directly home from, or attending
a meeting, entertainment or recreational activity supervised or sponsored by
a local education authority or governmental agency;



   (D)   In a motor vehicle engaged in interstate travel;



   (E)   In the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
city about the minor's presence;



   (F)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution; or



   (G)   Present in or upon public property or a public place in
connection with or required by some legitimate business, trade, profession or
occupation in which the minor is lawfully engaged.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-11)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-73.  PARENTS RESPONSIBLE.



   No parent or guardian shall permit a minor to do any of the acts
prohibited in section 7-71.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-12)  (Ord. No. 2452)



ARTICLE V.  GRAFFITI



SEC. 7-80.  DECLARATION OF GRAFFITI AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   The city council hereby finds and determines that graffiti is a public
nuisance and that the health, safety and welfare of the city’s residents
shall be furthered by the establishment of a graffiti prohibition and removal
program; sales, possession, and storage regulations for graffiti implements;
and a reward for apprehension of persons damaging, destroying, or defacing
public or private property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-4.1)  (Ord. No. 2330, 2708)



SEC. 7-81.  DEFINITIONS.



   For purpose of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   ADHESIVE STICKERS - Any piece of paper, fabric, plastic, or
other material with an adhesive, paste or gummed backing, which, when applied
or affixed to any surface, either creates a permanent contact or is not
easily removable without the use of solvents.



   (B)   AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER - A container, regardless of the
material from which it is made, that is adapted or made for the purpose of
spraying paint or other substances capable of defacing property.



   (C)   DEFACEMENT - The intentional altering of the physical shape or
physical appearance of property without the prior written consent of the
owner.



   (D)   ETCHING CREAM - Any caustic cream, gel, liquid, or solution
capable, by means of a chemical action, of marking, defacing, damaging, or
destroying glass, plastic, wood, metal, or concrete surfaces in a manner
similar to acid.



   (E)   ETCHING TOOL - Any sharp or pointed instrument that is capable
of etching or marking glass, plastic, wood, metal, or concrete surfaces,
including, but not limited to, picks, scribes, awls, chisels, markers, and
etchers, or any masonry or glass drill bit, carbide drill bit, glass cutter,
grinding stone, or acid etching solution.



   (F)   GRAFFITI - Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark,
adhesive sticker, or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched,
drawn, painted, labeled, pasted, applied, or affixed on any real or personal
property of another.



   (G)   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT - An adhesive sticker, an aerosol paint
container, etching cream, an etching tool, an indelible marker, a paint
stick, a graffiti stick, a spray actuator, or any other device or instrument
capable of creating graffiti.



   (H)   INDELIBLE MARKER - Any device containing fluid that is not
soluble in water and has a writing surface for applying such fluid.



   (I)   MINOR - A person less than 18 years of age.



   (J)   PAINT STICK or GRAFFITI STICK - A device containing a solid
form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance that is not
soluble in water, is capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and
upon application, leaves a mark.



   (K)   RESPONSIBLE ADULT - A parent, legal guardian or teacher of a
minor.



   (L)   SPRAY ACTUATOR - An object or device that is capable of being
attached to an aerosol or other paint container for the purpose of spraying
the substance contained therein.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-4.2)  (Ord. No. 2330, 2708, 2827)



SEC. 7-82.  GRAFFITI PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti on or apply
graffiti to any public, private, or personal property located within the city
without permission of the owner of the property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-4.3)  (Ord. No. 2330, 2708, 2827)



SEC. 7-83.  GRAFFITI REMOVAL.



   Every owner of property shall remove graffiti promptly from such
property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-4.4)  (Ord. No. 2330, 2708)



SEC. 7-84.  REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI BY PRIVATE PARTY.



   (A)   When graffiti is capable of being viewed by a person while
standing in or on any public property, the city manager or designee may
direct, in writing, that the owner of the graffitied property remove the
graffiti.



   (B)   Unless additional time is granted by the city manager or
designee, the property owner shall remove the graffiti within five calendar
days after the date of receipt of a notice to remove the graffiti.



   (C)   (1)   For each day the graffiti remains beyond five
calendar days after receipt of the notice to remove the graffiti, the owner
of the graffitied property shall be in violation of the code.



      (2)   Each and every such day shall constitute a new and
separate violation of this code and may be charged as such.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-4.5)  (Ord. No. 2330, 2708)



SEC. 7-85.  REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI BY CITY.



   Whenever the city manager, or designee, determines that graffiti may be
viewed by a person in accordance with section 7-84(A), the city manager or
designee is authorized to provide for and to use public funds to remove the
graffiti upon the following conditions:



   (A)   Only the graffiti or other inscribed material itself may be
removed unless the graffiti or other inscribed material itself cannot be
removed cost effectively. In such cases, the portion of the property that was
defaced may be repaired or replaced. Portions of the property that were not
defaced, shall not be painted, repaired, or replaced.



   (B)   If the subject property is owned by a public entity other than
the city, the removal requires the consent of an authorized representative of
such entity and the representative shall execute a release and waiver
approved as to form by the city attorney.



   (C)   If the subject property is privately owned, the removal
requires the consent of the property owner and the owner shall execute a
release and waiver approved as to form by the city attorney.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-4.6)  (Ord. No. 2330, 2708, 2827)



SEC. 7-86.  PROHIBITION OF SPECIFIED GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS IN DESIGNATED AREAS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her
possession any adhesive sticker, etching tool, indelible marker, paint stick,
or graffiti stick while in or upon any public facility, park, playground,
swimming pool, beach, recreational facility, or other public building owned
or operated by the city where signs forbidding such possession without valid
authorization are displayed in a reasonable location or locations.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess any graffiti
implement while in or upon school property, grounds, facilities, buildings,
or structures. The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to the
possession of indelible markers by a minor attending a school at which the
minor is enrolled if the minor is participating in a class at the school that
formally requires the possession of indelible markers.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-4.7)  (Ord. No. 2330, 2708, 2827)



SEC. 7-87.  PROHIBITION OF SALE OF SPECIFIED GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS TO MINORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a responsible person,
to sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause to permit to be
sold, exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any etching tool,
indelible marker, paint stick, graffiti stick, or spray actuator to a minor
unless such minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-4.8)  (Ord. No. 2330, 2708, 2827)



SEC. 7-88.  REQUIRED SIGNS.



   (A)   Every retail establishment selling or offering for sale
etching tools, indelible markers, paint sticks, graffiti sticks, or spray
actuators shall post at the location of retail sale a sign in letters at
least three-eighths of an inch high and clearly visible and legible to
employees and customers stating:



"It is unlawful for any person to sell or give any etching tool, indelible
marker, paint stick, graffiti stick, or spray actuator to a minor who is not
accompanied by a responsible adult."



   (B)   Every retail establishment selling or offering for sale
etching tools, indelible markers, paint sticks, graffiti sticks, or spray
actuators capable of defacing property shall post in a conspicuous space a
sign in letters at least three-eighths of an inch high stating:



"Any person who defaces real or personal property with an etching tool,
indelible marker, paint stick, graffiti stick, or spray actuator is guilty of
vandalism which is punishable by a fine, imprisonment, or both."



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-4.9)  (Ord. No. 2330, 2708, 2827)



SEC. 7-89.  STORAGE REQUIREMENTS FOR GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS.



   (A)   Every person who owns, conducts, operates, or manages a retail
establishment selling or offering for sale any graffiti implement shall keep,
store, and maintain such graffiti implements in a place that is locked and
secure or otherwise made unavailable to the public except upon request.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to the selling or offering for
sale of adhesive stickers.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-4.10)  (Ord. No. 2330, 2708, 2827)



SEC. 7-90.  REWARDS.



   (A)   The city council hereby authorizes the city manager to pay a
reward to any person who provides information leading to the identity and the
apprehension of any person who willfully or maliciously places graffiti on
any public or private property within the city.  The maximum reward amount
available shall be established by resolution of the city council.



   (B)   The exact amount of the reward to be paid shall be determined
by the police of chief, or designee, after receipt of a report from a police
officer confirming the role of the recommended reward recipient.  No law
enforcement officer, municipal officer or employee of the city shall be
eligible to receive such reward.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-4.11)  (Ord. No. 2330, 2708)



SEC. 7-91.  FINE FOR VIOLATION.



   Any person who violates the provisions of sections 7-82, 7-84(B), 7-86,
7-87, 7-88 or 7-89(A) of this article is subject to a fine in accordance with
article III of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-4.12)  (Ord. No. 2330, 2521, 2698, 2708, 2827)



SEC. 7-92.  LIABILITY FOR COST OF GRAFFITI ABATEMENT; LIEN PROCEDURES.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases
shall have the following meanings:



      (1)   EXPENSE OF ABATEMENT - Includes, but is not limited to,
court costs, attorney's fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other
inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and
the law enforcement costs incurred in identifying and apprehending the person
responsible for placing graffiti or other inscribed material on property of
another.



      (2)   MINOR - A person less than 18 years of age who falls
into one of the following categories:



         (a)   Has confessed to, admitted to, or pled guilty or
nolo contendere to a violation of Cal. Penal Code, Section 594, 594.3, 640.5,
640.6, or 640.7;



         (b)   Has been convicted by final judgment of a
violation of Cal. Penal Code, Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7; or



         (c)   Has been declared a ward of the Juvenile Court
pursuant to Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code, Section 602 by reason of the
commission of an act prohibited by Cal. Penal Code, Section 594, 594.3,
640.5, 640.6, or 640.7.



      (3)   PERSON OTHER THAN A MINOR - A person who has confessed
to, admitted to, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of Cal.
Penal Code, Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7.



   (B)   When the city abates graffiti or other inscribed material
placed on public or private property by a minor, the city manager or designee
may impose a lien for the expense of abatement against the property of the
minor or against the property of the parent or guardian having custody and
control of said minor, and the expense of abatement shall be a personal
obligation against the minor or against the parent or guardian having custody
and control of the minor.



   (C)   When the city abates graffiti or other inscribed material
placed on public or private property by a person other than a minor, the city
manager or designee may impose a lien for the expense of abatement against
the property of said person, and the expense of abatement shall be a personal
obligation against the person.



   (D)   If the city manager or designee imposes a lien for the expense
of abatement as set forth in subdivisions (B) or (C) of this section, the
city manager or designee shall provide notice to the person who owns the
property upon which the lien is being imposed prior to the recordation of the
lien. The city manager or designee shall serve the notice in the same manner
as a summons in a civil action pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, Part
2, Title 5, Chapter 4, Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10).



   (E)   If the person who owns the property upon which the lien is
being imposed cannot be located after diligent search, the city manager or
designee may serve the notice by posting a copy of the notice upon the
property in a conspicuous place for a period of ten days. The city manager or
designee shall also publish the notice pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure, Section 6062 in a newspaper of general circulation that is
published in the county in which the property is located.



   (F)   All liens imposed pursuant to subdivisions (B) or (C) of this
section shall be recorded in the county recorder's office in the county in
which the parcel of land is located and shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   The amount of the lien;



      (2)   The name and agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed;



      (3)   The date of the abatement order;



      (4)   The street address, legal description, and assessor's
parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed; and



      (5)   The name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.



   (G)   If a lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either
through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the
information specified in subdivision (F) of this section shall be recorded by
the city. A lien and the release of a lien shall be indexed in the
grantor-grantee index.



   (H)   Any lien imposed pursuant to subdivisions (B) or (C) of this
section may be satisfied through foreclosure in an action brought by the city.



(Ord. No. 2708, 2827)



SEC. 7-93.  COLLECTION OF GRAFFITI ABATEMENT COSTS THROUGH THE JUVENILE
COURT.



   Editor's note:  Former section 7-93 was repealed by Part 10 of Ord.
No. 2827, adopted May 4, 2010.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section only, the following
definitions are applicable to this section only:



      (1)   MINOR - A person under the age of 18 years who has been
convicted of a violation of Cal. Penal Code, Section 594, 594.3, 594.4,
640.5, 640.6 or 640.7, or has been found to be a person described in Cal.
Welfare and Institutions Code, Section 602 by reason of the commission of an
act prohibited by the Cal. Penal Code sections identified in this section.



      (2)   GRAFFITI ABATEMENT COSTS - Means:



         (a)   The average costs incurred in identifying and
apprehending a person convicted of Cal. Penal Code, Sections 594, 594.3,
594.4, 640.5, 640.6, 640.7 or a minor subsequently found to be a person
described in Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code, Section 602 by reason of the
commission of an act prohibited on the Cal. Penal Code sections identified in
this subdivision; and



         (b)   The average costs incurred in removing graffiti or
other inscribed material; and



         (c)   The average costs incurred in repairing and
replacing property of a type frequently defaced with graffiti or other
inscribed material.



   (B)   Cost findings shall be reviewed at least once every three
years to ensure their adequacy. Recommendations shall be made to the city
council regarding any appropriate updates to the amount of graffiti abatement
costs and expenses. The city council may adopt updated cost findings by
resolution. Immediately after adoption, the city clerk shall forward a
certified copy of the adopted cost findings to the clerk of the Ventura
County Juvenile Court and the Ventura County Probation Agency.



   (C)   The Ventura County Probation Agency is hereby authorized, on
behalf of the city, to collect from the minor, the minor's estate or the
minor's parents or guardian, the city's graffiti abatement costs and expenses
through the juvenile court proceedings pursuant to the Graffiti Removal and
Damage Recovery Program (Cal. Welfare and Institution Code, Section 742.10 et
seq.) and to promptly transfer said funds to the city.



   (D)   Upon request of the Ventura County Probation Agency, the city
shall promptly transmit to the probation officer data about the city's
expenditure of resources for graffiti abatement costs in a particular case
for collection pursuant to this section.



(Ord. No. 2897)



ARTICLE VI.  LARGE PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR ASSEMBLAGES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



SEC. 7-100.  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of sections 7-100 through 7-106, the following terms shall
have the following meanings.



   (A)   CONTROL - Any form of dominion including ownership, tenancy,
or other possessory right.



   (B)   MINOR - Any person less than 18 years of age.



(Ord. No. 2834)



SEC. 7-101.  PROHIBITED PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR ASSEMBLAGES.



   A party, gathering, or assemblage ("event") held on private property
that threatens the public peace, health, safety, or general welfare or
results in continuous loud noise which causes discomfort or annoyance to a
reasonable person of normal sensitiveness is prohibited.



(Ord. No. 2834)



SEC. 7-102.  ISSUANCE OF WRITTEN WARNING.



   (A)   When a police officer determines that an event is a threat to
the public peace, health, safety, or general welfare or that an event results
in continuous loud noise which causes discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable
person of normal sensitiveness, the police officer shall issue a written
warning at the location of the event to the person in control of the location
of the event and/or the person responsible for the event, or if either of
those persons is a minor, the parents or guardians of that minor.



   (B)   When a written warning is issued to a person at the location
of the event and that person does not own the property where the event was
held, a written warning may also be mailed by first class mail, postage
prepaid, to the owner of the property at the address shown on the county's
last equalized property tax assessment rolls.  A declaration of service
shall be completed and attached to the warning mailed to the owner.



(Ord. No. 2834)



SEC. 7-103.  CONTENT OF WARNING.



   (A)   A written warning issued at the location of the event shall
state that if public safety personnel are required to return to the location
of the event within the following 72-hour period and the responding personnel
determine that the subsequent event is a threat to the public peace, health,
safety, or general welfare or that the subsequent event results in continuous
loud noise which causes discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person of
normal sensitiveness, a citation may be issued to the person who received the
written warning, and each such response may constitute the provision of
special response services.  The warning shall also state that the person
receiving the warning may be charged for the cost to the city of providing
such special response services for the event.



   (B)   A written warning mailed to the property owner shall contain
the following:



      (1)   A statement that police department personnel responded
to the owner's property and determined that an event held at the location was
a threat to the public peace, health, safety, or general welfare or that an
event held at the location resulted in continuous loud noise which caused
discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness.



      (2)   The date upon which police personnel responded to the
owner's property.



      (3)   Notice that if police department personnel are required
to return to the owner's property within one year of the date of the original
response and the responding personnel determine that any subsequent event is
a threat to the public peace, health, safety, or general welfare or that the
subsequent event results in continuous loud noise which causes discomfort or
annoyance to a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness, a citation may be
issued to the property owner, and each such response may constitute the
provision of special response services.



      (4)   Notice that the person receiving the warning may be
charged for the cost to the city of providing special response services for
the event.



(Ord. No. 2834)



SEC. 7-104.  COSTS FOR SPECIAL RESPONSE SERVICES.



   The costs of providing these special response services shall include,
but not be limited to, all direct and indirect costs attributable to the
subsequent response to the event and shall be imposed at the discretion of
the police chief based on the number of public safety personnel required to
respond to the subsequent event and the length of said response.



(Ord. No. 2834)



SEC. 7-105.  COLLECTION OF COSTS.



   The collectible costs for these special response services shall not be
in excess of $500 for each subsequent response, and said costs shall be
billed to the person or persons responsible for use of the special response
services, and, if minors, their parents or guardians.  The city shall have
the option to pursue any other legal remedies for recovery when such costs
exceed $500 per response.



(Ord. No. 2834)



SEC. 7-106.  DEBT OWED TO CITY.



   The amount of such costs charged shall be deemed a debt to the city of
the person or persons responsible for use of the special response services
and, if minors, their parents or guardians.  Any person required to pay such
costs shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for
recovery of such costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees.



(Ord. No. 2834)



ARTICLE VII.  NEWSRACKS



SEC. 7-110.  PURPOSE.



   The city council hereby establishes a comprehensive set of regulations
applicable to newsracks in the public right-of-way and to newsracks placed on
private property with the written consent of the property owner. These
regulations are intended to ensure the preservation of the public health,
safety and welfare while enhancing community and neighborhood aesthetics. The
regulations are not intended to restrict the rights of freedom of the press
or distribution of information.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-61.1)  (Ord. No. 2341, 2747)



SEC. 7-111.  FINDINGS.



   The city council makes the following findings:



   (A)   Unregulated placement and size of newsracks in public
rights-of-way can pose threats to the public health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   These regulations provide ample opportunities for the siting
of newsracks in locations that safeguard and encourage safe pedestrian and
vehicular movements in the vicinity of newsracks.



   (C)   Unregulated size and color of newsracks can contribute to a
blighted street scape.  A blighted street scape discourages economic
investment and leads to a negative balance between government services
necessary for an area and the ability to pay for such services.



   (D)   These regulations provide clearly defined sizes and colors for
newsracks which will help provide an aesthetic street scape that discourages
blight.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-61.2)  (Ord. No. 2341)



SEC. 7-112.  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   NEWSRACK - Any self-service or coin-operated box, container,
storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the
display, distribution or sale of newspapers, periodicals, or magazines,
whether currently installed, used, or maintained or installed, used, or
maintained hereafter.



   (B)   PARKWAY - The area between the sidewalk and the curb of any
street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the
roadway and the property line adjacent thereto.



   (C)   PERSON - Any individual, company, corporation, association,
business or other legal entity.



   (D)   RIGHT-OF-WAY - Land which by deed, conveyance, agreement,
easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for and dedicated
to the public for street, highway, alley, pedestrian walkway, sidewalk,
roadway, parkway, bicycle path or other purposes.



   (E)   ROADWAY - The portion of a public street improved, designed,
or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-61.3)  (Ord. No. 2341)



SEC. 7-113.  REGULATIONS FOR NEWSRACKS LOCATED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   The following regulations shall apply to any newsrack located
on public property:



      (1)   No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack
which rests upon or projects over any part of any roadway.



      (2)   No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack
if such newsrack exceeds 48 inches in height, 30 inches in width, or 24
inches in depth or weighs in excess of 125 pounds when empty.



      (3)   No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack
contrary to any of the following regulations:



         (a)   Within six feet of any marked crosswalk;



         (b)   Within six feet of any street or alley curb return
without a marked crosswalk;



         (c)   Within six feet of any driveway or curb cut;



         (d)   Within an area 25 feet forward of a driveway, curb
cut, or curb return (“forward of a driveway, curb cut, or curb return”
shall mean parallel to and in the same direction as the traffic on the side
of the roadway in which such driveway, curb cut, or curb return is located)
and extending 75 feet to the rear of a driveway, curb cut, or curb return
(“to the rear of a driveway, curb cut, or curb return” shall mean
parallel to and against the direction of the traffic on the side of the
roadway in which such driveway, curb cut, or curb return is located) except
if the newsrack is located at the back of a sidewalk and every portion of the
newsrack is at least four feet, six inches away from the curb face.



         (e)   Within ten feet of any fire hydrant or fire
department connection;



         (f)   Within four feet of any fire call box, police call
box or other emergency facility;



         (g)   Within a 264 feet area surrounding any sign
marking a designated bus stop, such area described as follows:  extending
from the curb face or edge of pavement to a distance eight feet
perpendicularly away from the roadway and beginning three feet forward of
such sign (“forward of such sign” shall mean parallel to and in the same
direction as the traffic on the side of the roadway in which such sign is
located) and extending 30 feet to the rear of such sign (“to the rear of
such sign” shall mean parallel to and against the direction as the traffic
on the side of the roadway in which such sign is located).



         (h)   Within four feet, six inches from the edge of a
curb face or, if no curb exists, the edge of pavement where parking is
permitted; or, within one foot from the edge of a curb face or, if no curb
face exists, the edge of pavement where parking is prohibited;



         (i)   Within four feet of any bus bench or bus shelter;



         (j)   Within five feet of any bicycle rack;



         (k)   Within three feet of any manhole or catch basin
access;



         (l)   Within six feet of any lift station;



         (m)   Within three feet of any utility or signal pull
box or utility meter;



         (n)   Within five feet of a traffic signal control
cabinet, signal standard or signal pole;



         (o)   Within two feet of any pole, post or other device
on which a traffic sign is attached or mounted;



         (p)   Within four feet of a pedestrian access ramp;



         (q)   Within five feet of any utility pole;



         (r)   Within one foot of any building, wall or fence;



         (s)   At any location where the installation of the
newsrack reduces the width of the pedestrian walkway to less than four feet.



      (4)   No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack
which endangers the safety of persons or property, or when the installation
site is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or
other government use, or when such newsrack interferes with or impedes the
flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the ingress into or egress from any
residence, place of business, or any legally parked or stopped vehicle, or
when the newsrack interferes with the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or
signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near the
installation site, or when such newsrack interferes with the cleaning of any
sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning.



      (5)   Each newsrack shall be installed on a single pedestal
which shall be securely anchored to the sidewalk or a concrete pad through
the use of bolts and sleeves.



      (6)   Each newsrack shall be constructed, installed, and
maintained in a safe and secure condition and in accordance with standards
adopted by the city.



      (7)   Except for the insertion of removable stock located on
or inside the newsrack which is used for the purpose of promoting an upcoming
civic event or special coverage in an upcoming issue of the newspaper, a
newsrack shall not be used for advertising or publicity purposes other than
to refer to the name of the newspaper, periodical, or magazine contained in
the newsrack.



      (8)   Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean, neat, and
attractive condition and in good repair at all times.



      (9)   (a)   Except as noted in this subsection, each
newsrack shall be painted one uniform color from the following list of colors
as found in “The PANTONE Book of Color,” International Standard Book
Number 0-8109-3711-5:



            (i)   Desert Palm, Pantone #7-0815;



            (ii)   Bracken, Pantone #7-1015; or



            (iii)   Slate Black, Pantone #7-0814.



         (b)   The pedestal of the newsrack may be painted the
same color as the newsrack or Slate Black, as noted above.  In addition to
any one of the above colors, no more than 20 percent of the newsrack’s
metal surface may be painted or lettered with one of the following accent
colors to display the vendor’s logo or name:



            (i)   Winter White - Pantone #11-0507;



            (ii)   Sun Kiss - Pantone #12-0807;



            (iii)   Cameo Rose - Pantone #14-1310;



            (iv)   Shell - Pantone #13-1405;



            (v)   Bark - Pantone #16-1506;



            (vi)   Lilac Gray - Pantone #14-3903;



            (vii)   Dapple Gray - Pantone #16-3907;



            (viii)   Ocean Wave - Pantone #14-5711;



            (ix)   Spray - Pantone #13-6007;



            (x)   Gravel - Pantone #14-1014;



            (xi)   Putty - Pantone #13-0711;



            (xii)   Brick Red - Pantone #7-1543;



            (xiii)   Snow White - Pantone #11-0602;



            (xiv)   Pastel Parchment - Pantone #11-0603;



            (xv)   Bone White - Pantone #12-0105; or



            (xvi)   Ice - Pantone #11-4803.



   (B)   The following regulations shall apply to any newsrack located
on private property with the written consent of the property owner:



      (1)   No person shall chain, bolt or otherwise attach a
newsrack to any privately owned property or to any permanently fixed,
privately owned object unless the consent of the owner of such property or
object is obtained in writing.



      (2)   No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack
if such newsrack exceeds 48 inches in height, 30 inches in width, or 24
inches in depth or weighs in excess of 125 pounds when empty.



      (3)   Each newsrack shall be installed on a single pedestal
which shall be securely anchored to the sidewalk or a concrete pad through
the use of bolts and sleeves.



      (4)   Each newsrack shall be constructed, installed, and
maintained in a safe and secure condition and in accordance with standards
adopted by the city.



      (5)   Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean, neat, and
attractive condition and in good repair at all times.



      (6)   Each newsrack on private property shall conform to the
uniform color requirements established in subsection (A)(9)(a) and (b) for
newsracks on public property.



   (C)   These subsections regulating colors shall apply to all
newsracks and pedestals located on private property six months after the
effective date of this article, any newsrack or pedestal after the effective
date of this article, and any newsrack that is removed and repaired after the
effective date of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-61.4)  (Ord. No. 2341, 2747)



SEC. 7-114.  APPLICATION FOR NEWSRACK PERMIT.



   (A)   (1)   For any newsrack on public property which was in
place on September 27, 1994, the owner of such newsrack shall obtain a
newsrack permit from the development services manager within 30 days after
the effective date of this section.



      (2)   Such permit shall be issued by the development services
manager or designee if the newsrack complies with the city standards.



   (B)   For all other newsracks on public property, the owner of such
newsrack shall obtain a newsrack permit from the development services manager
within ten days after the installation of such newsrack.  Such permit shall
be issued by the development services manager if the newsrack complies with
the city standards.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-61.5)  (Ord. No. 2341)



SEC. 7-115.  INDEMNITY; INSURANCE.



   (A)   At the time of issuance of the newsrack permit, the permittee
shall also execute a form, approved by the city attorney, agreeing to hold
the city, its officers, employees and agents, free and harmless from any
claim, demand or judgment in favor of any person, arising out of the
installation, use, maintenance or location of any newsrack.



   (B)   At the time of issuance of the newsrack permit, the permittee
shall submit to the city clerk a certificate of insurance confirming that a
liability insurance policy in minimum amounts normally required by the city
for encroachment permits has been issued naming the city as an additional
insured. The certificate of insurance shall contain a provision which binds
the insurance company to notify in writing the finance director or designee
30 days prior to cancellation of the liability insurance policy.  If such
liability insurance policy is canceled at any time, the city may remove the
permittee's newsracks in accordance with the provisions of section 7-117.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-61.6)  (Ord. No. 2341)



SEC. 7-116.  IDENTIFICATION DECAL.



   Together with the issuance of a newsrack permit, the development
services manager or designee shall issue an identification decal to the
permittee.  The permittee shall affix the decal to the newsrack. If the
decal should be removed or defaced, the permittee shall notify the
development services manager or designee and another decal will be issued
which the permittee shall affix to the newsrack.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-61.7)  (Ord. No. 2341)



SEC. 7-117.  NEWSRACK REMOVAL.



   (A)   Any newsrack installed, used or maintained in violation of the
provisions of these sections may be removed and stored by the development
services manager or designee ten working days after mailing notice to the
address given in the permittee's application for a newsrack permit that such
newsrack will be removed.  The notice shall give the permittee the
opportunity to cure the violation or to be heard at an informal conference
with the development services manager.  The permittee shall be notified if
the newsrack is removed and stored.



   (B)   The development services manager may summarily remove any
newsrack which poses a danger to pedestrians or vehicles, creates a health or
safety hazard for pedestrians or vehicles, or otherwise unreasonably
interferes with the safe use of public streets or sidewalks.  The permittee
shall be notified if the newsrack is removed.  The notice shall give the
permittee the opportunity to be heard at an informal conference with the
development services manager.



   (C)   The notice of removal or intended removal shall include a form
for requesting an informal conference with the development services manager
as to the reasons for the removal or intended removal of the newsrack.  If
the permittee wishes to contest the removal or intended removal of a
newsrack, the permittee shall, within ten working days of the mailing of the
notice return to the city such request for an informal conference with the
development services manager as to the reasons for such removal or intended
removal of the newsrack.  Following such conference, a written decision
shall be mailed to the permittee.



   (D)   If within 30 days following a notice of removal of a newsrack,
or, if a conference was requested and the removal was upheld, within 30 days
following the mailing of the decision, the permittee fails to claim the
newsrack and pay the expenses of removal and storage, the newsrack shall be
deemed unclaimed property in possession of the city and may be disposed of
pursuant to law.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-61.8)  (Ord. No. 2341)



ARTICLE VIII.  OFFENSES



SEC. 7-125.  CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL.



   (A)   Consumption of alcoholic beverages on streets and public
places.  No person shall consume beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage, as
defined by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the State of California:



      (1)   While upon any publicly owned property in the city,
improved or unimproved, including, but not limited to, any of the following:
public alleyways; public parking lots; public passageways; public streets;
public rights-of-way; publicly owned, maintained or operated parks; publicly
owned, maintained or operated landscaped areas or greenbelts; publicly owned,
maintained or operated open spaces, including, but not limited to, those
adjacent to city hall or other public facilities or buildings of any kind;
public sidewalks, curbs and gutters; public educational institutions; or
other government-owned, -maintained or -operated properties located within
the city.



      (2)   Upon any private street, building or private property
within the city without the consent of the person or entity in possession or
control thereof.



   (B)   Possession of alcoholic beverages on streets or other public
places.



      (1)   No person shall possess any can, bottle, or other
receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage that has been opened, or a seal
broken, or contents of which have been partially removed while upon any
publicly owned property in the city, improved or unimproved, including, but
not limited to, any of the following: public alleyways; public parking lots;
public passageways; public streets; public rights-of-way; publicly owned,
maintained or operated parks; publicly owned, maintained or operated
landscaped areas or greenbelts; publicly owned, maintained or operated open
spaces, including, but not limited to, those adjacent to city hall or other
public facilities or buildings of any kind; public sidewalks, curbs and
gutters; public educational institutions; or other government owned,
maintained or operated properties located within the city.



      (2)   This section does not apply when an individual is in the
possession of an alcoholic beverage container for the purpose of recycling or
other related activity.



      (3)   This section does not apply to possession and transport
of a corked bottle of wine removed from a bona fide eating place pursuant to
Cal. Business and Professions Code, Section 23396.5.



      (4)   This section is enacted pursuant to Cal. Business and
Professions Code Section 25620.



   (C)   Possession of alcoholic beverages adjacent to a licensed
retail establishment.  No person who has in his/her possession any can,
bottle, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage that has been
opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially
removed, shall enter, be, or remain on the posted premises of, including the
posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale
alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with
Section 23000) of the California Business and Professions Code.



   (D)   Penalty; misdemeanor or infraction.



      (1)   Any person violating any of the provisions of section
7-125(A) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000, or shall be
imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or shall
receive both such fine and imprisonment.



      (2)   The city may issue a civil citation to any person who
violates section 7-125(B) or (C), or prosecute such violation as an
infraction.



   (E)   This section shall not be deemed to make punishable any act
prohibited or expressly permitted by any law of the State of California;
provided further that the provisions of this section shall not prohibit the
holding, exercise of dominion over, or consumption of such beverages upon any
premises licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-1)  (Ord. No. 2452; 2774; 2944)



SEC. 7-126.  COMMUNITY EVENTS EXCEPTION.



   Notwithstanding section 7-125, at any duly permitted event where the
person conducting the event has obtained a license from the State Department
of Alcoholic Beverage Control, alcoholic beverages may be dispensed and
consumed in areas at the event specifically permitted by the police chief.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-2)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-127.  TERMINAL SALE; DEFINED.



   Terminal sale is a one-time sale of a total inventory of goods or the
sale of the stock of goods of a business advertising or holding itself out to
be terminating commercial operations at a fixed place of business. The term
is synonymous with an “insurance,” “bankruptcy,” “damaged goods,”
“insolvency,” “assignee's,” “executor's,” “administrator's,”
“receiver's,” “trustee's,” “creditor's,” “forced re-removal,”
“closing out,” “lost lease,” “we quit” and other sales similarly
designated.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-3)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-128.  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall conduct a terminal sale without first
obtaining a permit issued by the license collector.



   (B)   Application for such permit shall be completed on forms
provided by the license collector.



   (C)   The fee for such permit shall be established by resolution of
the city council.



   (D)   The permit requirements of this section shall not apply to:



      (1)   A sale conducted under court order;



      (2)   A sale conducted by a governmental entity; or



      (3)   A sale conducted by any person or business terminating
commercial operations at a fixed place of business that is the subject of
eminent domain proceedings or is within a defined governmental redevelopment
area.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-4)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-129.  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   No person or business shall advertise or conduct a terminal sale:



   (A)   For a continuous period greater than 90 days;



   (B)   With inducement, advertising or representations that do not
state the true facts concerning the terminal sale; and



   (C)   For any inventory of merchandise to which goods have been
added or additional stock included while the terminal sale is in progress.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-5)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-130.  GOLF CLUBS IN PUBLIC PARKS.



   (A)   No person shall possess a golf club in a public park, except
in a public park that is held open for the purpose of playing or practicing
golf.



   (B)   No person shall use any object to strike a ball resting on the
ground or on a supporting structure that is on or in the ground in a public
park, except in areas of a public park held open for the purpose of playing
or practicing golf.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, "golf club" means an implement
composed of a shaft at least 18 inches long and a head no larger than six
inches in any dimension, fixed so that the implement is one unit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-6)  (Ord. No. 2452, 2658)



SEC. 7-131.  WARNING OF APPROACH OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall signal to or act as a lookout for other persons engaged
in unlawful activity to warn of the approach of law enforcement officers nor
shall any person solicit, encourage, employ, or offer payment to others to do
the same.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-7)  (Ord. No. 2452, 2522)



SEC. 7-132.  OBSTRUCTION OF MOVEMENT ON PUBLIC WAYS.



   (A)   No person shall sit or lie down in or upon any public street,
sidewalk or crosswalk in the city in any manner so as to hinder or obstruct
the free passage of pedestrians thereon, or to annoy or molest such
pedestrians.



   (B)   The prohibitions of subsection (A) shall not apply to any
person who:



      (1)   Is sitting or lying down on a public way due to a
medical emergency;



      (2)   As the result of a disability, utilizes a wheelchair,
walker, or similar device to move about the public way; or



      (3)   Is operating or patronizing a commercial establishment
conducted on the public way pursuant to a permit duly issued by the city or
who is participating in or attending a parade, festival, performance, rally,
demonstration, meeting, or similar event conducted on a public way pursuant
to a permit duly issued by the city.



   (C)   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of subsection
(A) unless the person engages in conduct prohibited by this section after
having been notified by a law enforcement officer that the conduct violates
this chapter.



   (D)   Except for an on-duty peace officer, as defined in Cal. Penal
Code, Section 830, no person 12 years of age or older shall ride a bicycle on
a public sidewalk in the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-8)  (Ord. No. 2452, 2711)



SEC. 7-133.  BEGGING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall, in any place of business where food or drink is sold
and consumed, beg, solicit or importune any patron or customer of or visitor
in such establishment to purchase any article of food or drink for the one
begging, soliciting or importuning, or for any frequenter, habitue, vagrant
or idle person in or about such place.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-13)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-134.  PROPRIETOR RESPONSIBLE.



   No person who owns, manages or otherwise controls any business where
food or drink is sold and consumed shall permit or allow another person to
beg, solicit or importune patrons, customers or visitors thereof in the
manner and for the purposes specified in section 7-133.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-14)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-135.  PARADES PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMIT.



   (A)   No person or organized group of persons shall march or parade
on any street, alley, sidewalk, public thoroughfare, park or place without
first obtaining a permit therefor from the city manager. Application for such
a permit may be oral or written.



   (B)   The city manager shall issue a permit subject to reasonable
conditions to protect the public health, safety or welfare.



   (C)   Any person aggrieved by the determination of the city manager
under this section may within two weeks thereof appeal the matter to the city
council.  The city council's decision shall be final and shall exhaust all
administrative remedies.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-15)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-136.  PARKS TO BE CLOSED AT DUSK; VIOLATION.



   (A)   Except when different hours shall be established by the city
manager, any public park and/or recreation area owned or operated by the city
shall be closed everyday to the public from dusk to 7:00 a.m.



   (B)   Any person who enters or is on the premises of a public park
or recreation area owned or operated by the city at a time when the park or
facility is closed, shall be guilty of a violation of section 1-10 of this
code.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to events, programs and
activities sponsored or permitted by the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-16)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-137.  APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO BE IN A PARK OR RECREATION AREA.



   Any person, wishing to be in or otherwise use a public park or
recreation area, owned or operated by the city, between dusk and 7:00 a.m.
shall obtain a permit to do so.  The application for the permit shall be on
a form approved by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-17)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-138.  SALE OF CONFECTION, CANDY, LIQUID OR OTHER REFRESHMENT IN WAX
CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.



   No person in the city shall give away, sell or offer to sell any
confection, candy, liquid or other refreshment in wax or paraffin containers,
or other containers which when discarded upon a sidewalk or street will
create a waxy, oily or greasy condition.  This section shall not be
construed to prohibit merchandising of products in paper or cardboard
containers which are coated with paraffin or wax.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-18)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-139.  UNCAPPED WELL PROHIBITED.



   No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained or for any reason
to own or control any real property on which there is maintained or permitted
to be maintained any uncapped or unguarded well, cistern, oil sump or other
earthen sump, excavation or hole likely to produce bodily injury to persons
as a result of a fall therein.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-19)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-140.  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   The existence of any condition described in section 7-139 is hereby
declared to be and is made a public nuisance.  All such nuisances reported
to or discovered by the city shall be abated in the manner provided by law.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-20)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-141.  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.



   (A)   No person shall fire, shoot or discharge within the limits of
the city any gun, rifle, pistol or other firearm, or any air gun, air rifle
or air pistol, or any spring gun, spring rifle or spring pistol, or any
carbon dioxide or other gas-operated gun, rifle or pistol.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a peace
officer in the performance of his/her duty, nor to any person:



      (1)   While shooting in a municipally licensed or municipally
owned or operated shooting gallery, pistol or target range;



      (2)   While shooting an air gun, air rifle or air pistol, or
any spring gun, spring rifle or spring pistol, or any carbon dioxide or other
gas operated gun, rifle or pistol in any private place or location
constructed such that it is not possible for the ammunition, projectiles or
other objects expelled by such guns, rifles or pistols to escape the place or
location;



      (3)   While shooting in the course of the lawful protection of
crops grown for sale on property consisting of five or more acres devoted to
agricultural uses;



      (4)   While shooting in and as a part of an adult supervised
training program or curriculum of any public or private school or club or
association organized for instruction in the use of firearms in any place or
location specified in and regulated by this chapter or from which the
ammunition, projectile or other objects expelled by the weapons used cannot
escape; or



      (5)   While lawfully defending life or property.



   (C)   If the person shooting under this chapter is a minor then
he/she shall be supervised by an adult person who is present when the minor
is shooting.



   (D)   Any adult person who has care, custody or control of a minor
and who suffers or permits the minor to discharge a weapon in violation of
this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (E)   In any prosecution charging an adult with suffering or
permitting a minor to discharge a weapon in violation of this section, proof
of the people of the State that an adult had care, custody or control of the
minor discharging the weapon shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
adult suffered or permitted the minor to discharge the weapon and that the
adult had the duty and power to prevent the discharge of the weapon.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-21)  (Ord. No. 2401, 2452)



SEC. 7-141.1.  REPORTING LOST OR STOLEN FIREARMS.



   (A)   Any person residing or doing business in the city who owns or
possesses a firearm, as defined in the California Penal Code, shall report
the theft or loss of the firearm to the police department within 72 hours
after his or her discovery or knowledge of the theft or loss.



   (B)   Any person residing or doing business in the city who has
experienced the loss or theft of a firearm, as defined in the California
Penal Code, in the city within the five years prior to November 23, 2007,
without the firearm having been recovered during such time, shall report the
theft or loss to the police department within 90 days of November 23, 2007.



(Ord. No. 2757)



SEC. 7-142.  INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE SERVICE DOGS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall willfully interfere with any police service
dog while such dog is being utilized by any peace officer or employee of the
city in the performance of any functions of the city.



   (B)   Interfere, as used in this section, shall include teasing,
taunting, striking, shooting at or near, distracting, restraining, injuring,
directing or urging any other animal to attack, or in any other manner
hindering such dog or delaying or preventing it from performing its functions.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-22)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-143.  URINATION AND DEFECATION PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC.



   No person shall urinate or defecate upon any street, sidewalk, parkway,
alley or other place exposed to public view within the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 20-23)  (Ord. No. 2452)



SEC. 7-144.  SKATEBOARDING, BICYCLING, ROLLER SKATING, INLINE SKATING OR
RAZOR SCOOTING IN PUBLIC PARKING LOTS AND ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   The following regulations shall apply to skateboarding,
bicycling, roller skating, inline skating, or razor scooting in public
parking lots:



      (1)   No person shall ride, propel or in any manner operate a
skateboard, bicycle, roller skates, inline skates, or inline scooter on or
over any public parking lot upon which the city has posted signs informing
such person that such uses are prohibited.



      (2)   The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not
apply unless and until the city complies with the following:



         (a)   Provide notice in and about the area where the
activity is prohibited, in conspicuously placed locations and in sufficient
numbers to adequately notify a person engaging in the prohibited activity;



         (b)   The notice shall identify in capital letters at
least two inches high the activities that are prohibited and shall identify
this section of the code.



   (B)   The following regulations shall apply to skateboarding,
bicycling, roller skating, inline skating, or razor scooting on private
property:



      (1)   No person shall ride, propel or in any manner operate a
skateboard, bicycle, roller skates, inline skates, or inline scooter on or
over any privately owned property upon which the owner, manager, or other
person in charge of such private property has posted signs informing such
person that such uses are prohibited.



      (2)   The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not
apply unless and until the owner, manager, or person in charge of such
private property complies with the following:



         (a)   Provide notice in and about the area where the
activity is prohibited, in conspicuously placed locations and in sufficient
numbers to adequately notify a person engaging in the prohibited activity;



         (b)   The notice shall identify in capital letters at
least two inches high the activities that are prohibited and shall identify
this section of the code.



(Ord. No. 2767)



SEC. 7-145.  USE OF OFF-STREET PARKING.



   (A)   Except as set forth in subsections (A)(1) - (A)(5) of this
section, no person shall park a motor vehicle in any off-street parking area
in a commercial zone.



      (1)   A customer may park a motor vehicle in an off-street
parking area while doing business with one of the commercial enterprises
served by such off-street parking.



      (2)   An employee may park a motor vehicle in an off-street
parking area during the employee's normal working hours with one of the
commercial enterprises served by such off-street parking.



      (3)   A person doing business with a commercial enterprise may
park a motor vehicle in an off-street parking area during the time the person
is doing business with a commercial enterprise served by such off-street
parking.



      (4)   A person may park a motor vehicle in an off-street
parking area if the use is in accordance with a valid temporary use permit
for such off-street parking area.



      (5)   A person may park a motor vehicle in an off-street
parking area owned by the city if the use is in accordance with and
authorized by a written license agreement with the city.



   (B)   This section shall only apply during the hours that any
commercial enterprise served by such off-street parking is open for business.



(Ord. No. 2609, 2636)



SEC. 7-146.  TRESPASSING ON RIVER RIDGE GOLF COURSE.



   (A)   No person shall trespass on the River Ridge Golf Course.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, "trespass" means to enter the
golf playing area (except the driving range or the practice area) of the
River Ridge Golf Course without a receipt issued for that purpose on the same
day in the pro shop of the River Ridge Golf Course; or to enter the golf
playing area of the River Ridge Golf Course at any time that the golf playing
area is closed.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, the golf playing area of the
River Ridge Golf Course is the area outlined on the map on file with the city
clerk.



(Ord. No. 2659)



SEC. 7-147.  TAKING OFF OR LANDING OF ULTRALIGHT VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall cause an ultralight vehicle to take off from
or land within the city except at an airport open to the public.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the term ULTRALIGHT VEHICLE
shall mean a vehicle that:



      (1)   Is used or intended to be used for manned flight by a
single occupant;



      (2)   Is used or intended to be used for recreation or sport
purposes only; and



      (3)   Does not have any United States or foreign airworthiness
certificate.



(Ord. No. 2704)



SEC. 7-147.1.  FIREWORKS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purposes of this section, the following
words and phrases shall have the following meanings:



      (1)   DANGEROUS FIREWORKS shall be defined as set forth in
Cal. Health and Safety Code section 12505, as such definition may be amended
from time to time by the California Legislature.



      (2)   FIREWORKS shall be defined as set forth in Cal. Health
and Safety Code section 12511, as such definition may be amended from time to
time by the California Legislature.



   (B)   Prohibition.



      (1)   Except as authorized by the fire chief in accordance
with the currently adopted California Fire Code, no person shall sell, offer
to sell, use, or have in his/her possession within the city any fireworks or
dangerous fireworks.



      (2)   Except as authorized by the fire chief in accordance
with the currently adopted California Fire Code, no property owner or tenant
shall allow or permit the sale, offer to sell, use, or possession of
fireworks on their property when the property owner or tenant knows or should
know of the sale, offer to sell, use, or possession of fireworks at the
property.



   (C)   Violation.  Any person violating a provision of division (B)
of this section shall be subject to a fine in accordance with article III of
chapter 7 of this code or is guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. No. 2773, 2938)



SEC. 7-148.  ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION BY MINORS PROHIBITED – PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The city council finds and determines that minors often obtain
alcoholic beverages at parties held at private premises. The city council
further funds and determines that persons who will be held responsible for
abetting or tolerating such conduct will be more likely to properly supervise
or stop such parties on property under their control.



(Ord. No. 2734)



SEC. 7-148.1.  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of sections 7-148 through 7-148.13, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:



   (A)   ADULT - A person who is 21 years of age or older.



   (B)   CONTROL - Any form of dominion including ownership, tenancy,
or other possessory right.



   (C)   RESIDENCE or PREMISES - A house, yard, apartment, condominium,
or other dwelling unit, a hotel or motel room, or a hall or meeting room,
whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a
dwelling or for living space or for a party, meeting, or other social
function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without
compensation.



   (D)   ENFORCEMENT SERVICES - The salaries and benefits of police
officers or other code compliance personnel for the amount of time actually
spent in responding to or in remaining at the residence or premises and the
administrative costs attributable to the incident, the actual cost of any
medical treatment to injured police officers or other code compliance
personnel as a result of injuries suffered in responding to or in remaining
at the residence or premises, the cost arising from the use of any city
equipment in responding to or remaining at the residence or premises, and the
cost of repairing any damaged city equipment or property used in responding
to or in remaining at the residence or premises.



   (E)   MINOR - A person who is less than 21 years of age.



(Ord. No. 2734)



SEC. 7-148.2.  CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL BY MINOR PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACE,
PLACE OPEN TO PUBLIC, OR PLACE NOT OPEN TO PUBLIC.



   Except as permitted by State law, it shall be a violation for any minor
to:



   (A)   Consume at any public place or any place open to the public
any alcoholic beverage; or



   (B)   Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic
beverage, unless his/her parent or legal guardian in connection with the
consumption of the alcoholic beverage is supervising that minor.



(Ord. No. 2734)



SEC. 7-148.3.  HOSTING, PERMITTING, OR ALLOWING A PARTY, GATHERING, OR EVENT
WHERE MINORS CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Except as permitted by Article 1, Section 4, of the California
Constitution, it shall be a violation for any person to host, permit, or
allow a party, gathering, or event at his/her place of residence or other
private property, place, or premises under his/her control where two or more
minors are present and alcoholic beverages are being consumed by any minor.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of
alcoholic beverages, which occurs exclusively between a minor child and
his/her parent or legal guardian.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to any location or place
regulated by the California Department of Alcohol and Beverage Control.



(Ord. No. 2734)



SEC. 7-148.4.  PROTECTED ACTIVITIES.



   The provisions of sections 7-148.2 and 7-148.3 shall not apply to
legally protected religious activities.



(Ord. No. 2734)



SEC. 7-148.5.  FINES.



   An enforcement officer may issue a civil citation for a violation of
section 7-148.2 or a violation of section 7-148.3. Any person who violates
said sections is subject to a fine in accordance with section 7-56 of Article
III of Chapter 7 of this code.



(Ord. No. 2734)



SEC. 7-148.6.  CIVIL LIABILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT SERVICES.



   When a party, gathering, or event prohibited by section 7-148.3 occurs
and police officers or code compliance officers are called to the scene, the
person(s) having control of the residence or premises shall be liable for the
cost of providing enforcement services. If the person having control is a
minor and if a parent or legal guardian is served with a copy of the civil
citation issued to the minor, the parent or legal guardian of that minor
shall be liable for the costs incurred for said enforcement services up to
the limits allowed by State law.



(Ord. No. 2734)



SEC. 7-148.7.  REIMBURSEMENT FOR COST OF ENFORCEMENT SERVICES.



   The actual cost of enforcement services described in section 7-148.6
shall be deemed a debt owed to the city recoverable in a civil action and
shall be recoverable in a civil action, including reasonable attorney fees
and costs.



(Ord. No. 2734)



SEC. 7-148.8.  RESERVATION OF LEGAL OPTIONS.



   The city does not waive its right to seek reimbursement for actual
costs of enforcement services through other legal remedies or procedures. The
procedure provided for in section 7-148.9 is in addition to any other
statute, ordinance, or law, civil or criminal. This section in no way limits
the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any
criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by sections 7-148.2 or
7-148.3.



(Ord. No. 2734)



SEC. 7-148.9.  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.



   (A)   A person who receives a civil citation for a violation of
section 7-148.2 or section 7-148.3 may request an administrative hearing.



   (B)   A request for an administrative hearing shall be made on an
administrative hearing request form and shall include the grounds for
requesting an administrative hearing.



   (C)   Any request for an administrative hearing shall be filed with
the city manager within 30 days of the issuance of the civil citation. The
request shall be accompanied by a deposit of the fine amount imposed in the
civil citation.



   (D)   Unless the hearing was otherwise continued, a person
requesting an administrative hearing shall attend the hearing on the date,
time, and location specified in the civil citation. Failure to attend the
hearing shall constitute an abandonment of the request for an administrative
hearing.



(Ord. No. 2734)



SEC. 7-148.10.  HEARING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The administrative hearing shall be conducted by a hearing
officer on the date, time, and location specified in the civil citation.



   (B)   The city manager shall ensure that all information relevant to
the civil citation is provided to the hearing officer prior to the hearing
date. The city manager shall provide the person who received the civil
citation with a copy of all information provided to the hearing officer.



   (C)   The person who received the civil citation shall be allowed to
testify and to present evidence relevant to any financial hardship or to the
violation cited.



   (D)   The civil citation and any other reports prepared by the
enforcement officer concerning the violation and provided to the hearing
officer shall be accepted by the hearing officer as prima facie evidence of
the code violation and of the facts stated in such documents.



   (E)   Neither the enforcement officer nor any other representative
of the city shall be required to attend an administrative hearing. The
hearing officer shall not require that the enforcement officer submit any
evidence other than a copy of the civil citation. The enforcement officer
may, in his/her discretion, appear at an administrative hearing and/or submit
additional evidence.



   (F)   If a request is made by the person who received the citation
or a representative of the city setting forth good cause for a continuance,
the hearing officer may continue an administrative hearing.



   (G)   If a continuance is granted, a new hearing date shall be set
within 45 days and shall be specified in the notice of continuance. If a
continuance is denied, the administrative hearing shall proceed as scheduled.
The decision of the hearing officer to grant or deny a continuance shall be
final and is not subject to judicial review.



   (H)   An administrative hearing shall be conducted informally
without strict adherence to the legal rules of evidence.



   (I)   Failure of the person who received the civil citation to
appear at a hearing shall constitute an abandonment of the hearing and a
failure to exhaust administrative remedies concerning the violation set forth
in the civil citation. Failure to appear by the person who received the
citation shall be noted on the notice of decision by the hearing officer
which will be mailed to said person.



(Ord. No. 2734)



SEC. 7-148.11.  DECISION.



   (A)   The hearing officer shall issue a notice of decision within
five working days of the conclusion of the administrative hearing either
upholding or dismissing the civil citation. The decision of the hearing
officer shall be final.



   (B)   The hearing officer may not increase or reduce any fine
specified in the civil citation.



   (C)   The notice of decision shall be personally delivered or mailed
to the person who received the civil citation.



   (D)   If the hearing officer dismisses the civil citation, the city
shall, within 30 days of the date of the notice of decision, refund to the
person who received the civil citation any fine deposited with the city.



(Ord. No. 2734)



SEC. 7-148.12.  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   (A)   The person who received the civil citation may seek judicial
review of the hearing officer's decision by filing an appeal with the Ventura
County Superior Court Clerk within 20 calendar days after said person
receives a copy of the notice of decision in accordance with Cal. Gov't Code
section 53069.4. Any appeal filed with the superior court shall contain a
proof of service showing that a copy of the appeal was served upon the city.
The person who received the citation must pay the appropriate filing fees.



   (B)   Judicial review is not available for an abandonment of an
administrative hearing by a person who received a civil citation by failing
to appear at the administrative hearing or failing to deposit the appropriate
fine amount.



   (C)   Within 15 days of any request, the city attorney or his/her
designee shall forward to the superior court, the appropriate notice of
decision and civil citation for any matter appealed to the superior court. If
the superior court reverses any decision of the hearing officer, the city
shall refund the superior court filing fee and any fine deposit paid by the
person who received the citation.



(Ord. No. 2734)



SEC. 7-148.13.  COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT FINES.



   (A)   The city manager may pursue any and all legal and equitable
remedies for the collection of delinquent fines, including interest and
penalties.



   (B)   Any delinquent fines, interest, and penalties may be recovered
as a lien or special assessment against the property of the person who
received the citation.



   (C)   Prior to recording a lien or special assessment, the city
manager shall prepare a cost report itemizing the amount owed by the person
who received the citation.



   (D)   The city manager shall notify the person who received the
citation of the time, date, and location that the city council shall consider
any cost report imposing a lien or special assessment on property of said
person.



   (E)   At a public hearing, the city council shall consider the cost
report with any objections of the person who received the citation liable to
be assessed for the costs stated in the report. The city council may modify
the cost report as appropriate.



   (F)   Upon approval by the city council, the city manager shall file
a certified copy of the cost report with the county auditor. The city manager
shall request the auditor to enter each assessment on the county tax roll and
to collect the amount of the assessment at the time and in the manner of
ordinary municipal taxes.



(Ord. No. 2734)



SEC. 7-149.  RESIDENTIAL YARD SALES.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, a YARD SALE shall be defined as
the public sale of items from a garage, carport, patio, driveway, front yard,
side yard, or back yard of a residence.



   (B)   Yard sales shall be limited to no more than three per
residence during a calendar year.  No yard sale shall occur within 30 days
from the last day of any previous yard sale held at the same residence.



   (C)   Each yard sale shall not exceed three consecutive days and
shall be held only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. or sunrise, whichever is
later, and 6:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever is earlier.



   (D)   Yard sale items shall not be displayed on or obstruct public
streets, alleys, or sidewalks.



   (E)   Yard sale items shall be removed from public visibility at the
end of each day said yard sale is held.



   (F)   Yard sale items shall be the personal property of the resident
and shall have been used in the home of said resident.  Items that were
purchased, solicited, or made for the purpose of resale shall not be sold or
displayed at any yard sale.



   (G)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to sales of
personal property made under court order.



(Ord. No. 2825)



ARTICLE IX.  PROPERTY CONSERVATION



SEC. 7-150.  FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT.



   (A)   The city council finds as follows:



      (1)   Certain detrimental conditions of property are injurious
or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare.  Such
detrimental conditions contribute to the diminution of property values, to
disproportionate expenditures of city funds for protection against hazards,
crime, accidents, fires, and disease.  Such detrimental conditions interfere
with the city's and community's efforts to protect the community from matters
that are offensive to the senses and that interfere with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property.



      (2)   Regulation of the uses and abuses of property as
described herein reasonably relates to the proper exercise of police power to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.



      (3)   Unless the city council undertakes corrective measures
to alleviate such present and future detrimental conditions, the community's
public services and quality of life will decline.



      (4)   The alleviation of such detrimental conditions will
appreciate the values and appearance of property in the city, benefit the use
and enjoyment of property in the city and will ultimately improve the city's
tax base.



   (B)   This article is intended:



      (1)   To define as nuisances and attractive nuisances certain
conditions that are harmful or detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare
of the citizens of the city;



      (2)   To promote the sound maintenance of property and to
enhance the livability, community appearance, and social, economic, and
environmental conditions of the city; and



      (3)   To correct nuisances and attractive nuisances in a
manner that affords due process to all parties.



   (C)   This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in
any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of any other laws,
ordinances, or with private restrictions placed upon property by covenant,
deed, or other private agreement or with restrictive covenants running with
the land to which the city is a party.



   (D)   This article provides the minimum standards for maintenance of
property in the city.  Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon
property or structures thereon than is imposed or required by existing
provisions of law, ordinance, contract, or deed, the provisions of this
article shall control.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-62.1)  (Ord. No. 2331)



SEC. 7-151.  NUISANCES; GENERAL.



   Any person or entity owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or
possession of any real property maintained in such manner that any of the
following conditions are found to exist thereon shall be guilty of creating a
nuisance in violation of this code.



   (A)   Buildings or structures that are abandoned, partially
destroyed, or left in an unreasonable state of partial construction, such as
any unfinished building or structure that has been in the course of
construction two years or more, and the appearance or other conditions of the
unfinished building or structure substantially detracts from the appearance
of the surrounding property or reduces property values of the surrounding
property;



   (B)   Unpainted buildings or structures; buildings or structures
having dry rot, warping, or termite infestation; or buildings or structures
on which the condition of the paint or other exterior weather protection has
become so deteriorated as to show excessive checking, cracking, peeling,
chalking, or as to render the building or structure unsightly and in a state
of disrepair;



   (C)   Buildings or structures with broken windows constituting
hazardous conditions or inviting trespassers or malicious mischief;



   (D)   Buildings or structures with exteriors, walls, roofs, fences,
driveways, sidewalks, or walkways that are in such a condition as to be
defective, unsightly, or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair as
to cause depreciation of the values of surrounding property or as to be
materially detrimental to surrounding property;



   (E)   The storage or accumulation of lumber, junk, trash, salvage
materials or debris visible from a public street, public alley, or adjoining
public or private property;  (For the purpose of this subsection, the term
“debris” shall include unused or discarded matter and material having no
substantial market value, including (without limitation or exclusion by
enumeration) such matter and material as: rubbish, refuse, and matter of any
kind including but not limited to rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile,
rocks, bricks, soil, building materials, crates, cartons, containers, boxes,
machinery or parts thereof, scrap metal and other pieces of metal, ferrous or
nonferrous, furniture or parts thereof, abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicles, vehicle bodies or parts thereof, trimmings from plants
or trees, cans, bottles, and barrels.)



   (F)   Abandoned, discarded, or unused furniture, stoves, sinks,
toilets, cabinets, or other household fixtures or equipment that is visible
from a public street, public alley, or adjoining public or private property;



   (G)   Construction equipment or machinery that is visible from a
public street, public alley, or adjoining public or private property, except
wile city-authorized and permitted excavation, construction, or demolition
operations are in progress on the subject property or an adjoining property;



   (H)   Property maintained so out of harmony or conformity with the
standards of surrounding property as to cause substantial diminution of the
enjoyment, use, or values of such surrounding property;



   (I)   Dead, decayed, diseased, or hazardous trees, weeds, or
overgrown vegetation, cultivated or uncultivated, that are likely to harbor
rats or vermin, constitute a fire hazard, or constitute an unsightly
appearance that is detrimental to surrounding property values;



   (J)   Materials or items of any nature on a rooftop that are visible
from a public street, public alley, or adjoining public or private property,
except if permitted by code for location on such rooftop;



   (K)   Any condition that violates any use permit approved by the
planning commission or city council that relates to the appearance or
maintenance of real property;



   (L)   Use of a trailer or camper for living or sleeping purposes,
except in a licensed mobile home park;



   (M)   Use of a boat for living or sleeping purposes, except on a
waterway;



   (N)   Any off-street parking facility that is not maintained as
required at the time of the original construction or development, unless
subsequently modified by permit;



   (O)   Any property containing a motor vehicle that has not been
registered for operation on a public highway within the preceding six months,
unless such vehicle is fully enclosed within a building or structure and is
not visible from a public street, public alley, or adjoining public or
private property.  This section shall not apply to any commercial business
or operation that has received all city approvals, licenses, and permits to
conduct motor vehicle sales, repairs, assembly/disassembly, or storage of
such vehicles and is operating in compliance with all the conditions of such
approvals, licenses, or permits;



   (P)   Property maintained in such condition as to be detrimental to
the public health, safety, or general welfare or in such manner as to
constitute a public nuisance as defined by Cal. Civil Code, Section 3480.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-62.2)  (Ord. No. 2331)



SEC. 7-152.  ATTRACTIVE NUISANCES.



   Any person or entity creating or maintaining an attractive nuisance
shall be in violation of this code. An attractive nuisance includes all
objects or things which would be classified as an attractive nuisance under
common law, statute, or case law, plus the following:



   (A)   Unprotected pools, ponds, or refrigerators, freezers, or other
airtight containers not properly secured against entry.  For the purpose of
this subsection, the terms “pool” or “pond” shall include any
exterior improvement or excavation that contains water to a depth of 18
inches or more.



   (B)   Fences or walls that violate zoning regulations regarding
height, or that are in a hazardous condition, or that are in disrepair, or
that hinder free access to public sidewalks.



   (C)   Unpaved or deteriorated parking lots containing uneven
surfaces or drainage problems that are hazardous to the public.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-62.3)  (Ord. No. 2331)



SEC. 7-153.  APPEAL OFFICER.



   For the purposes of this article, the city council hereby creates the
office of appeal officer.  The appeal officer shall be designated by the
city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-62.4)  (Ord. No. 2331)



SEC. 7-154.  NOTICE TO ABATE; VOLUNTARY ABATEMENT; APPEAL.



   (A)   Whenever a code enforcement officer, city inspector, or police
officer finds that a nuisance or attractive nuisance exists on a particular
property in accordance with section 7-151 or section 7-152, above, then such
city official shall either:



      (1)   Deliver to the owner, lessor, occupant, or person in
charge or possession of the property a written notice to abate the nuisance
or attractive nuisance; or



      (2)   Mail, by regular mail, a written notice to abate the
nuisance or attractive nuisance to the owner, as listed on the last equalized
assessment roll for such property, and post a copy of the written notice to
abate the nuisance or attractive nuisance on the property in a conspicuous
place.



   (B)   Any person notified to abate a nuisance or attractive nuisance
pursuant to subsection (A) above, shall either:



      (1)   Abate the nuisance or attractive nuisance within ten
days of delivery of such notice, or, in the case of service by mail and
posting, within 15 days from the day of mailing or posting such notice,
whichever is later; or



      (2)   Within ten days of delivery of such notice, or, in the
case of service by mail and posting, within 15 days from the day of mailing
or posting such notice, whichever is later, file an appeal that:



         (a)   Disputes the notice to abate the nuisance or
attractive nuisance; or



         (b)   Contends that to abate the nuisance or attractive
nuisance within the time set forth in subsection (B)(1) above, is impossible
or impractical.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-62.5)  (Ord. No. 2331, 2379)



SEC. 7-155.  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   A written appeal shall be filed with the city clerk not later
than ten days after delivery of the notice to abate, or, in the case of
service by mail and posting, within 15 days from the day of mailing or
posting the notice, whichever is later.  Such appeal shall set forth the
following information:



      (1)   The street address or assessor's parcel number of the
property in question;



      (2)   The specific facts that justify the appellant's
contentions; and



      (3)   The appellant's name, an address to send all notices,
and a daytime telephone number to contact appellant or leave messages for
appellant.



   (B)   The appeal officer shall notify the appellant of the time and
place for the appeal and shall conduct the appeal within a reasonable time
but not less than five days after receipt of the appeal by the city clerk.



   (C)   The appeal officer shall consider all material evidence that a
reasonable person would normally rely upon to make a significant decision.



   (D)   The appeal officer shall make written findings of facts and
conclusions of law, and render a decision as to whether or not the property
constitutes a nuisance or attractive nuisance and, if so, when such condition
must be abated.



   (E)   All decisions by the appeal officer shall be final decisions
of the administrative power of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-62.6)  (Ord. No. 2331, 2379)



SEC. 7-156.  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   If the nuisance or attractive nuisance is not abated within the time
specified in the notice to abate the nuisance or attractive nuisance or
within ten days from the date of the denial of any appeal, the city manager
shall abate the nuisance.



(Ord. No. 2768)



SEC. 7-157.  ABATEMENT AND RELATED ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS INCURRED BY CITY.



   The costs of abatement incurred by the city of a nuisance or attractive
nuisance and related administrative costs shall be paid by the property owner
and shall be collectible by the city as a civil debt.



(Ord. No. 2768)



SEC. 7-158.  ABATEMENT AND RELATED ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS AS LIEN.



   (A)   When the city abates a nuisance as defined in section 7-151 or
an attractive nuisance as defined in section 7-152, the city manager or
designee may impose a lien for recovery by the city of the costs for
abatement and related administrative costs upon the property on which the
nuisance or attractive nuisance was maintained.



   (B)   Prior to recording a lien, the city manager or designee shall
prepare a nuisance abatement cost report containing the following information:



      (1)   The street address, legal description, and assessor's
parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is to be imposed;



      (2)   The name and address of the owner of the property;



      (3)   The name of the city as the agency on whose behalf the
lien is imposed;



      (4)   The date of the abatement order; and



      (5)   The amount of the lien.



   (C)   The city manager or designee shall notify each property owner
of the time, date, and location that the city council shall consider any cost
report imposing a lien on the owner's property. The city manager or designee
shall serve the notice in the same manner as a summons in a civil action
pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title
5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure.



   (D)   If the property owner cannot be located after diligent search,
the city manager or designee may serve the notice by posting a copy of the
notice upon the subject property in a conspicuous place for a period of ten
days. The city manager or designee shall also publish the notice pursuant to
Code of Civil Procedure section 6062 in a newspaper of general circulation
that is published in Ventura County.



   (E)   At a public hearing, the city council shall consider the cost
report with any objections of any property owner liable to be assessed for
the costs stated in the report. The city council may modify the cost report
as appropriate.



   (F)   Upon approval by the city council, the city manager or
designee shall file a certified copy of the cost report with the county
auditor. The city manager or designee request that the county auditor process
and record the lien.



(Ord. No. 2768)



SEC. 7-159.  PENALTIES.



   (A)   If a person or entity is served a notice to abate a nuisance
or attractive nuisance pursuant to section 7-154(A) and fails to either abate
the condition within ten days of the delivery of such notice, or in the case
of service by mail and posting, within 15 days from the day of mailing or
posting the notice, whichever is later or fails to file a timely appeal, such
person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  Each day that such nuisance or
attractive nuisance exists beyond the time set forth in this chapter for
abatement or appeal of the notice to abate such nuisance or attractive
nuisance shall constitute a new and separate misdemeanor and may be charged
as such.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any misdemeanor violation or
failure to comply may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be prosecuted
as an infraction.



   (B)   If a person or entity is served a notice to abate a nuisance
or attractive nuisance pursuant to section 7-154(A) and files an appeal, such
person shall comply with the decision of the appeal officer. If a person or
entity fails to comply with a decision of the appeal officer that person or
entity shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  Each day that such person or
entity fails to comply with the decision of the appeal officer shall
constitute a new and separate misdemeanor and may be charged as such.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any misdemeanor violation or failure to comply
may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be prosecuted as an infraction.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-62.7)  (Ord. No. 2331, 2379; 2768)



SEC. 7-160.  JUDICIAL REMEDIES.



   (A)   In addition to the other remedies of this chapter the city
attorney is authorized to:



      (1)   Commence a civil action in the superior court to enforce
all or any of the provisions of any abatement order;



      (2)   Commence a civil action, including seeking a
receivership, to abate a public nuisance as an alternative to, or in
conjunction with, an administrative proceeding pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   In any civil action, administrative or special proceeding
brought to abate a public nuisance, the prevailing party will be entitled to
recover attorneys’‘ fees; provided, that attorneys’ fees will only be
available in those actions or proceedings in which the city has provided
notice at the commencement of such action or proceeding that it intends to
seek and recover its own attorneys’ fees. In no action or proceeding shall
an award of attorneys’ fees exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’
fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding.



(Ord. No. 2919)



ARTICLE X.  SHOPPING CARTS



SEC. 7-165.  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   The city council finds and declares that the accumulation and storage
of wrecked, dismantled, or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof, on
public or private property reduces property values, promotes blight and
deterioration, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the
health and safety of minors, and is aesthetically displeasing and injurious
to the health, safety and general welfare of the community. Therefore, the
presence of wrecked, dismantled, or abandoned shopping carts, or parts
thereof, on public or private property, is declared to constitute a public
nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-70.1)  (Ord. No. 2380)



SEC. 7-166.  DEFINITIONS.



   For purpose of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   PUBLIC PROPERTY - Includes, but is not limited to, all areas
dedicated to public use for parks, parking lots, street purposes, roadways,
parkways, alleys, sidewalks, flood control channels and any public
right-of-way.



   (B)   SHOPPING CART - A metal or plastic basket that is mounted on
wheels or a similar device generally used in retail establishments by a
customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-70.2)  (Ord. No. 2380)



SEC. 7-167.  ABANDONED SHOPPING CART.



   (A)   When a shopping cart is left standing on any public or private
property, the shopping cart shall be deemed to be abandoned and to constitute
a public nuisance.  This subsection shall not apply to shopping carts left
standing on the private property of the owner of the shopping cart, as such
owner is identified by the sign affixed to the shopping cart as required by
section 7-170.



   (B)   If a shopping cart is left standing on any public or private
property or if the shopping cart does not bear the sign required by section
7-170, the owner of the shopping cart shall be responsible and liable for the
costs of removal and storage of the abandoned shopping cart.



   (C)   The city manager may exempt a shopping cart owner from the
provisions of subsection (B) of this section if the shopping cart owner has
implemented a plan whereby the shopping cart owner's employees retrieve
shopping carts, or whereby the shopping cart owner has entered into a
contract with a shopping cart retrieval service and has provided the city
manager with proof of such contract, provided the frequency of the shopping
cart retrieval service is satisfactory to the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-70.3)  (Ord. No. 2380)



SEC. 7-168.  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by
the city manager, who may enter onto public or private property to examine a
shopping cart or parts thereof, to obtain information as to the identity of a
shopping cart and to cause the abatement and removal of shopping carts
declared to be a nuisance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-70.4)  (Ord. No. 2380)



SEC. 7-169.  ASSESSMENTS FOR SHOPPING CART REMOVAL; NOTICE, HEARINGS, SALE.



   (A)   Upon the abatement and removal of any shopping cart located on
public or private property, the city manager shall notify the owner thereof,
if the same can be ascertained, by mailing a notice of abatement to the last
known address of the owner.  Such notice shall state the date the shopping
cart was removed from public or private property, the location and procedure
for retrieval of the shopping cart, and that in order to receive a hearing
about the removal of the shopping cart, the owner or its agent shall submit a
request for such hearing to the city manager either in person or in writing
within ten days of the date appearing on the notice.



   (B)   Any shopping cart removed and stored pursuant to these
provisions shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within 30 days
after such removal and upon the payment of reasonable administrative fees. 
Such administrative fees may be waived if a determination is made at a
hearing that the administrative fees are unduly burdensome or otherwise
unfair.



   (C)   The administrative fees for the removal and storage of the
shopping cart shall be established or modified by resolution of the city
council and shall include the actual cost of removal and storage of any
shopping cart, or parts thereof, plus the proportional share of
administrative costs in connection therewith.



   (D)   Any hearing shall be conducted within five days of the receipt
of the request for such hearing, excluding weekends and holidays, by the city
manager, who shall be the hearing officer.  The failure of either the owner
or its agent to request a hearing within ten days from the date appearing on
the notice shall satisfy the hearing requirement.



   (E)   If a hearing is requested, the hearing officer shall determine
whether good cause was shown for abatement or removal of the shopping cart
from public or private property.  The decision of the hearing officer shall
be the final administrative remedy available to the owner or its agent.



   (F)   If good cause is shown for the abatement and removal of the
shopping cart, the owner or its agent shall have 15 days from the date of the
hearing to retrieve the shopping cart upon payment of the administrative
fee.  If good cause is not shown for the abatement and removal of the
shopping cart from public or private property, the administrative fee shall
be waived and the owner or its agent shall have 15 days to retrieve the
shopping cart from the storage area.



   (G)   Any shopping cart that is not retrieved by the owner of such
shopping cart within 30 days after the mailing of written notice of abatement
when such owner has not requested a hearing in accordance with this section,
or within 30 days of storage of the shopping cart by the city in all other
cases, shall be deemed to be permanently abandoned and may be sold at public
auction or otherwise disposed of at the end of 30 days following such notice.



   (H)   (1)   At such time as shall be convenient, the city shall
advertise for the sale of permanently abandoned shopping carts.



      (2)   Notice of such sale shall be posted in three conspicuous
places located within the city.



      (3)   Ten days after the posting of such notice and the time
and place fixed in the notice for the sale such permanently abandoned
shopping carts may be sold and delivered to the highest bidder free and clear
of the claims of the owner thereof.



   (I)   The proceeds of such sale shall be disbursed to the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-70.5)  (Ord. No. 2380)



SEC. 7-170.  IDENTIFICATION BY OWNER.



   (A)   All shopping carts used in the city shall be properly
identified by the owner thereof, including the name of the local business in
which such shopping cart is to be used. Each shopping cart shall have a sign
permanently affixed to the shopping cart in a conspicuous location stating in
substantially the same language that:  “Removal of this shopping cart from
these premises without written consent is prohibited by section 7-171 of the
Oxnard City Code.”



   (B)   Every business owner using shopping carts shall post in a
conspicuous place a sign containing the substantially similar words to the
effect that:  “Removal of shopping carts from these premises without
written consent is unlawful by section 7-171 of the Oxnard City Code.”



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-70.6)  (Ord. No. 2380)



SEC. 7-171.  REMOVAL FROM PREMISES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   No person shall remove any shopping cart from the immediate structure
or parking premises of any food store, market, mercantile establishment, or
other business in the city, unless such person is the owner, owner's employee
or agent or obtains written consent from the shopping cart owner.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-70.7)  (Ord. No. 2380)



SEC. 7-172.  ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.



   No person shall abandon or leave any shopping cart, which has been
removed from the owner's premises, upon public property or upon any private
property not under the control of the person abandoning or leaving the
shopping cart or under the control of the shopping cart owner.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-70.8)  (Ord. No. 2380)



SEC. 7-173.  UNLAWFUL POSSESSION.



   No person shall possess any shopping cart that has been removed from
the owner's premises without written consent or that has been abandoned or
left on private property under circumstances as described in section 7-167
unless such person so having possession has notified the owner or city of the
presence and location of such shopping cart.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-70.9)  (Ord. No. 2380)



ARTICLE XI.  SOUND REGULATION



SEC. 7-180.  DECLARATION OF POLICY.



   (A)   The city council hereby adopts this article in order to
protect classes of land use from excessive sound because the city council has
determined that such excessive sound is detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare and contrary to the public interest.



   (B)   The city council also adopts this article in order to
implement the noise standards established by the State for community noise
exposure and to establish land uses compatible with various sound levels.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-60.1)  (Ord. No. 2292)



SEC. 7-181.  EXCESSIVE SOUND AS PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   The city council hereby declares that the generation or maintenance of
any sound in a manner prohibited by the provisions of this article shall be
considered a public nuisance.  The person responsible for such generation or
maintenance shall be punished in accordance with this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-60.2)  (Ord. No. 2292)



SEC. 7-182.  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS - Activities occurring on a parcel of
real property which is undeveloped and used for cultivation, producing crops,
and raising livestock.



   (B)   AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL - The all-encompassing sound level
associated with a given location, time of day and duration.



   (C)   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL - The sound level in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network (scale) at slow
response with the unit of measurement to be defined as dBA.



   (D)   BROADCAST - To operate, or permit the operation of, any sound
amplification system on or within a vehicle for the purpose of addressing the
public or attracting the attention of persons outside the vehicle.



   (E)   DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR or DIRECTOR - The development
services director for the city or designee.



   (F)   CUMULATIVE PERIOD - An additive period of time composed of
individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted.



   (G)   DECIBEL or dB - A unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound
equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure
of the sound measured to the reference pressure which is 20 micropascals (20
micronewtons per square meter).



   (H)   EMERGENCY MACHINERY, VEHICLE, WORK OR ALARM - Any machinery,
vehicle, work or alarm used, employed, performed or operated in an effort to
protect, provide or restore safety conditions in the city, or for residents,
or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.



   (I)   GRADING - Any excavating or falling of earth material or any
combination thereof conducted at a site to prepare the site for construction
or other improvements thereon.



   (J)   HERTZ or Hz - The unit which describes the frequency of a
function periodic in time which is the reciprocal of the period.



   (K)   IMPULSE SOUND - A sound of short duration usually less than
one second and of high intensity with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.



   (L)   INTRUDING SOUND LEVEL - The total sound level, in decibels,
originating from an alleged offensive source at a specified location.



    (M)   PERSON - An individual, firm, association, copartnership,
joint venture, corporation or any entity, public or private in nature.



   (N)   SIMPLE TONE NOISE - A sound characterized by a predominant
frequency so that other frequencies cannot be readily distinguished and shall
exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure levels in the band with the
tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two
contiguous one-third octave bands as follows:  five dB for center
frequencies of 500 Hz and above, and by eight dB for center frequencies
between 160 and 400 Hz and by 15 dB for frequencies less than or equal to 125
Hz.



   (O)   SOUND LEVEL METER - An instrument meeting American National
Standard Institute Standards 51.4-1971 or most recent revision thereof for
Type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and
analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data.



   (P)   SOUND LEVEL - Twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of
the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure which shall be
explicitly stated.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-60.3)  (Ord. No. 2292, 2413)



SEC. 7-183.  DECIBEL MEASUREMENT CRITERIA.



   Any decibel measurement made pursuant to the provisions of section
7-187 shall be based on a reference sound pressure level of 20 micropascals
as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighted sound level.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-60.4)  (Ord. No. 2292)



SEC. 7-184.  DESIGNATED SOUND ZONES.



   The properties hereinafter described are hereby assigned to the
following sound zones:



   (A)   Sound Zone I - Residential property: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4,
R-B-1, R-W-1, R-W-2, R-2-C, R-3-C, MH-P, MHP-C, R-P-D, CPC, R-BF, CBD, C-O,
C-1, C-2, CVC, CNC, BRP, HCI, and any of the above zones with a PD suffix.



   (B)   Sound Zone II - Commercial property: C-1, C-2, CBD, CVC, CNC,
BRP, RP, RC, HCI, and any of the preceding zones with a PD suffix.



   (C)   Sound Zone III - Industrial property: M-L, M-1, M-2, M-P-D,
CR, CDI, EC, COD, and any of the preceding zones with a PD suffix.



   (D)   Sound Zone IV - All property within the contours around a
roadway, railroad track, or the Oxnard Airport as identified in Figure IX-2
of the Noise Element of the 2020 General Plan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-60.5)  (Ord. No. 2292)



SEC. 7-185.  EXTERIOR SOUND STANDARDS.



   (A)   The following standards, unless otherwise specifically
indicated, shall apply to all property within the designated sound zone:



 

Sound Zone
 
Type of Land Use
 
Allowable Exterior Sound Level


7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
 
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.


I
 
Residential
 
55 dBA
 
50 dBA


II
 
Commercial
 
65 dBA
 
60 dBA


III
 
Industrial
 
70 dBA
 
70 dBA


IV
 
As identified in Figure IX-2 of the 2020 General Plan



 



   (B)   Each of the sound levels specified shall be reduced by five
dBA for impulse sound and simple tone noise, or for sounds consisting of
speech or music, provided, however, that if the ambient sound level exceeds
the allowable exterior sound level, the ambient sound level shall be the
standard.



   (C)   No person at any location within the city shall create,
maintain, cause or allow any sound on property which causes the sound level,
when measured on any other property, to exceed:



      (1)   The allowable exterior sound level for a cumulative
period of more than 30 minutes in any hour;



      (2)   The allowable exterior sound level plus five dBA for a
cumulative period of more than 15 minutes in any hour;



      (3)   The allowable exterior sound level plus ten dBA for a
cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour;



      (4)   The allowable exterior sound level plus 15 dBA for a
cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or



      (5)   The allowable exterior sound level plus 20 dBA for any
period of time.



   (D)   In the event the ambient sound level exceeds any of the first
four sound level categories in subsection (C) above, the allowable exterior
sound level applicable to the category shall be increased to reflect ambient
sound level. In the event the ambient sound level exceeds the fifth category,
the maximum allowable exterior sound level under the category shall be
increased to reflect the maximum ambient sound level.



   (E)   If the measurement location is on a boundary between two
different sound zones, the lower allowable exterior sound level applicable to
the sound zone shall apply.



   (F)   If the intruding sound level is continuous and cannot be
reasonably discontinued or stopped for a time period whereby the ambient
sound level may be determined, then the measured sound level obtained while
the sound source is in operation shall be compared directly to the allowable
exterior sound level.  The allowable exterior sound level shall be the one
applicable to the type of land use at the location of the measurement and the
time of day.



   (G)   The reasonableness of temporarily discontinuing the sound
generated by an intruding sound source shall be determined by the director
for the purpose of establishing the existing ambient sound level at the
measurement location.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-60.6)  (Ord. No. 2292)



SEC. 7-186.  INTERIOR SOUND STANDARDS.



   (A)   The following standards, unless otherwise specifically
indicated, shall apply to all residential property within all sound zones:



 

Sound Zone
 
Type of Land Usage
 
Allowable Interior Sound Level


7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
 
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.


All
 
Residential
 
50 dBA
 
45 dBA



 



   (B)   The sound level specified above shall be reduced by five dBA
for impulse sound or simple tone noise or for sounds consisting of speech or
music provided, however, that if the ambient exterior sound level exceeds the
allowable interior sound level, then the ambient exterior sound level shall
be the standard.



   (C)   No person at any location within the city shall create,
maintain, cause or allow any sound on property which causes the sound level
when measured within any dwelling unit in any sound zone to exceed:



      (1)   The allowable interior sound level for a cumulative
period of more than five minutes in any hour; or



      (2)   The allowable interior sound level plus five dBA for a
cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or



      (3)   The allowable interior sound level plus ten dBA for any
period of time.



   (D)   In the event the ambient exterior sound level exceeds any of
the first two sound level categories above, the allowable interior sound
level applicable to those categories shall be increased to reflect the
maximum ambient sound level.



   (E)   If the measurement location is on a boundary between two
different sound zones, the lower allowable interior sound level applicable to
the sound zone shall apply.



   (F)   If the intruding sound is continuous and cannot reasonably be
discontinued or stopped for a time period whereby the ambient exterior sound
level may be determined, the same procedures specified in section 7-185(F)
and (G) shall be followed prior to enforcement of the provisions of this
section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-60.7)  (Ord. No. 2292)



SEC. 7-187.  SOUND LEVEL MEASUREMENT.



   (A)   When the location selected for measuring a sound level is
within the affected dwelling unit, the measurement shall be made at a point
at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the sound source
with windows in an open position depending on the normal seasonal ventilation
requirements.



   (B)   When the location selected for measuring a sound level is
outside a dwelling unit, the measurement shall be taken at the property line
of the site from which the sound emanates.



   (C)   When the location selected for measuring a sound level is on
public property, the measurement shall be taken 100 feet from the sound
source.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-60.8)  (Ord. No. 2292)



SEC. 7-188.  EXEMPTIONS FOR SPECIFIED ACTIVITIES.



   The following specified activities shall be exempted from the
provisions of this article.



   (A)   Activities for which a permit or license has been issued and
conducted on public parks, public playgrounds, or public or private school
grounds, including school athletic and school entertainment events which are
conducted under the sanction of the school.



   (B)   Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows, sporting or
entertainment events, provided the activity is conducted pursuant to a permit
or license.



   (C)   Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to
or connected with emergency machinery, vehicle, work or alarm, provided the
sounding of any alarm on any building or motor vehicle shall terminate within
30 minutes in any hour of being activated.



   (D)   Sound sources associated with or created by construction,
repair, remodeling or grading of any real property or during authorized
seismic surveys, provided the activities occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, including Saturday.



   (E)   All mechanical devices, apparatus, or equipment associated
with agriculture operations provided:



      (1)   Operations occur between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on
weekdays, including Saturday;



      (2)   Operations are for the protection or salvage of
agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or
other adverse weather conditions; or



      (3)   Operations are intended for agricultural pest control
through pesticide application, provided the application is made in accordance
with permits issued by or regulations enforced by the California Department
of Agriculture.



   (F)   Sounds associated with the maintenance of real property,
provided the activities occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
any day except Sunday and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on
Sunday.  Required city services shall be allowed to conduct routine
maintenance of real property or emergency-related function before 7:00 a.m.
and after 6:00 p.m. on any day.



   (G)   Sounds associated with the maintenance and inspection of
emergency machinery, vehicle, work or alarm provided the activities occur
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.



   (H)   Broadcasting from any aircraft, motor vehicle or fixed
sound-amplifying equipment or the use of a radio, tape player, tape recorder,
compact disc player, record player or television, in the course of an
assembly, festival or parade for which a license or permit has been issued.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-60.9)  (Ord. No. 2292)



SEC. 7-189.  AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION SYSTEMS.



   Until January 1, 1995, the sound standards enumerated in sections 7-185
and 7-186 shall be increased ten dBA where the alleged intruding sound source
is an air conditioning or refrigeration system or associated equipment which
was installed prior to the effective date of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-60.10)  (Ord. No. 2292)



SEC. 7-190.  BROADCASTING IN CERTAIN AREAS.



   Except as allowed by section 7-188, no person shall broadcast:



   (A)   Within 300 feet of any school or church or other place of
religious worship, when in session, or any hospital; or



   (B)   On any public street between the hours 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
of the following day.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-60.10.5)  (Ord. No. 2413)



SEC. 7-191.  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any person
violating this article on public property shall be guilty of an infraction
and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $50
for a first violation; a fine not exceeding $100 for a second violation
within one year; and a fine not exceeding $250 for each additional violation
within one year.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-60.11)  (Ord. No. 2292)



SEC. 7-192.  VIOLATION.



   (A)   Any sound exceeding the sound level standards as specified
herein shall be deemed to be a violation of the provisions of this article.



   (B)   No citation or notice to appear shall be issued or criminal
complaint shall be filed for a violation of this article unless the alleged
offending party is first given a verbal or written notification of violation
by any peace officer, public officer, park ranger, or other person assigned
to enforce this article and the alleged offending party is given an
opportunity to correct the reason for the violation.



   (C)   The property owner shall be notified in writing and mailed a
copy of this article whenever any action, including a verbal or written
warning, is instituted to enforce this article on private property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-60.12)  (Ord. No. 2292)



SEC. 7-193.  CONVICTION; MISDEMEANOR.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in
an amount not to exceed $1,000 or be imprisoned in the county jail for a
period not to exceed six months or both such fine and imprisonment.  Each
day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-60.13)  (Ord. No. 2292)



SEC. 7-194.  LIEN ON PROPERTY.



   The expense of enforcement of this article is hereby declared to be a
lien against the property on which such public nuisance is maintained, and
such lien shall be a personal obligation of the property owner.



(`64 Code, Sec. 19-60.14)  (Ord. No. 2292)



ARTICLE XII.  INLAND WATERWAYS



DIVISION 1.  IN GENERAL



SEC. 7-200. DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings.



   (A)   COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES - Operations or businesses involving
chartered sports fishing, commercial transport, commercial fishing, vessel or
engine repair, vessel salvage, vessel rental, vessel sales, vessel schools,
and other commercial uses of a vessel except for on-site minor vessel
maintenance, repairs, or emergency services when the work or service is
performed at the vessel's moorage.



   (B)   EASEMENT AREA - The water area immediately adjacent to land
bordering the inland waterway which has been reserved by deed and tract map
as a private easement for the adjacent land.



   (C)   FLOAT - A floating moorage, dock or structure intended to be
used for tying fast or mooring a vessel which has been approved by the city.



   (D)   HARBOR - The Channel Islands Harbor of the county.



   (E)   INLAND WATERWAY - The network of artificial watercourses
comprised of two principal channels interconnecting a diffused system of
canals, and which is confluent to the harbor, extends therefrom in a
northerly direction, and lies within the property circumscribed by Wooley
Road, Victoria Avenue, Channel Islands and Harbor Boulevards.



   (F)   LIVE ABOARD - To reside on a vessel that is moored in the
inland waterway between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. unless a person
is actively engaged in making the vessel ready for leaving its moorage that
same day.



   (G)   OWNER - The holder of the primary possessory interest in a
vessel.



   (H)   PADDLE CRAFT - A raft, surfboard, kayak, canoe, inner-tube or
other nondescript watercraft propelled solely by paddles or oars.



   (I)   REFUSE - Any discard or waste matter including garbage,
sewage, offal and carcasses.



   (J)   SEAWORTHY - Except for paddle craft, a vessel which is
currently registered by the State or is currently United States documented;
capable of immediate movement with installed power if a power boat or under
auxiliary power if a sail boat; and for vessels equipped with automatic bilge
pump, the installed bilge pump and battery are fully operational.



   (K)   STRAY VESSEL - An abandoned vessel, a vessel the owner of
which is unknown, and/or a vessel moored without the dockowner's permission.



   (L)   VESSEL - A watercraft of any description.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-1)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-201.  SEAWORTHINESS REQUIRED.



   The owner shall not permit a vessel to be launched, moored or used upon
the inland waterway unless the vessel is in a seaworthy condition and either
bears a decal showing current registration of the vessel by the State or is a
currently United States documented vessel.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-2)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-202.  PUBLIC WAY; WATERCOURSE IDENTIFICATION.



   (A)   The navigational course of the inland waterway is declared to
be a public way for the purpose of navigation.  The water and surface of
each canal and channel of the inland waterway are divided into three
constituent parts:  two easement areas extending medially from the banks of
the canal or channel which bound and delimit a central passage or
navigational course for vessels underway.



   (B)   The city shall identify by name, color or device each
watercourse of the inland waterway.



   (C)   Every developed property which is adjacent to the inland
waterway shall display the numerical address of the property in a place and a
format approved by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-3)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-203.  CITY MANAGER'S POWERS.



   The city manager is granted full authority to enforce the provisions of
this chapter and is vested with those powers reasonably necessary to perform
the function.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-4)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-204.  PUBLIC ACCESS; PERMITS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.



   (A)   The city manager shall not restrict reasonable public access
to the inland waterway or the public enjoyment thereof for navigational
purposes.



   (B)   No group of persons, or business, political or social
organization, shall parade or conduct a special event or activity requiring
group participation within the inland waterway without first obtaining a
permit from the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-5)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-205.  MARKING, REMOVING SUNKEN VESSELS.



   The owner of a wrecked or sunken vessel within the inland waterway
shall immediately mark the vessel with a lighted buoy, shall immediately
report the location of the wrecked or sunken vessel to the Oxnard fire
department, and shall maintain the lighted mark until the vessel is removed
from the inland waterway.  The owner shall promptly effect removal of the
vessel.  The failure of the owner to do so within 72 hours shall be
considered abandonment of the vessel.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-6)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-206.  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.



   (A)   The owner is responsible for the conduct of persons aboard the
vessel while the vessel is moored or operated upon the inland waterway.



   (B)   The owner shall not permit the vessel to be operated upon the
inland waterway without a competent person in command.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-7)  (Ord. No. 2484)



DIVISION 2.  REGULATION OF VESSELS



SEC. 7-210.  OPERATION OF VESSELS.



   No person in command of a vessel upon the inland waterway shall operate
the vessel, or permit its operation or moorage:



   (A)   At a speed greater than five nautical miles an hour;



   (B)   At a speed which results in a wake which causes damage to or
is unsafe to persons, vessels underway, moored vessels, docks, or other
property, public or private;



   (C)   In a manner that obstructs or endangers moorage or navigation;



   (D)   Near the sea wall bulkheads in such a manner as the vessel's
propeller wash causes damage to the bulkhead;



   (E)   With the stern of a motorized vessel moored towards the sea
wall bulkhead; or



   (F)   With any portion of the vessel extending into the public
right-of-way or an adjacent private easement without the written permission
of the owner of such adjacent private easement.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-8)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-211.  LIVING ABOARD AND DISCHARGE OF REFUSE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall:



   (A)   Live aboard a vessel moored in the inland waterway;



   (B)   Discharge the contents of a vessel's galley, toilet fixtures,
or fuel tanks into the inland waterway; or



   (C)   Abandon or deposit refuse, fuel, oil, or lubricants into the
inland waterway or on any property, public or private, adjacent to the inland
waterway.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-9)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-212.  MOORAGE; ABANDONMENT OF VESSELS; OBSTRUCTION.



   No person shall:



   (A)   Leave a vessel unattended in the inland waterway unless the
vessel is made fast to a float approved by the city manager;



   (B)   Moor or tie-off a vessel to another vessel or in a manner
which causes the vessel to extend into the public right-of-way or an adjacent
private easement without the written permission of the owner of such private
easement;



   (C)   Moor or tie-off a vessel in the inland waterway, without
written permission of the owner or person in possession of the float; or



   (D)   Abandon a vessel, whether afloat, aground or sunken, upon the
inland waterway.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-10)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-213.  DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED, STRAY, GROUNDED OR SUNKEN VESSELS.



   Any stray, abandoned, grounded or sunken vessel, and any unauthorized
float or other obstruction, upon the inland waterway shall be subject to
removal, storage, sale or destruction by the manager at the expense of the
owner or other person entitled to possession.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-11)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-214.  USE OF INFLAMMABLES ON MOORED VESSEL.



   No person shall:



   (A)   Use a spray gun for any purpose except spraying water, or use
a torch for welding or burning, upon a float or aboard a vessel moored
thereto in the inland waterway;



   (B)   Store any cloth subjected to solvent, oil or paint, or store
any highly flammable substance, upon a float or aboard a vessel moored
thereto in the inland waterway; provided, however, paint products and motor
fuel may be stored in closed, airtight metal containers or in tanks produced
commercially for the specific purpose; or



   (C)   Burn paint, or use or permit an open fire for any purpose,
upon a float or aboard a vessel moored thereto in the inland waterway;
provided, however, a hibachi may be used on the open deck of a vessel or
float under safe conditions.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-12)  (Ord. No. 2484)



DIVISION 3.  REGULATION OF CONDUCT



SEC. 7-220.  UNAUTHORIZED BOARDING OR TAMPERING WITH VESSELS.



   No person shall board a vessel moored in the inland waterway, or
damage, remove or tamper with any part thereof, without the consent of the
owner.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-13)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-221.  COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY; MOORAGE OF COMMERCIAL VESSEL; DOCK RENTAL.



   (A)   Commercial activities - No person shall advertise or conduct
any commercial activities in any residential zone in or adjacent to the
inland waterway.  This prohibition includes residences, lots, ramps and
docks adjacent to the land.



   (B)   Moorage of commercial vessels -



      (1)   Except for vessels making temporary service calls, no
vessel used for commercial activities or a vessel being prepared for
commercial activities shall be moored in the inland waterway unless a limited
commercial moorage permit is obtained from the city manager.



      (2)   A commercially licensed or registered vessel is prima
facie evidence that the vessel is used for commercial activities.



   (C)   Dock rentals - The rental of a dock space or moorage for more
than one vessel for each residence or lot is deemed to constitute commercial
activity and is not permitted in the inland waterway.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-14)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-222.  LIMITED COMMERCIAL MOORAGE PERMIT.



   (A)   A limited commercial moorage permit may be obtained from the
city manager.  The permit authorizes a commercially registered vessel to
moor in the residential zones of the inland waterway, provided that the owner
or one of the owners who has at least 51 percent interest in the vessel, is a
resident of the dwelling unit associated with or adjacent to the mooring.



   (B)   The limited permit shall not be issued by the city manager if
any of the following activities are then occurring and may be rescinded by
the manager if any of the following activities occur after permit issuance:



      (1)   Frequent or extensive repairs are made to the engine,
equipment, gear or fishing paraphernalia of a vessel indicating that the
vessel is being used for substantial commercial activities;



      (2)   A generator or other auxiliary motor is operated between
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or for more than two hours between the hours of 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m.;



      (3)   Excessive noise arises from the operation of the
vessel's engines or from any other activity on or close to the vessel which
interferes with the quiet enjoyment of residents in the area;



      (4)   Any person lives on board or stays overnight on the
vessel;



      (5)   The vessel is used for transporting persons, equipment
or supplies to oil platforms; or



      (6)   The vessel is used for commercial activities more than
12 days, or portions of a day, during any 12-month period.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-15)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-223.  DOCKING PERMIT REQUIRED; ISSUANCE; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   Docking permit required - No vessel shall be docked adjacent
to a vacant lot within the inland waterway unless a valid docking permit is
obtained from the city manager.



   (B)   Issuance of docking permit - Upon receipt of an application
for a docking permit, the city manager shall issue the docking permit if the
provisions of subsection (C) of this section are satisfied.



   (C)   Purpose of docking permit - The purpose of the docking permit
is to allow a vessel to be docked adjacent to a vacant lot without
jeopardizing the single-family residential nature of the inland waterway. The
following standards shall apply to the issuance and continued validity of a
docking permit:



      (1)   No vessel over 50 feet in length shall be eligible for a
docking permit.



      (2)   A docking permit will only be issued:



         (a)   To the owner of a vacant lot; or



         (b)   To anyone having the written permission of such an
owner to dock a vessel adjacent to the vacant lot.



      (3)   A docking permit may only confer benefits to the
individual permittee.  The docking permit is not a covenant running with the
land and shall not be construed to confer any benefits to heirs, successors
or assigns of the permittee.



   (D)   Prohibited activities - The following activities are
prohibited in connection with the docking of a vessel adjacent to a vacant
lot in the inland waterway:



      (1)   Performing major alterations, repairs or maintenance on
a vessel, or its engines, or equipment;



      (2)   Creating excessive noise, whether by operation of a
vessel's engines or from any other activity on or close to the vessel or lot;



      (3)   Storing engine parts, equipment, material, or any other
paraphernalia, on the dock;



      (4)   Modifying the dock or lot;



      (5)   Parking automobiles, trucks, trailers, or other vehicles
or storing anything whatsoever, on the adjacent vacant lot;



      (6)   Using the adjacent vacant lot in any way not expressly
authorized by the zoning ordinance; or



      (7)   Creating a nuisance or causing any of the following to
occur in an offensive or objectionable manner and to a greater extent than is
customary in a residential area:



         (a)   Noise;



         (b)   Lights;



         (c)   Vibrations;



         (d)   Smoke;



         (e)   Odor;



         (f)   Glare;



         (g)   Dust or dirt;



         (h)   Electrical interference;



         (i)   Pedestrian traffic;



         (j)   Vehicular traffic; or



         (k)   Television or radio interference.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-16)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-224.  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   Any violation of this chapter shall be cause for revocation of any
permit by the city manager after the permittee has an opportunity for a
hearing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-17)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-225.  REQUEST FOR PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   A request for hearing shall be filed with the city clerk. 
Upon receiving a request for hearing, the city clerk shall send the request
to the hearing officer.  The hearing officer shall promptly schedule and
conduct a hearing.



   (B)   The hearing officer shall mail the notice of the hearing at
least ten days before the hearing to interested persons.



   (C)   If a timely request for hearing is not received the city
manager shall have the authority to revoke the permit without holding a
public hearing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-18)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-226.  HEARING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   All hearings shall be open to the public.



   (B)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
fashion and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-19)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-227.  DECISION.



   (A)   Within 14 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing
officer shall issue and mail to interested persons a written decision
containing a statement of the reasons on which the decision is based.



   (B)   The hearing officer shall serve a copy of such decision on the
manager.  The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and shall
exhaust available administrative remedies.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-20)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-228.  JUDICIAL ACTION.



   Any person may seek judicial review of the decision of the hearing
officer within the time and in the manner provided by the Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure, Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-21)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-229.  FISHING RESTRICTED.



   No person shall fish, cast, or permit fishing gear to extend within the
navigational course of the inland waterway.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-22)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-230.  CONSTRUCTION OF FLOATS AND STRUCTURES; DREDGING.



   No person shall build or alter a float, a sea wall or a structure of
any kind, within the inland waterway without obtaining a permit from the
manager for the design, location, and construction thereof, nor shall any
person excavate or dredge, within the inland waterway without first obtaining
a permit for the purpose from the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-23)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-231.  STORAGE ON FLOATS AND SEAWALLS.



   No person shall store on a float or seawall any lumber, junk, trash,
salvage materials or debris, or abandoned, discarded, or unused furniture,
stoves, sinks, toilets, cabinets, or other household fixtures or equipment. 
For the purpose of this section, the term “debris” shall include unused
or discarded matter and material having no substantial market value,
including (without limitation or exclusion by enumeration) such matter and
material as:  rubbish, refuse, and matter of any kind including but not
limited to rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, soil,
building materials, crates, cartons, containers, boxes, machinery or parts
thereof, scrap metal and other pieces of metal, ferrous or nonferrous,
furniture or parts thereof, abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicles, or parts thereof, trimmings from plants or trees, cans, bottles,
and barrels.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-25)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-232.  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   The following activities are prohibited in connection with the docking
of a vessel adjacent to a developed lot in the inland waterway:



   (A)   Performing major alterations, repairs or maintenance on a
vessel, or its engines, or equipment;



   (B)   Creating excessive noise, whether by operation of a vessel's
engines or from any other activity on or close to the vessel or lot;



   (C)   Storing engine parts, equipment, material, or any other
paraphernalia, on the dock;



   (D)   Creating a nuisance or causing any of the following to occur
in an offensive or objectionable manner and to a greater extent than is
customary in a residential area:



      (1)   Noise;



      (2)   Lights;



      (3)   Vibrations;



      (4)   Smoke;



      (5)   Odor;



      (6)   Glare;



      (7)   Dust or dirt;



      (8)   Electrical interference; or



      (9)   Television or radio interference.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-25)  (Ord. No. 2484)



SEC. 7-233.  PERMIT FEES.



   The fees for any permit required by this article shall be established
by resolution of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18.1-26)  (Ord. No. 2484)



ARTICLE XIII.  GRANDFATHERED ESTABLISHMENTS SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



SEC. 7-240.  PURPOSE.



   The city council hereby establishes regulations applicable to certain
establishments located in the city and selling alcoholic beverages.  Such
establishments are “grandfathered,” or exempt from certain zoning
provisions contained in chapter 16 of the city code because such
establishments were engaged in such business before the adoption of such
provisions.  These regulations are intended to preserve the public health,
safety and welfare by defining activities at such establishments that create
a nuisance and by establishing performance standards that, if adhered to,
will obviate the creation of a nuisance.



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-241.  APPLICABILITY.



   This article applies to any establishment that was in compliance with
all applicable city ordinances and was selling alcoholic beverages at retail
in the city before the effective date of zoning ordinances contained in
chapter 16 of the city code that require establishments selling alcoholic
beverages at retail to obtain a special use permit.  This article refers to
such establishments as “grandfathered establishments.”



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-242.  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.



   A grandfathered establishment is declared to create a nuisance if the
grandfathered establishment does any of the following:



   (A)   Is operated in a manner that results in adverse effects to the
public health, safety or welfare of persons residing or working within 1,000
feet of the grandfathered establishment; or



   (B)   Is operated so as to cause or allow within the grandfathered
establishment or within 1,000 feet thereof any disturbance of the peace,
illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, public
urination, harassment of passerby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen
goods, theft, assault, battery, vandalism, loitering, excessive littering,
illegal parking, excessive loud noises (especially between 10:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m.), curfew violations, lewd conduct, traffic violations, or police
detentions and arrests; or



   (C)   Violates or allows the violation of any provision of the code
or State or federal law, statute or regulation.



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-243.  UNLAWFUL TO MAINTAIN NUISANCE.



   The owner of property on which a grandfathered establishment is located
shall not cause or allow the grandfathered establishment to create a
nuisance, whether or not such owner is also the operator of the grandfathered
establishment.  The owner of property on which a grandfathered establishment
creates a nuisance shall promptly abate such nuisance.



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-244.  NOTICE.



   The city manager may require the owner of any property on which a
grandfathered establishment creates a nuisance to abate the nuisance.  The
city manager shall, by certified mail, send written notice to abate to each
person to whom such property is assessed in the last equalized assessment
roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current.



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-245.  FORM OF NOTICE.



   The notice shall be in substantially the following form:



   NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE



Please be advised that on                                  
        , 20          , (brief description of nuisances) was caused
or allowed by (name of grandfathered establishment selling alcoholic
beverages), at property you own, located at           (address)     
          .  The aforementioned establishment sells alcoholic beverages
and is subject to Article XIII of Chapter 7 of the Oxnard City Code, which
provides that such activity constitutes a nuisance that must be abated.  If
you do not abate the nuisance by taking measures to ensure that the activity
(or another activity declared by section 7-242 of the Oxnard City Code to
constitute a nuisance) does not recur at or in the vicinity of the
establishment, and such activity or such another activity does recur or
occur, the City of Oxnard may abate the nuisance, after notice and hearing.



In order to abate the nuisance, the city may impose fines, place conditions
on the operation of the establishment, or require that the establishment
cease selling alcoholic beverages.  The city's costs of abatement will be
assessed on the above-described property and constitute a special assessment
on the property until paid.



If you object to the requirement to abate imposed by this notice, you may, no
later than ten days after the date this notice was mailed to you, file with
the city clerk a written request for a hearing before a hearing officer,
stating the grounds on which you assert that the activity does not constitute
a nuisance.  The request for hearing must be accompanied by a hearing fee in
the amount of $500.00.



This notice will become final if such a request for hearing is not timely
filed, accompanied by the hearing fee.  After the notice has become final,
the notice is evidence that the activity constituting the nuisance occurred,
and the owner of the above-described property may not question or attack such
evidence in any abatement proceeding regarding the establishment.



Dated:                               , 2              .



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-246.  ABATEMENT BY OWNER.



   On receipt of the notice, the property owner may abate the nuisance at
his/her own expense.  Nevertheless, whenever such a notice is issued, the
city manager may demand that the property owner pay costs incurred by the
city in enforcing abatement upon the property, including investigation,
boundary determination, measurement, preparation and service of the notice,
and related costs (“notice costs”).  If the property owner does not pay
such costs, a special assessment may be imposed on the property, as provided
for in this article.



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-247.  APPEAL OF NOTICE.



   Within ten days of the day that a notice to abate a nuisance is mailed,
a property owner may file with the city clerk a written request for a hearing
before a hearing officer, stating the reasons that the property owner
contests the city manager's determination that the grandfathered
establishment on the property owner's property caused or allowed a
nuisance.  Before the city clerk accepts the request for hearing for filing,
the property owner shall deposit with the city clerk the hearing fee set by
resolution of the city council.



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-248.  HEARING.



   On receiving a request for hearing, accompanied by the hearing fee, the
city clerk shall send the request to the hearing officer, who shall promptly
schedule the hearing.  At least ten days before the hearing, the hearing
officer shall send written notice to the property owner of the date, time and
place of hearing.



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-249.  CONDUCT OF HEARING.



   (A)   All hearings shall be open to the public.



   (B)   The property owner shall first present evidence to justify
his/her failure or refusal to comply with the notice to abate a nuisance. 
Thereafter, a representative of the city may present evidence.  The property
owner bears the burden of proof to justify noncompliance with the notice to
abate a nuisance.



   (C)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
fashion and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence.



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-250.  DECISION.



   (A)   Within 14 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing
officer shall issue and mail to the property owner a written decision
containing a statement of the reasons on which the decision is based.  The
hearing officer shall also provide a copy of the decision to the city manager.



   (B)   The hearing officer may uphold the notice to abate a nuisance,
modify the abatement requirements contained in the notice to abate a
nuisance, or invalidate the notice to abate a nuisance.



   (C)   The decision of the hearing officer is a final administrative
decision and is not subject to reconsideration or administrative appeal.



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-251.  JUDICIAL ACTION.



   The property owner may seek judicial review of the decision of the
hearing officer in accordance with of the Cal. Code of Civil Procedure,
Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-252.  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   If the property owner does not request a hearing of a notice to abate a
nuisance, or if a hearing is requested and the hearing officer upholds the
notice or modified the abatement requirements contained in the notice, and
the nuisance is not abated as and when required by the notice or the hearing
officer's decision, the city manager shall abate the nuisance by taking the
action required in the notice or in the hearing officer's decision, by
imposing fines as set out in the notice or in the hearing officer's decision,
by seeking a court order to prohibit the grandfathered establishment from
continuing to sell alcoholic beverages, or by taking any other action
available to the city.



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-253.  COST OF ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   (A)   The costs of abatement of a nuisance, including the payment of
any fines imposed in the notice to abate a nuisance or the decision of a
hearing officer, including notice costs, and any costs of the hearing not
paid by the property owner, shall be paid by the property owner and shall be
collectible by the city as a civil debt.



   (B)   Attorneys' fees may be recovered by the prevailing party in an
action by the city to abate a nuisance or recover the costs of abatement;
provided, however, attorneys' fees may be recovered by the property owner
against the city only if the city elects, at the initiation of the action, to
seek recovery of the city's attorneys' fees against the property owner.



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-254.  COST OF ABATEMENT AS LIEN.



   The cost of abatement, including notice costs and any costs of the
hearing not paid by the property owner, shall be a lien against the property
on which the nuisance is maintained, as well as a personal obligation of the
owner of the property.



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-255.  COST REPORT.



   The city manager shall prepare a nuisance abatement cost report
containing the following information:



   (A)   A description of the property on which the nuisance exists;



   (B)   The name and address of the property owner, and the name and
address of the person creating, causing, committing, maintaining or allowing
the nuisance, if such person is not the property owner;



   (C)   The date the notice to abate a nuisance was mailed to the
property owner;



   (D)   The date of hearing, if any, and the decision of the hearing
officer;



   (E)   Any costs of the hearing not paid by the property owner;



   (F)   The costs of abatement, including notice costs.



(Ord. No. 2572)



SEC. 7-256.  HEARING ON COST REPORT; IMPOSITION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.



   (A)   The city manager shall schedule the cost report for hearing by
the city council at a city council meeting.  At least ten days before the
date of the hearing, the city manager shall mail notice to the property owner
of the place, date and time of the hearing.  At least three days before the
date of the hearing, the city manager shall post the cost report near the
city council chambers in a location open to the public.



   (B)   At the hearing the property owner may object to the
calculation of the cost of any item in the cost report.



   (C)   The city council may uphold the cost report, modify the cost
report, or reject the cost report.



   (D)   If the city council upholds the cost report or modifies the
cost report, the city council shall adopt a resolution making the cost of the
abatement determined in the cost report a lien against the property on which
the grandfathered establishment is located and requesting the county auditor
to the enter the assessment on the county tax roll and collect the amount of
the assessment at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes.



   (E)   The city manager shall send a copy of the resolution to the
property owner by certified mail, together with a notice specifying that the
property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid
delinquent assessments.



   (F)   The city manager shall file a certified copy of the resolution
with the county auditor.



(Ord. No. 2572)



ARTICLE XIV.  REGULATION OF PRIVATE PATROL OPERATORS, PROPRIETARY PRIVATE
SECURITY OFFICERS, AND SECURITY OFFICERS



SEC. 7-260.  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings.



   (A)   LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS - Peace officers, as defined by
Cal. Penal Code, Section 830 et seq., employed by any law enforcement agency
in Ventura County.



   (B)   PRIVATE PATROL OPERATOR - Shall be defined as set forth in
Cal. Business and Professions Code, Section 7582.1(a).



   (C)   PROPRIETARY PRIVATE SECURITY OFFICER - Shall be defined as set
forth in Cal. Business and Professions Code, Section 7574.1.



(Ord. No. 2813)



SEC. 7-261.  UNIFORMS.



   Unless otherwise authorized by the Police Chief, no employee of a
private patrol operator and no proprietary private security officer shall
wear or be required to wear any uniform which is an imitation of, resembles
by color or combination of colors, or may be readily mistaken for the uniform
worn by local law enforcement officers.



(Ord. No. 2813)



SEC. 7-262.  REPORTS OF VIOLATIONS OF LAWS.



   Proprietary private security officers and employees of private patrol
operators shall make reports to the Police Department of any felony crimes
observed or reported by a third party.  Such reports may be made by
telephone or by personal visit to the watch commander or other person charged
with receiving reports of law violations.



(Ord. No. 2813)



ARTICLE XV.  PUBLIC LIBRARY RULES OF CONDUCT AND EXCLUSION PROCESS



SEC. 7-270.  PURPOSE.



   It is the intent of the city council in enacting this article to
protect the rights of library customers, staff, and volunteers. Library
customers, staff, and volunteers using library buildings, materials, and
services have at least the following rights:



   (A)   To use library buildings, materials, and services without
being unreasonably disturbed or impeded by others;



   (B)   To use and work in library buildings that are safe, secure,
sanitary, and attractive; and



   (C)   To use and work with library materials and equipment, which
are accessible and in good condition, in a quiet and orderly atmosphere
conducive to every customer's exercise of his or her right to receive and
read recorded communication.



(Ord. No. 2888, 2955)



SEC. 7-271.  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   LIBRARY - The Oxnard Public Library and each and all of its
branch libraries.



   (B)   LIBRARY BUILDING - Any building, structure, or enclosure in
which the library keeps, displays, and makes available for inspection or
borrowing printed or audio-visual material or information, or information
that is kept in other form, but for purposes of this article, does not
include the exterior appurtenances to such building, structure, or enclosure,
nor land on which such building, structure, or enclosure is located.



   (C)   LIBRARY CUSTOMER - A member of the public who uses library
facilities, materials, and services.



   (D)   LIBRARY FACILITY - A library building, all exterior
appurtenances to such building, and the real property upon which the library
building and exterior appurtenances are located.



   (E)   LIBRARY MANAGER - The person appointed by the city manager to
be responsible for the overall administration of the library.



   (F)   LIBRARY PRIVILEGES - Access to any printed or audio-visual
material or information that is kept in any other form at a library facility,
and the right to physically enter and be present in any library building.



   (G)   LIBRARY STAFF - Public employees who work for the city and are
assigned to work at library facilities.



   (H)   LIBRARY VOLUNTEER - A member of the public who volunteers and
works at library facilities.



   (I)   RULES OF CONDUCT - The activities identified in and prohibited
by section 7-272.



   (J)   SERIOUS VIOLATION OF THE RULES OF CONDUCT - Engaging in
activities prohibited by law at a library facility, or violating any other
rule of conduct that poses an immediate threat to the safety of any person or
to the orderly operation of the library.



(Ord. No. 2888, 2955)



SEC. 7-272.  RULES OF CONDUCT.



   In order to protect the rights of library customers, staff and
volunteers, the following activities, that a reasonable person would find
disruptive to the normal functions being carried on at the library, are
prohibited:



   (A)   Engaging in activities prohibited by law including but not
limited to:



      (1)   Cal. Penal Code, Section 415 (Fighting; Causing Loud
Noise or Using Offensive Words in a Public Place);



      (2)   Cal. Penal Code, Section 484 (Theft);



      (3)   Cal. Penal Code, Section 490.5 (Theft of Library Books
and Materials);



      (4)   Cal. Penal Code, Section 594 (Vandalism);



      (5)   Cal. Penal Code, Section 602.1(b) (Interfering with
Library Business);



      (6)   Cal. Penal Code, Section 602q (Refusing or Failing to
Leave a Library Building);



      (7)   Cal. Penal Code, Section 647 (Lewd and Dissolute
Conduct, Solicitation, Loitering, Public Intoxication);



      (8)   Cal. Education Code, Section 19910 (Maliciously Damaging
Library Materials);



      (9)   Cal. Education Code, Section 19911 (Failure to Return
Materials After Notice);



      (10)   Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 7597(a) (Smoking Any Tobacco
Product Inside a Library Building or Within Twenty-five Feet of a Main Exit,
Entrance, or Operable Window of a Library Building), including vaping and
cannabis use;



      (11)   Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 11550 (Under the
Influence of a Controlled Substance); and/or



      (12)   Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 11364(a)
(Possession of an Instrument Used for Smoking or Injecting a Controlled
Substance).



   (B)   Engaging in any activity or behavior (either oral or physical)
that is loud, disruptive, disturbing, offensive, intimidating, threatening,
unsafe, or annoying, and which unreasonably interferes with another person's
use of any library facility, or with the ability of library staff or
volunteers to perform their duties, including creating excessive or
unnecessary noise (including cell phone use and headphones); using loud,
abusive, threatening, or insulting language; screaming, running, verbal, or
physical threats; having body odor constituting a nuisance to other persons;
or engaging in any other activity or behavior that unreasonably disturbs and
inhibits others from using library buildings, materials, or services;



   (C)   Eating or drinking, including any alcoholic beverage, in
unauthorized public areas within any library building;



   (D)   Sleeping, appearing to sleep, lying down, loitering, or
interfering with free passage within any library building, at the entrance or
exit of any library building;



   (E)   Littering or leaving personal items unattended within any
library building or at the entrance or exit of any library building;



   (F)   Leaving a child under the age of 12 unattended within any
library building. This prohibition shall not apply to a child's unattended
participation in library programs or services;



   (G)   Distributing or posting printed materials, soliciting
signatures for petitions, or conducting surveys within any library building;



   (H)   Not using library space, stairways, aisles, furniture, or
equipment for its intended purpose (for example, placing one's feet on
library desks, tables, or chairs), or otherwise monopolizing (using more than
one seat or table space per person) library space, stairways, aisles,
doorways, equipment, seating, or tables to the exclusion of other patrons or
staff;



   (I)   Moving library furniture or equipment without permission from
library staff;



   (J)   Using library building restrooms or water fountains for
inappropriate purposes such as loitering, bathing, shampooing, hair
processing, doing laundry, changing clothes, shaving, personal hygiene,
illegal drug use, and the like;



   (K)   Skateboarding or rollerblading in or about any library
facility;



   (L)   Bringing any animal into any library building, with the
exception of a service animal accompanying a person with disabilities. As
defined, a "service animal" is individually trained to do work or perform
tasks for an individual with a disability, including a physical, sensory,
psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental disability. The animal's work or
tasks must directly relate to the handler's disability. Service animals are
expected to be under the control of the owner and leashed at all times;



   (M)   Photographing, audio recording, or filming within any library
building without permission from the library manager, except at governmental
meetings open to the general public;



   (N)   Leaning on railings or security gates within any library
building;



   (O)   Throwing items over railings located within any library
building;



   (P)   Failing to wear shoes and garments on the upper and lower
torso of the body at all times within any library building;



   (Q)   Entering any library building with firearms or other dangerous
weapons, with the exception of those individuals authorized to possess
weapons in a local public building or open public meeting pursuant to Cal.
Penal Code, Section 171b;



   (R)   Disseminating, downloading, viewing, or printing from public
library computers illegal materials including but not limited to obscene or
harmful matter as those terms are used in Cal. Penal Code, Sections 313 et
seq. and 331 et seq.;



   (S)   (1)   Bringing into the library a bicycle, utility cart,
wagon, shopping cart (as defined in section 7-166), or items of a similar
size which interfere with patron and staff use and access within the library
facility. Wheeled conveyances such as strollers and wheelchairs are only
permitted if being used for the transport of a person.



      (2)   Other items that may not be brought into the libraries
include, but are not limited to:



         (a)   Skateboards, inline skates, shoes with built-in
wheels, collapsible scooters, hover boards, and other similar devices unless
carried while on library property;



         (b)   Items including, but not limited to, suitcases,
bags, coolers with or without wheels that are collectively larger than 9
inches by 14 inches by 22 inches including handles and wheels;



         (c)   Trailer-like objects that are pushed or towed;



         (d)   Sleeping bags, tarps, bed rolls, mats, blankets,
and mattresses; and



         (e)   Televisions and monitors;



   (T)   Using public space to conduct commercial activity;



   (U)   Using public space to conduct group instruction with more than
three participants without approval from the library manager;



   (V)   Using more than one library electrical receptacle, allowing
charging cords to interfere with aisles, leaving electronic devices
unattended, using electronic devices or other personal equipment that is
disruptive, noisy, or unsafe;



   (W)   Damaging, removing, altering, or bypassing library software or
hardware;



   (X)   Using another person's library card;



   (Y)   Possessing items deemed unsanitary;



   (Z)   Violating a term or condition of a warning notice or an
exclusion notice;



   (AA)   Engaging in sexual misconduct such as exposure, threatening
touching, or touching; or



   (BB)   Possessing drug paraphernalia or alcoholic beverages.



(Ord. No. 2888, 2955)



SEC. 7-273.  RULES OF CONDUCT ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   General provisions. A library customer is subject to exclusion
from the library or may otherwise have his or her library privileges
restricted or suspended if he or she (or a person under his or her control or
direction) violates any of the rules of conduct specified in section 7-272
within 90 days after he or she was given a verbal warning for a violation of
the rules of conduct and a subsequent written warning notice of a violation
of the rules of conduct. Serious violations of the rules of conduct, as
determined by the library manager, may result in the issuance of a written
warning notice without a verbal warning.



   (B)   Persons authorized to issue warning or exclusion notices. The
library manager shall designate those library staff authorized to issue
warning and exclusion notices.



   (C)   Issuance of warning or exclusion notices -



      (1)   Warning notice - After the issuance of a verbal warning
to a library customer for a violation of the rules of conduct or immediately
upon the occurrence of a serious rule of conduct violation, library staff
designated by the library manager may issue a written warning notice for a
rule of conduct violation. The warning notice shall specify that the
recipient must leave the library for the remainder of the day, and that in
the event a second violation of the rules of conduct occurs within 90 days of
the date of issuance of the warning notice, that person shall be subject to
exclusion from the library facility for a period of time not to exceed two
years, or the loss of some or all of his or her library privileges as the
library manager may determine to be appropriate. The warning notice shall
also contain information concerning the right to appeal. The person to whom
the warning notice is issued shall sign a written acknowledgment of its
receipt. If the recipient refuses to sign, the person issuing the warning
notice shall make a written record of the refusal.



      (2)   Exclusion notice - If a library customer has received a
warning notice as set forth in division (C)(1) above and again violates a
rule of conduct within 90 days of the date of issuance of the warning notice,
library staff designated by the library manager may issue a written exclusion
notice excluding the person from the library facility or setting forth the
loss of some or all of his or her library privileges as the library manager
may determine to be appropriate. If the person is excluded from the library
facility, the exclusion shall be for a period of no less than one month and
no more than two years. The exclusion notice shall specify the person that is
to be excluded from the library facility, the period of the exclusion, the
time the exclusion is to commence, and library privileges being lost and the
specified period of loss, and information concerning the right to appeal the
exclusion notice. The person to whom the exclusion notice is issued shall
sign a written acknowledgment of its receipt and allow his or her photograph
to be taken. If the recipient refuses to sign or take a photograph, the
person issuing the exclusion notice shall make a written record of the
refusal.



(Ord. No. 2888, 2955)



SEC. 7-274.  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The individual to whom a warning or exclusion notice is issued
shall have the right to an appeal from the issuance of the notice.



   (B)   A notice of appeal of a warning notice or an exclusion notice
must be filed, in writing, with the cultural and community services director
within five calendar days of the issuance of the warning or exclusion notice.
The notice of appeal shall state the following:



      (1)   The appellant's name;



      (2)   The appellant's address and a telephone number where he
or she can be reached;



      (3)   A concise statement as to why the appellant believes
that the issuance of the warning notice or the exclusion notice was invalid
or unjustified; and



      (4)   A copy of the warning notice or exclusion notice shall
be attached.



   (C)   A hearing on the appeal shall be held no more than 15 calendar
days after the filing of the appeal, and no one except the cultural and
community services director may postpone the hearing date at the request of
the appellant or the library staff for good cause. The appellant shall be
provided notice of the hearing date, time, and location at least five
calendar days prior to the hearing date. The hearing shall afford a
reasonable opportunity for the appellant to be present and present evidence
that the warning notice or exclusion notice is invalid or unjustified.



   (D)   Copies of all library staff documents to be used by the
library staff at the hearing shall be made available to the appellant at
least five calendar days prior to the hearing.



   (E)   At the hearing on the appeal, the library staff shall have the
burden to show by a preponderance of evidence that the warning notice or
exclusion notice was based on, and justified by, a violation of the rules of
conduct described in section 7-272. The cultural and community services
director shall conduct the hearing in an informal fashion and shall not be
bound by the technical rules of evidence.



   (F)   Within 30 calendar days of the conclusion of the hearing, the
library manager shall issue and mail the appellant a written decision
containing a statement of the reasons on which the decision is based. The
written decision shall include a notice that the parties have 90 days to
pursue a petition for a writ of administrative mandamus of the decision under
Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. The library manager
shall serve a copy of such decision to the city manager. The decision of the
cultural and community services director shall be final.



(Ord. No. 2888, 2955)



SEC. 7-275.  VIOLATION OF WARNING OR EXCLUSION NOTICE.



   Any person who violates a provision of a warning notice or an exclusion
notice to stay away from the library by physically entering a library
facility during the exclusion period is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as
set forth in section 1-10 of this code.



(Ord. No. 2888, 2955)



ARTICLE XVI.  CANNABIS AND MEDICAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES



SEC. 7-280.  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   CANNABIS - All parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa Linnaeus,
Cannabis Indica, or Cannabis Ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds
thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the
plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the
separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis.
"Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced
from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or
the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the
purpose of this article, "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as
defined by Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 11018.5.



   (B)   CANNABIS CULTIVATION - The planting, growing, harvesting,
drying, or processing of cannabis plants or any part thereof, and any and all
associated business and/or operational activities.



   (C)   CANNABIS DISPENSARY - Any facility or location, whether fixed
or mobile, where cannabis and/or cannabis products are made available to
customers, patients, or clients. A "cannabis dispensary" shall not include
the following uses, as long as the location of such uses is otherwise
regulated by this code or applicable law: a clinic licensed pursuant to Cal.
Health and Safety Code, Chapter 1 of Division 2; a healthcare facility
licensed pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 2 of Division 2; a
facility licensed pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 2 of
Division 2; a residential care facility for persons with chronic
life-threatening illnesses licensed pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code,
Chapter 3.01 of Division 2; a residential care facility for the elderly
licensed pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 3.2 of Division 2;
a residential hospice; or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Cal.
Health and Safety Code, Chapter 8 of Division 2, as long as such use complies
strictly with applicable law, including but not limited to, Cal. Health and
Safety Code, Section 11362.5 et seq., and the city code.



   (D)   CANNABIS PRODUCT - Cannabis that has undergone a process
whereby the plant material has been transformed into concentrate, including,
but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product
containing cannabis and other ingredients.



   (E)   MEDICAL CANNABIS and MEDICAL CANNABIS PRODUCT - Cannabis or a
cannabis product intended to be sold for use pursuant to applicable state
regulations, including, but not limited to, Cal. Health and Safety Code,
Section 11362.5, by a qualified patient.



   (F)   MEDICAL CANNABIS DELIVERY - The delivery, transfer, or
transport of medical cannabis, medical cannabis product, medical cannabis
edibles, and/or any cannabis product from a medical cannabis dispensary to a
medicinal cannabis patient who possesses a physician's recommendation that
complies with the requirements of state law.



   (G)   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY - Any facility or location where
medical cannabis and/or medical cannabis products are made available to
customers, patients, or clients that is also duly licensed by the State of
California and the local jurisdiction in which the medical cannabis
dispensary is physically located. A "medical cannabis dispensary" shall not
include the following uses, as long as the location of such uses is otherwise
regulated by this code or applicable law: a clinic licensed pursuant to Cal.
Health and Safety Code, Chapter 1 of Division 2; a healthcare facility
licensed pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 2 of Division 2; a
facility licensed pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 2 of
Division 2; a residential care facility for persons with chronic
life-threatening illnesses licensed pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code,
Chapter 3.01 of Division 2; a residential care facility for the elderly
licensed pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 3.2 of Division 2;
a residential hospice; or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Cal.
Health and Safety Code, Chapter 8 of Division 2, as long as such use complies
strictly with applicable law, including but not limited to, Cal. Health and
Safety Code, Section 11362.5 et seq., and the city code.



   (H)   QUALIFIED PATIENT - This term shall have the meaning set forth
in Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 11362.7, and also includes a person
with an identification card as defined in that section as it now appears or
may hereafter be amended or renumbered.



   (I)   RECREATIONAL CANNABIS DELIVERY - The delivery, transfer or
transport, or arranging for the delivery, transfer or transport, or the use
of any technology platform to arrange for or facilitate the commercial
delivery, transfer or transport of cannabis, cannabis edibles, and/or any
cannabis products to or from any location, and any and all associated
business and/or operational activities.



(Ord. No. 2898, 2937)



SEC. 7-281.  CANNABIS DISPENSARIES AND MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARIES
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No cannabis dispensary shall be located within the city.



   (B)   No medicinal cannabis dispensary shall be located within the
city.



(Ord. No. 2898, 2937)



SEC. 7-282.  CANNABIS CULTIVATION PROHIBITED.



   Cannabis cultivation by any person or entity, including clinics,
collectives, cooperatives, cannabis dispensaries, and medical cannabis
dispensaries, is prohibited within the city, with the exception of indoor
personal, non-commercial cannabis cultivation not to exceed six plants in
compliance with Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 11362.2.



(Ord. No. 2898, 2911, 2937)



SEC. 7-283.  RECREATIONAL CANNABIS DELIVERY PROHIBITED.



   Recreational cannabis delivery by any person or entity, including
clinics, collectives, cooperatives, and dispensaries, is prohibited within
the city.



(Ord. No. 2898, 2937)



SEC. 7-284.  MEDICAL CANNABIS DELIVERY.



   Medical cannabis delivery is prohibited within the city unless
necessary permits are first obtained pursuant to the requirements of Article
XV of Chapter 11 of the city code.



(Ord. No. 2937)



SEC. 7-285.  REMEDIES.



   (A)   A violation of any section of this article and any use or
condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any provision of
this article shall be, and hereby is declared to be, a public nuisance and
may be abated by the city.



   (B)   A violation of any section of this article may be also be
enforced under sections 1-10(B)(2) and (3) of the city code. Sections 1-10(A)
and (B)(1) of the city code shall not apply to violations of this article.



(Ord. No. 2898, 2937)



ARTICLE XVII.  REGULATION OF SMOKING



SEC. 7-290.  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, phrases and terms, as used in this article, shall
be construed as defined in this section:



   (A)   DINING AREA - Any area, including streets and sidewalks, that
is available to or customarily used by the general public or an employee, and
that is designed, established, or regularly used, for consuming food or drink.



   (B)   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE - An electronic or battery-operated
device that delivers vapors of nicotine and/or other substances for
inhalation. This term includes every variation and type of such device,
whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic
cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo. an electronic pipe,
a vapor cigarette or any other similar product. This term does not include
any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for use in the mitigation, treatment or prevention of diseases.



   (C)   PUBLIC EVENT - Any event open to the general public regardless
of any fee or age requirements, including but not limited to farmers’
markets, parades, fairs or festivals.



   (D)   REASONABLE DISTANCE - A distance of 25 feet in any direction
from an area in which smoking is prohibited.



   (E)   RECREATIONAL AREA - Any area that is publicly or privately
owned, and open to the general public for recreational purposes regardless of
any fee requirement, including but not limited to, parks, beaches, picnic
areas, gardens, swimming pools, walking paths, skateboard parks and
playgrounds.



   (F)   SERVICE AREA - Any publicly or privately owned area, including
streets and sidewalks, designed to be used or regularly used by one or more
persons to receive a service, wait to receive a service, or to make a
transaction, whether or not such service or transaction includes the exchange
of money. The term SERVICE AREA includes but is not limited to areas
including or adjacent to information kiosks, automatic teller machines
(ATMs), ticket lines, bus stops or shelters, mobile vendor lines, or cab
stands.



   (G)   SMOKING - The carrying, inhaling, or emitting the fumes or
vapors of a lighted or activated pipe, cigar, cigarette, electronic smoking
device, or any other lighted or activated smoking product or equipment used
to burn any tobacco product, weed, plant, or other combustible substance in
any manner or in any form. SMOKING does not mean the combustion of material
solely for olfactory purposes such as, for example, smoke from incense, that
does not contain any tobacco or nicotine, or the emissions from a product
specifically approved by the United State Food and Drug Administration for
use in mitigating or preventing disease.



(Ord. No. 2908)



SEC. 7-291.  SMOKING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Smoking shall be prohibited at the following locations in the
city:



      (1)   Dining areas;



      (2)   Public events;



      (3)   Recreational areas;



      (4)   Service areas;



      (5)   Inside all facilities owned, leased or controlled by the
city;



      (6)   Within a reasonable distance (25 feet) from an area
where smoking is prohibited including any doorway, window, opening, or vent
into an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited, except while actively
passing on the way to another destination.



(Ord. No. 2908)



SEC. 7-292.  OTHER RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall dispose of any cigarette, cigar or tobacco or
electronic smoking device or any part of a cigarette or cigar or electronic
smoking device except in a designated waste disposal container.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any
owner, operator, manager, or other person who controls any establishment or
facility may declare that entire establishment or facility as a nonsmoking
establishment, whether enclosed or not.



   (C)   This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit
smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.



(Ord. 2908)



SEC. 7-293.  POSTING OF SIGNS.



   (A)   Any owner, operator, manager, or other person who controls of
an area in which smoking is prohibited by this article shall post a clear and
conspicuous “No Smoking” or “Smokefree” sign at each point of ingress
to the area, and in at least one other conspicuous point within the area. The
signs shall have letters of no less than one inch in height and shall include
the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar
across it). The city manager shall be responsible for administration of
facilities owned or leased by the city.



   (B)   The presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to a
charge of violation of any provision of this article.



(Ord. No. 2908)



SEC. 7-294.  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   A violation of this article is designated an infraction and
may be enforced according to the provisions of section 1-10 of the city code.



   (B)   A violation of any section of this article and any use or
condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any provision of
this article shall be, and hereby is declared to be, a public nuisance.



   (C)   Punishment under this section shall not preclude punishment
pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 13002, Cal. Penal Code,
Section 374.4. or any other law proscribing the act of littering.



(Ord. No. 2908)



ARTICLE XVIII.  ORMOND BEACH REGULATIONS



SEC. 7-300.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   The purposes of this article are to protect and preserve the unique
natural wildlife and other attributes of Ormond Beach for the public
enjoyment of current and future generations.



(Ord. No. 2906)



SEC. 7-301.  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   The following activities are prohibited at Ormond Beach:



   (A)   To bring, walk (whether leashed or unleashed), ride or release
any domesticated animal including but not limited to cats, dogs, horses and
pigs. This limitation shall not apply to a leashed dog being used as a
service animal under the Americans with Disabilities Act.



   (B)   To bring or release any non-domesticated or exotic animal.
This prohibition shall not apply to the legally permitted release of
rehabilitated wildlife, subject to the permission of the property owners.



   (C)   To go within or interfere with any protected habitat area as
designated by fencing, signage, or other method.



   (D)   To alter or remove any sand dune, plants or vegetation unless
the activity is carried out pursuant to a validly issued permit and
applicable legal requirements.



   (E)   To camp as defined below:



      (1)   CAMP - means one or more of the following activities:
pitching or occupying camp facilities; or the use of camp paraphernalia.
These activities constitute camping when it reasonably appears, in
considering all the circumstances, that the individual, in conducting these
activities, is in fact using the area as a living accommodation, regardless
of the intent of the individual or the nature of any other activities in
which they may be engaging.



      (2)   “Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to,
tents, huts, temporary shelters, or other similar facilities.



      (3)   “Camp paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited
to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, mattresses, sleeping bags, hammocks, cookware,
cooking equipment, kitchen utensils, or other similar equipment.



   (F)   To make or kindle a fire for any purpose.



   (G)   To operate any motorized vehicle. This prohibition shall
include and apply to remotely operated vehicles such as airplanes,
helicopters, cars and drones. This prohibition shall not apply to public
safety vehicles (including Coast Guard vehicles), military aerial vehicles,
or vehicles used as part of a permitted program or operation to protect
natural resources.



   (H)   To launch or fly a kite, kite board, or glider.



(Ord. No. 2906)



SEC. 7-302.  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   A violation of this article is designated an infraction and
may be enforced according to the provisions of section 1-10 of the city code.



   (B)   A violation of any section of this article and any use or
condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any provision of
this article shall be. and hereby is declared to be, a public nuisance.



(Ord. No. 2906)



SEC. 7-303.  OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.



   This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit any
activities otherwise restricted by other applicable State or federal laws or
regulations.



(Ord. No. 2906)



ARTICLE XIX.  RECORDING NOTICES OF VIOLATIONS



SEC. 7-310.  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The city council finds that there is a need to give notice of
pending and open enforcement actions and property-related code violation
actions to persons who may subsequently acquire the property as a means to
ensure such violations will be corrected. An appropriate method to accomplish
this is through the issuance and recordation of notices of violation.



   (B)   The procedures established in this article shall be in
addition to any criminal, civil, or other remedy established by law which may
be pursued to address violations of the city code or applicable state or
uniform codes.



(Ord. No. 2919)



SEC. 7-311.  QUALIFYING VIOLATIONS.



   This article shall apply to serious property related violations of the
city code, state code or any adopted uniform code. Serious property
violations are defined as those affecting the health and safety of persons
upon or near the property and other hazardous conditions related to
structures. This article does not apply to minor non-hazardous violations or
property maintenance violations that do not pose a threat to public health
and safety. The code compliance manager (manager) shall make the qualifying
violation determination pursuant to this article.



(Ord. No. 2919)



SEC. 7-312.  PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Once the manager has issued a notice of violation to a
responsible person for a qualifying violation, if the property remains in
violation after the deadline established in the notice, the manager may
record the notice of violation with the Ventura County Recorder’s office.
For purposes of this article, the responsible person shall be as defined in
Section 7-51(J) of this code.



   (B)   Before recordation, the manager shall provide the responsible
person with the notice of violation which shall state that such notice will
be recorded unless a written request to appeal the action is received
pursuant to the procedures outlined in this article. The notice of violation
shall be served in accordance with the methods set forth in Section 7-313.



   (C)   If a written request for appeal is not received within the
time frame specified in the notice of violation, the manager may thereafter
cause the notice of violation to be recorded if the violations remain.



   (D)   The recorded notice of violation shall include the following:



      (1)   The name of the responsible person;



      (2)   The name of the property owner, if different from the
responsible person;



      (3)   Street address and parcel number;



      (4)   The code section(s) in violation;



      (5)   A description of the conditions which violates the
applicable codes;



      (6)   A list of necessary corrections to bring the property
into compliance;



      (7)   A deadline or specific date to correct the violations
listed in the notice of violation, after which the notice of violation will
be recorded;



      (8)   A description of the appeal process and a written appeal
form.



(Ord. No. 2919)



SEC. 7-313.  SERVICE OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   The notice of violation shall be served in accordance with either
division (A), (B), or (C) of this section:



   (A)   An enforcement officer may personally serve the notice of
violation on the responsible person. A declaration of service shall be
completed and attached to a copy of the notice of violation mailed to the
responsible person via first class mail.



   (B)   An enforcement officer may post the property in a conspicuous
location with a copy of the notice of violation. A copy shall also be mailed
via certified mail to the responsible person’s last known address. An
address shown on the county’s last equalized property tax assessment rolls
is deemed to be a valid address for service.



   (C)   If the responsible person is not the property owner; the
notice shall also be mailed via certified mail to the property owner.



   (D)   Service is deemed accomplished on the date the notice of
violation is personally served or posted in accordance with this section.



   (E)   A copy of the notice of violation shall be mailed via first
class mail to any mortgage holder, property manager, agent for service, or
owner’s next of kin as applicable, but failure of one of these parties to
receive notice shall not invalidate any action under this article.



(Ord. No. 2919)



SEC. 7-314.  APPEAL PROCESS.



   (A)   An appeal of the manager’s notice of violation shall utilize
the procedures and timelines set forth in Chapter 1, Article V of this code.



   (B)   Upon receiving a written appeal, the manager shall schedule a
hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1-58. The purpose of
the hearing is for the responsible person or property owner to state any
reasons why the notice of violation should not be recorded.



   (C)   The failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with
these provisions shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative
hearing and shall not affect the validity of the recorded notice of violation.



(Ord. No. 2919)



SEC. 7-315.  APPEAL HEARING.



   (A)   At the appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall only consider
evidence that is consistent with the city’s rules and procedures for
administrative hearings, and that is relevant to the following issues:



      (1)   Whether the conditions listed in the notice of violation
violate the city code, state code or any adopted uniform code; and



      (2)   Whether the manager afforded the responsible person with
due process by adhering to the notification procedures specified in this
article.



   (B)   If the hearing officer affirms the manager’s decision, the
manager may proceed to record the notice of violation.



   (C)   If the hearing officer determines that recordation is
improper, the hearing officer shall invalidate the manager’s decision to
record the notice of violation.



(Ord. No. 2919)



SEC. 7-316.  NOTICE OF COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   When the violations listed on the notice of violation have
been corrected, the responsible person or property owner shall file with the
manager a written request for a notice of compliance on a form provided by
the city.



   (B)   Once the manager receives this request, the manager, or
designee, shall re-inspect the property within 20 days from receipt of the
request to determine whether the violations listed in the notice of violation
have been corrected and whether all necessary permits have been issued and
final inspections have been performed.



   (C)   The manager shall provide a notice of compliance to the
responsible person or property owner if the manager determines that the
following conditions are met:



      (1)   All violations listed in the recorded notice of
violation have been corrected;



      (2)   All necessary permits have been issued and finalized;



      (3)   All administrative fines or civil penalties have been
paid;



      (4)   The party requesting the issuance of the notice of
compliance shall be responsible for payment of all administrative fees
necessary to reimburse the city for all costs involved in the issuance of the
notice, including re-inspection.



   (D)   Administrative costs may include costs incurred in the
investigation, inspection, re-inspection, title search, appeal hearing, and
any other processing costs associated with the violations specified on the
notice of violation.



   (E)   If the manager denies a request to issue a notice of
compliance, the manager shall serve the requesting party, the responsible
person and the property owner with a written explanation within five (5) days
from the inspection setting forth the reasons for the denial. The written
explanation shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in
Section 7-313 or by certified mail.



   (F)   The manager’s decision denying a request to issue a notice
of compliance constitutes the final decision in the matter and is not
appealable.



   (G)   It shall be the responsibility of the responsible person or
property owner to record the notice of compliance with the county recorder
and this recording shall have the effect of canceling the recorded notice of
violation.



(Ord. No. 2919)



SEC. 7-317.  PROHIBITION AGAINST ISSUANCE OF CITY PERMITS.



   For properties where a notice of violation has been recorded, the city
may withhold permits for repair, construction and/or alteration on the
affected property until a notice of compliance has been issued by the
manager. The city may not withhold permits which are necessary to obtain a
notice of compliance or which are necessary to correct serious health and
safety violations.



(Ord. No. 2919)



CHAPTER 8:  VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   8-1.   Interference with funeral procession prohibited



   8-2.   Declared prima facie speed limits



   8-3.   Light traffic streets designated; heavy trucks prohibited



   8-4.   Trucks routes designated



ARTICLE II.  CRUISING



   8-10.   Cruising prohibited



   8-11.   Definitions



   8-12.   Determination of congested traffic



   8-13.   Posting of signs



   8-14.   Warning against cruising



   8-15.   Violation



   8-16.   Penalty



ARTICLE III.  MOTOR VEHICLES/MOTORCYCLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY



   8-25.   Generally



   8-26.   Sleeping in motor vehicles; exceptions



   8-27.   Posting notice



ARTICLE IV.  PARKING



DIVISION 1.  IN GENERAL



   8-35.   Definitions



   8-36.   Public vehicles



   8-37.   Duration of parking



   8-38.   Notice of tow away; request for hearing



   8-39.   Hearing



   8-40.   Garage keeper's lien



   8-41.   Parking commercial vehicles in residential areas



   8-41.1.     Parking oversized vehicles in residential areas



   8-42.   Parking for washing or repair



   8-43.   Removing chalk mark



   8-44.   Parking non-motorized vehicles



   8-45.   Leaving ignition key in unattended vehicle



   8-46.   Parking without permission of property owner



   8-47.   Vending from vehicles and human powered devices



   8-48.   Temporary parking regulation



   8-49.   Loading permits required



   8-50.   Parking in alleys



   8-51.   Loading and unloading in yellow zones



   8-52.   Stopping in white zones



   8-53.   Stopping in green zones



   8-54.   Stopping in red zones



   8-55.   Parking near fire hydrants



   8-56.   Preferential parking in residential areas



   8-57.   Electric vehicle charging



DIVISION 2.  VIOLATION



   8-60.   Violation



ARTICLE V.  DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS AND TRAFFIC ENGINEER



   8-65.   Traffic duties of police officers



   8-66.   Traffic accident report system



   8-67.   Annual traffic accident report summary



   8-68.   Appointment of traffic engineer



   8-69.   Duties of traffic engineer



   8-70.   Required traffic control devices



   8-71.   Additional traffic control devices



   8-72.   Removal of traffic control devices



   8-73.   Hours and days of operation



   8-74.   Lane markers



   8-75.   Turns



   8-76.   Crosswalks



   8-77.   Parking



   8-78.   Traffic signals



ARTICLE VI.  TOWING SERVICES



   8-85.   Towing services providers; regulations



   8-86.   Reimbursement of city costs



ARTICLE VII.  AMBULANCES



   8-90.   County regulations adopted by reference; copies of
regulations on file with city clerk



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 8-1.  INTERFERENCE WITH FUNERAL PROCESSION PROHIBITED.



   No person shall interfere with an authorized funeral procession.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-23)  (Ord. No. 2397)



SEC. 8-2.  DECLARED PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMITS.



   After considering findings presented upon the orderly movement of
traffic and the reasonable and safe speed of traffic, the city council
declares the following prima facia speed limits.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Speed Limit




Auto Center Drive
 
From Rose Avenue to Santa Clara Avenue
 
40


Bard Road
 
From J Street to Saviers Road
 
30


From Saviers Road to Pleasant Valley Road
 
35


C Street
 
From Channel Islands Boulevard to Citrus Grove Lane
 
30


Camino Del Sol
 
From Oxnard Boulevard to Del Norte Boulevard
 
45


Channel Islands Boulevard
 
From Harbor Boulevard to Victoria Avenue
 
45


From Ventura Road to Paula Street
 
35


From Paula Street to easterly city limits
 
40


Citrus Grove Lane
 
From C Street to Oxnard Boulevard
 
30


Del Norte Boulevard
 
From Fifth Street to Route 101
 
50


Doris Avenue
 
From Patterson Road to Ventura Road
 
45


Eastman Avenue
 
From Rose Avenue to Rice Avenue
 
40


Emerson Avenue
 
From Pacific Avenue to easterly city limits
 
40


Etting Road
 
From Pleasant Valley Road to easterly city limits
 
40


Fifth Street
 
From Victoria Avenue to 1/4-mile west of Ventura Road
 
45


From Del Norte Boulevard to Rose Avenue
 
55


From Rose Avenue to Oxnard Boulevard
 
35


Gary Drive
 
From Albany Drive to Rose Avenue
 
30


Gonzales Road
 
From westerly city limits to Rice Avenue
 
45


Graves Avenue
 
From Celsius Avenue and Wankel Way
 
40


H Street
 
From Gonzales Road to Vineyard Avenue
 
40


From Fifth Street to Gonzales Road
 
30


From Gonzales Road to Violet Way
 
40


Harbor Boulevard
 
From Bluefin Circle to Channel Islands Boulevard
 
40


From Channel Islands Boulevard to Fifth Street
 
50


Harbor Boulevard Frontage Road
 
From Beach Way to Channel Way
 
15


Hemlock Street
 
From Victoria Avenue to Patterson Avenue
 
40


From Patterson Avenue to Ventura Road
 
35


Hobson Way
 
From Ninth Street to Fifth Street
 
30


Hueneme Road
 
From J Street to Edison Drive
 
45


J Street
 
From Hueneme Road to Ninth Street
 
30


Lombard Street
 
From Camino Del Sol to Eastman Avenue
 
40


From Eastman Avenue to Gonzales Road
 
35


Maulhardt Road
 
From Dodge Road to Pleasant Valley Road
 
35


Ninth Street
 
From Ventura Road to Hobson Way
 
35


Oxnard Boulevard
 
From Channel Islands Boulevard to Pleasant Valley Road
 
60


From Rose Avenue to Channel Islands Boulevard
 
55


From the railroad tracks to Rose Avenue
 
45


From Wooley Road to the railroad tracks
 
40


From Second Street to Wooley Road
 
30


From Robert Avenue to Second Street
 
35


From Vineyard Avenue to Robert Avenue
 
45


From Town Center Drive to Vineyard Avenue
 
50


From Forest Park Boulevard to Town Center Drive
 
35


Pacific Avenue
 
From Statham Boulevard to Fifth Street
 
35


Patterson Road
 
From Hemlock Street to Fifth Street
 
45


From Doris Avenue to Vineyard Avenue
 
40


Pleasant Valley Road
 
From J Street to Squires Drive
 
35


From Squires Drive to Route 1
 
45


Rice Avenue
 
From Fifth Street to Route 101 southbound ramp
 
50


From Route 101 southbound ramp to the northerly city limits
 
40


Rose Avenue
 
From Sanford Street to Fifth Street
 
45


From Fifth Street to Camino Del Sol
 
40


From Camino Del Sol to Gonzales Road
 
45


From Gonzales Road to Collins Street
 
40


Saviers Road
 
From Hueneme Road to Wooley Road
 
40


Second Street/Teal Club Road
 
From westerly city limits to H Street
 
35


Statham Boulevard
 
From Channel Islands Boulevard to Route 1
 
40


Sturgis Road
 
From Lombard Street to easterly city limits
 
40


Third Street
 
From A Street to Juanita Avenue
 
35


From Juanita Avenue to Rose Avenue
 
40


Ventura Boulevard
 
From Auto Center Drive to Santa Clara Avenue
 
35


Ventura Road
 
From Channel Islands Boulevard to Vineyard Avenue
 
45


From Vineyard Avenue to Union Pacific Railroad Crossing
 
50


From Union Pacific Railroad Crossing to Town Center Drive
 
40


Victoria Avenue
 
From Lakeshore Drive to Fifth Street
 
50


From Fifth Street to the Santa Clara River Bridge
 
55


Vineyard Avenue
 
From Patterson Road to Oxnard Boulevard
 
40


From Oxnard Boulevard to Route 101
 
35


From Route 101 to Forest Park Boulevard
 
40


From Forest Park Boulevard to northerly city limits
 
55


Wooley Road
 
From Harbor Boulevard to Ventura Road
 
45


From Ventura Boulevard to Rose Avenue
 
40




 



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-36)  (Ord. No. 1081, 2068, 2080, 2104, 2110, 2138, 2186,
2226, 2316, 2357, 2397, 2437, 2844, 2941)



SEC. 8-3.  LIGHT TRAFFIC STREETS DESIGNATED; HEAVY TRUCKS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The city council declares that all streets in the city, other
than those designated on a map, not printed herein, are light traffic
streets.  The city council may, from time to time, by resolution amend this
map.  The city shall adequately post those streets designated on the map as
truck routes.



   (B)   No operator of a commercial vehicle with a gross weight,
including load, over five tons (“truck”), shall use a light traffic
street, except when necessary to reach a location, for loading and unloading
cargo, and such location cannot be reached by a truck route.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger
buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-37)  (Ord. No. 497, 2154, 2397)



SEC. 8-4.  TRUCKS ROUTES DESIGNATED.



   The operators of commercial vehicles of over five tons, including load,
are restricted to those routes designated on the map to which reference is
made in section 8-3.  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate
such streets by appropriate signs as “truck routes.”



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-38)  (Ord. No. 497, 2154)



ARTICLE II.  CRUISING



SEC. 8-10.  CRUISING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall engage in the activity of cruising or be a passenger in
a cruising motor vehicle on a public street, alley, or highway of the city in
any area which has been posted as a no-cruising zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-131)  (Ord. No. 2293)



SEC. 8-11.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   CRUISING - The repetitive driving of any motor vehicle past a
traffic control point in congested traffic at or near the traffic control
point.



   (B)   CONGESTED TRAFFIC - Traffic on any public street, alley or
highway which is delayed to the point that:



      (1)   Motor vehicles cannot move through a 100-yard approach
corridor to an intersection controlled by a traffic light within two complete
green light cycles where the delay in forward movement is due to the position
of other motor vehicles;



      (2)   Motor vehicles cannot move through a 100-yard approach
corridor to an intersection controlled by a traffic light, stop sign or yield
sign within a five-minute period of time where the delay in forward movement
is due to the position of other motor vehicles; or



      (3)   Motor vehicles cannot readily move forward on portions
of a public street, alley or highway between intersections because traffic
speed has slowed to less than five miles per hour, and the delay in movement
is due to the position of other motor vehicles.



   (C)   GREEN LIGHT CYCLE - The period commencing upon the switching
of a traffic light from a red light to a green light through to the return of
a red light.



   (D)   TRAFFIC CONTROL POINT - A location along a public street,
alley or highway utilized by a peace officer on duty as an observation point
in order to monitor traffic conditions for potential violations of this
article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-132)  (Ord. No. 2293)



SEC. 8-12.  DETERMINATION OF CONGESTED TRAFFIC.



   The determination that traffic is congested on a public street, alley
or highway shall be made by the ranking peace officer on duty at the location.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-133)  (Ord. No. 2293)



SEC. 8-13.  POSTING OF SIGNS.



   The police chief is hereby authorized to designate no-cruising zones in
the city.  The police chief may create no-cruising zones by posting
no-cruising signs at the beginning and end of a public street, alley or
highway or portion thereof.  The signs shall reference Cal. Vehicle Code,
Section 21100(k) and this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-134)  (Ord. No. 2293)



SEC. 8-14.  WARNING AGAINST CRUISING.



   A peace officer may issue a written notice to any person operating or
occupying any motor vehicle passing a traffic control point in a no-cruising
zone.  Such written notice shall state that any subsequent passage past that
traffic control point within the next succeeding two hours will be a
violation of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-135)  (Ord. No. 2293)



SEC. 8-15.  VIOLATION.



   Any person who, after having received a written notice as described in
section 8-14, subsequently drives past or is a passenger in a motor vehicle
passing the same traffic control point within the next succeeding two hours
shall be in violation of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-136)  (Ord. No. 2293)



SEC. 8-16.  PENALTY.



   A violation of this article shall be an infraction.  The minimum
penalty for a first conviction for cruising shall be a $100 fine; for a
second conviction within one year of the first conviction, the minimum
penalty shall be a $200 fine; for a third or subsequent conviction within one
year of the first conviction, the minimum penalty shall be a $250 fine.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-137)  (Ord. No. 2293)



ARTICLE III.  MOTOR VEHICLES/MOTORCYCLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY



SEC. 8-25.  GENERALLY.



   Upon the private property of another or upon any public property which
is not held open to the public for any vehicular use and which is not subject
to the provisions of the Cal. Vehicle Code:



   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle, motorcycle,
mini-bike, dune buggy, motor scooter, jeep or other form of transportation.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency
vehicles, governmental agencies or to persons driving upon such property with
the written consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such
property, or to the owner himself, his family, employees, agents or lessees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-123)  (Ord. No. 1300)



SEC. 8-26.  SLEEPING IN MOTOR VEHICLES; EXCEPTIONS.



   No person shall sleep in any motor vehicle or transportable living
facility upon public property.  This section shall not apply to registered
guests, campers, or residents sleeping in vehicles at mobile home or
recreational vehicle parks validly existing pursuant to city zoning
requirements.  This section shall not apply to sleeping in a motor vehicle
or transportable living facility for a limited time, not exceeding four
hours, under bona fide conditions of emergency or in the interest of public
safety.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-124)  (Ord. No. 2405)



SEC. 8-27.  POSTING NOTICE.



   The city manager shall construct, maintain, and post such markings and
signs as are determined by the city manager to be necessary or desirable to
give reasonable notice to the public of this section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-125)  (Ord. No. 2405)



ARTICLE IV.  PARKING



DIVISION 1.  IN GENERAL



SEC. 8-35.  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this article, “vehicle,” “commercial vehicle”
and “manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating” shall have the meanings
ascribed to such words and terms in the Cal. Vehicle Code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-60)



SEC. 8-36.  PUBLIC VEHICLES.



   The provisions of this article regulating the parking or standing of
vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle belonging to the city or a public
utility while being used for construction or repair work, or any vehicle
owned by the United States while being used for the collection,
transportation or delivery of United States mail.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-61)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-37.  DURATION OF PARKING.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle on any street, alley or public
parking lot for a period of more than 72 consecutive hours.  This section is
violated if:



      (1)   At the end of the 72-hour period, the vehicle is parked
in the same place as at the beginning of the period, and physical marking or
other facts indicate that the vehicle has not been moved; or



      (2)   At the end of the 72-hour period, the vehicle is parked
on the street within 1,056 feet of where the vehicle was parked at the
beginning of the period, unless the owner or custodian establishes that the
vehicle has been moved more than 1,056 feet; or



      (3)   During the period, the vehicle has not been removed from
its parking place to a location off the public street or more than 1,056 feet
away.



   (B)   If a vehicle is parked or left standing on a street, alley or
public parking lot longer than the period of 72 consecutive hours, any police
department employee authorized by the police chief may remove the vehicle
from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of sections
8-38 through 8-40 of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-62)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-38.  NOTICE OF TOW AWAY; REQUEST FOR HEARING.



   (A)   At the time of the initial marking of a vehicle, which begins
the 72-hour time period for possible violation of section 8-37 of this
article, the police department employee shall place on the vehicle a warning
notice that the vehicle is subject to tow away if not moved within 72 hours.



   (B)   If the vehicle is not moved within 72 hours after the warning
is placed on the vehicle, any police department employee authorized by the
police chief may issue a citation for violation of section 8-37 and may
remove the vehicle.



   (C)   In compliance with the Cal. Vehicle Code, Section 22852, a
police department employee shall, within 48 hours of towing, send a written
notice to the vehicle's registered and legal owners or their agents, if
ascertainable, informing them of the name, address and telephone number to
call regarding the vehicle, a description of the vehicle (including, the name
or make, the manufacturer, the license plate number and the mileage), the
location of the vehicle, the towing and storage charges, the nature of the
violation and purpose for removal, and a statement that, in order to receive
a post-storage hearing, the owners or their agents must request a hearing in
person, in writing or by telephone request, to the city manager, within ten
days of the date appearing on the notice.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-63)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-39.  HEARING.



   (A)   If a written, personal or telephonic request for a hearing is
made to the city manager by a registered or legal owner of the vehicle, or an
agent for such person, the city manager shall hold an administrative hearing
within 48 hours of the date the request was received by the city manager,
excluding weekends and holidays, to determine whether there was sufficient
factual and legal basis for removing the vehicle and for charging towing and
storage fees.



   (B)   At the hearing, a police department employee shall first
present evidence to establish a sufficient factual and legal basis for
removing and storing the vehicle.  Thereafter, the person requesting the
hearing may present evidence as to insufficient factual or legal basis for
removing and storing the vehicle.  The sole issues before the hearing
officer shall be whether there was probable cause to remove and store the
vehicle and the proper amount of storage and towing charges.



   (C)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
fashion and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence.



   (D)   If the hearing officer determines that there was no probable
cause for removal, a police department employee shall forthwith cause the
garage having custody of the vehicle to release the vehicle to its registered
or legal owner or agent without any charge to the owner or agent.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-64)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-40.  GARAGE KEEPER'S LIEN.



   Whenever a vehicle has been removed to a garage under the provisions of
this article and there has been no hearing requested within the ten-day
period, or the requesting party fails to appear at the scheduled hearing, or
there was a hearing and a determination of probable cause, the keeper of the
garage shall have a lien dependent on possession for his/her compensation for
towing and for storage for and keeping safe the vehicle, as set out in the
Cal. Vehicle Code, Section 22851.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-65)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-41.  PARKING COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   (A)   No person shall park a commercial vehicle having a
manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more on any
street in any residential district, which is defined for the purpose of this
section as all areas within the city zoned for single-family or
multiple-family residential use and the entire portion of any street or
highway adjacent to any property zoned for single-family or multiple-family
residential use.



   (B)   Subsection (A) shall not apply to the parking of such
commercial vehicles in such residential areas while making pickups or
deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or
structure located in such residential areas or while delivering materials to
be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or
construction of any building or structure located in such residential areas
for which a building permit has previously been obtained from the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-66)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-41.1.  PARKING OVERSIZED VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   (A)   Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to section
8-41.1:



      (1)   “Oversized vehicle” means any motor vehicle, as
defined by the Cal. Vehicle Code, Section 670:



         (a)   That exceeds 96 inches in height, exclusive of
such projecting devices as are expressly allowed pursuant to the Cal. Vehicle
Code, and exceeds 240 inches in length; or



         (b)   That is attached to a trailer, as defined by the
Cal. Vehicle Code, Section 630, regardless of the combined height and length
of the motor vehicle and attached trailer.



      (2)   "Public street" means any roadway that is owned or
maintained by the city and open for motor vehicle traffic.



      (3)   "Residential zone" means those areas, including public
streets, designated as R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or MH-PD on the city's zoning maps.



   (B)   Parking of oversized vehicles prohibited. Except as otherwise
provided in this section, no person shall park or leave standing any
oversized vehicle on any public street in a residential zone.



   (C)   Exemptions. 



      (1)   The provisions of subsection (B) shall not apply during
a 24-hour period of time used for loading the oversized vehicle immediately
prior to using the oversized vehicle for a vacation outside the city, during
a 24-hour period of time used for unloading the oversized vehicle immediately
after using the oversized vehicle for a vacation outside the city, or during
the time period reasonably necessary for making a delivery to a residence.



      (2)   If a contractor uses an oversized vehicle and the
contractor is performing contract services at a residence, the contractor may
park the oversized vehicle on the public street where the residence is
located while such services are being performed.



      (3)   The following vehicles shall not be subject to the
restrictions established pursuant to subsections (A) and (B):



         (a)   Motor vehicles exempted by section 8-36 of this
Code; or



         (b)   A motor vehicle displaying a special
identification license plate issued under Cal. Vehicle Code Section 5007 or a
distinguishing placard issued under Cal. Vehicle Code Sections 22511.55 or
22511.59 (Disabled Placards).



   (D)   Posting.  Signs giving reasonable notice of the prohibitions
contained in this section will be erected within the city as required by the
Cal. Vehicle Code.



(Ord. No. 2693, 2715, 2730)



SEC. 8-42.  PARKING FOR WASHING OR REPAIR.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle on any street for the principal
purpose of washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs
necessitated by an emergency.



   (B)   Except in an emergency, no person shall park a vehicle on any
street when the vehicle cannot be operated.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-67)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-43.  REMOVING CHALK MARK.



   Before driving away from the place where a vehicle is parked, no person
shall remove or tamper with a chalk mark placed on the tire of the vehicle by
a police department employee.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-68)  (Ord. No. 2485)



SEC. 8-44.  PARKING NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall park or leave standing on any street, alley or
public property a non-motorized vehicle that is detached from a motor vehicle.



   (B)   A non-motorized vehicle is detached from a motor vehicle if
the hitch, coupling device, connections, brakes, light connections, safety
chains, or other devices required by law for the safe and legal operation of
the non-motorized vehicle on a public highway are not connected to a motor
vehicle.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   A non-motorized vehicle with a commercial license
registration while the non-motorized vehicle is being loaded with or unloaded
of any goods, wares or merchandise from property adjacent to the
non-motorized vehicle;



      (2)   A non-motorized vehicle required for any lawfully
authorized construction, maintenance or repair to property adjacent to the
non-motorized vehicle for no more than time reasonably required for the use
of the non-motorized vehicle in carrying out the construction, maintenance or
repair; and



      (3)   A non-motorized vehicle used solely for recreational
purposes while the non-motorized vehicle is being loaded or unloaded or
otherwise prepared for its intended recreational use.  In no event shall
such a non-motorized vehicle be parked on a street, alley or public property
for a period in excess of 24 hours.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-69)  (Ord. No. 2448, 2487)



SEC. 8-45.  LEAVING IGNITION KEY IN UNATTENDED VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle, except a
commercial vehicle, shall permit the vehicle to stand unattended in any
public place, used or new vehicle lot, or parking lot without first stopping
the engine, locking the ignition and removing the ignition key from the
vehicle.



   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a motor vehicle standing
unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, in violation of this
section, the police officer is authorized to remove the key from the vehicle
and deliver the key to the police officer in charge of the nearest police
station.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-70)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-46.  PARKING WITHOUT PERMISSION OF THE PROPERTY OWNER.



   No person shall park or stand a vehicle on private property or on
publicly owned property without the permission, express or implied, of the
owner or person in lawful possession of such property, or in a different
manner or a longer time than that for which permission was given.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-71)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-47.  VENDING FROM VEHICLES AND HUMAN POWERED DEVICES.



   (A)   Definitions - For the purposes of this section, the following
words shall have the following meanings.



      (1)   GOODS OR MERCHANDISE - Items and products of every kind
and description, including all food, produce, and beverage items.



      (2)   HUMAN POWERED DEVICE - Any device moved by human power,
including, but not limited to, a pushcart, wagon, bicycle, tricycle,
pedal-driver cart, other non-motorized conveyance, or other wheeled container
or mechanism, or from one's person.



      (3)   ROAMING SIDEWALK VENDOR - A sidewalk vendor who moves
from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.



      (4)   SIDEWALK VENDOR - A person who vends goods or
merchandise upon a public sidewalk from a structure, stand, display,
showcase, rack, or human powered device.



      (5)   SPECIAL EVENT - A city permitted event including, but
not limited to, carnivals, sporting events, fairs, art shows, and/or cultural
events.



      (6)   STATIONARY SIDEWALK VENDOR - A street vendor who vends
from a fixed location with a valid encroachment permit.



      (7)   STREET VENDOR - A person who drives a vehicle for the
purposes of vending on a public street.



      (8)   VEND OR VENDING - Any act of hawking, operating
noise-making devices to attract attention to the vendor, or the displaying,
selling, or offering for sale of any displayed goods or merchandise to the
public from any carrying device, box, bag, stand, or human powered device.



   (B)   Street vending - Except as provided in this section, no person
shall park any vehicle from which merchandise, food, or other items are sold
or displayed ,or offered for sale, barter, or exchange, on any portion of any
street, alley, sidewalk, or public property within the city.



      (1)   No person shall park such vehicle within or from the
following locations:



         (a)   The public right-of-way on C Street, Channel
Islands Boulevard, Camino Del Sol, Del Norte Boulevard, Fifth Street,
Gonzales Road, Harbor Boulevard, Hueneme Road, Oxnard Boulevard, Pleasant
Valley Road, Rice Avenue, Rose Avenue, Saviers Road, Ventura Road, Victoria
Avenue, Vineyard Avenue, or Wooley Road; or



         (b)   The public right-of-way within 100 feet of any
intersection, or within 50 feet of any driveway or of another such vehicle
parked on the public right-of-way.



      (2)   Every person operating such vehicles shall have in his
or her possession a valid business tax certificate issued by the city.



      (3)   No person shall park any such vehicle within 900 feet of
any school or daycare center between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on the days
school is in session.



      (4)   In residential areas, as shown on a map on file with the
license collector, no person shall park any such vehicle or container on any
day before 9:00 a.m. or sunrise, whichever is later, or after 7:00 p.m. or
sunset, whichever is earlier.



      (5)   When parked, the person operating such vehicle or
container shall:



         (a)   Stop playing music, ringing bells, or making other
noise that advertises such person's presence or wares; and



         (b)   Provide a visible trash receptacle for use by bona
fide purchasers.



      (6)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:



         (a)   A person delivering items from a store or other
fixed place of business, or distribution to a customer pursuant to an order
of, or by agreement with, such customer;



         (b)   A person who has obtained a temporary use permit
to park such a vehicle on specific public property; or



         (c)   A person who has a written license agreement with
the city to park such vehicle on specific public property.



   (C)   Sidewalk vending -



      (1)   In residential areas, only a sidewalk vendor with a
valid vendor permit issued pursuant to Chapter 11, Article 1, Division 3 of
this code may vend upon the city's public right-of-way.



      (2)   Every person to whom a valid business tax certificate
and/or permit is issued shall:



         (a)   Comply with the California Retail Food Code as
codified in Part 7 of Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 113.700 et seq.,
if vending food;



         (b)   Not vend from any structure, stand, display,
showcase, rack, ground placed display, or human powered device which exceeds
18 square feet, or exceeds a linear distance greater than six feet, on any
one side;



         (c)   Not occupy space on any sidewalk or path of travel
in such a way that would impede upon the required sidewalk width or path of
travel requirement pursuant to the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990 or other disability access standards;



         (d)   Not vend within 500 feet of an area designated for
a special event;



         (e)   Not vend upon a street median;



         (f)   Not vend within 100 feet of any intersection;



         (g)   Not vend within 500 feet of any freeway on-ramp or
off-ramp as defined in the Vehicle Code;



         (h)   Not vend within 900 feet of the property line of
any school or any daycare center between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
on the days the school is in session;



         (i)   Sidewalk vending hours’ limitations in areas
zoned for nonresidential use shall be as restrictive as any limitations on
hours of operation imposed on other businesses or uses on the same street,
excluding those permitted to operate 24 hours;



         (j)   In residential areas, roaming sidewalk vending
shall be limited to the hours of 9:00 a.m. or sunrise, whichever is later,
and 7:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever is earlier;



         (k)   Stationary sidewalk vending is prohibited in areas
that are exclusively residential; and



         (l)   Stationary sidewalk vendors are prohibited from
operating in a city park if the city has entered into exclusive agreements
for the sale of food or merchandise by one or more concessionaries for that
city park.



   (D)   Penalties -



      (1)   Every person vending in violation of this section is
guilty of an administrative violation punishable by administrative fines
established by city council resolution.



      (2)   Failure to pay an administrative fine is not punishable
as an infraction or misdemeanor.



      (3)   If a violator of this section fails to pay any fines,
fees, or other assessments, the city may levy a lien on a violator's real or
personal property, including the vehicle used for vending purposes.



(Ord. 2952)



SEC. 8-48.  TEMPORARY PARKING REGULATION.



   (A)   Whenever the police chief determines that any public or
private event is likely to cause substantial traffic or congestion that can
be alleviated if the parking or operation of vehicles is regulated or
prohibited, he/she may order that temporary signs be posted along affected
streets or alleys in public parking areas indicating the nature and duration
of the regulation or prohibition.



   (B)   After such signs have been posted for at least 24 hours, the
police chief may remove vehicles violating signs.



   (C)   The police chief shall remove such signs promptly after the
need for them has ended.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-73)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-49.  LOADING PERMITS REQUIRED.



   The traffic engineer may issue a permit allowing a vehicle to back to a
curb in order to load or unload merchandise or materials, subject to terms
and conditions stated in the permit.  The permit may be issued to the owner
or lessee of the real property where the merchandise or materials will be
loaded or unloaded or to the owner of the vehicle.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-74)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-50.  PARKING IN ALLEYS.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in an alley for any
purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-75)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-51.  LOADING AND UNLOADING IN YELLOW ZONES.



   Between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays,
no person shall stop a vehicle in a yellow zone except to load or unload
passengers or freight.  The loading and unloading of passengers shall not
consume more than three minutes, and the loading and unloading of freight
shall not consume more than 20 minutes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-76)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-52.  STOPPING IN WHITE ZONES.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a white zone except to
load and unload passengers or deposit mail in an adjacent mailbox.  No
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a white zone for such purposes
for more than three minutes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-77)  (Ord. No. 2448, 2483)



SEC. 8-53.  STOPPING IN GREEN ZONES.



   Between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays,
no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a green zone for longer than
15 minutes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-78)  (Ord. No. 2448, 2483)



SEC. 8-54.  STOPPING IN RED ZONES.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a red zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-79)  (Ord. No. 2483)



SEC. 8-55.  PARKING NEAR FIRE HYDRANTS.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within ten feet of a fire
hydrant except as follows:



   (A)   If the vehicle is attended by a licensed driver who is seated
in the front seat and who can immediately move such vehicle in case of
necessity; or



   (B)   If the vehicle is owned or operated by a fire department and
is clearly marked as a fire department vehicle.



(Ord. No. 2571)



SEC. 8-56.  PREFERENTIAL PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   (A)   Definitions - For the purposes of this section, the following
words shall have the following meanings.



      (1)   MOTOR VEHICLE - An automobile, truck, motorcycle or
other self-propelled form of transportation not in excess of 10,000 pounds of
gross vehicle weight.



      (2)   RESIDENT - A person who has at least a one-quarter
interest in a parcel of real property within the residential area or a person
who pays rent or other remuneration for use of a parcel of real property as
his/her residence.



      (3)   RESIDENTIAL AREA - The areas depicted in Exhibit A,
attached to Ordinance No. 2702, and Exhibit B, attached to Ordinance No.
2723. Both exhibits are incorporated herein by this reference.



   (B)   Issuance of permits -



      (1)   Parking permits and guest parking permits shall be
issued by the Traffic Engineer or designee. Each such permit shall state the
particular residential area. Parking permits shall not be issued for any
motor vehicle that has an outstanding notice of violation of parking rules
and restrictions established by this code. The Traffic Engineer shall issue
rules and regulations, consistent with this section, governing the manner in
which residents may qualify for such a permit.



      (2)   A parking permit or guest parking permit may be issued
for Motor Vehicles only upon application of:



         (a)   A resident who has a motor vehicle registered in
his/her name at an address in the residential area;



         (b)   A resident who has a motor vehicle registered to a
leasing company and leased to the resident's employer, provided the motor
vehicle is for the resident's use traveling to and from work and proof
acceptable to the Traffic Engineer or designee is provided that shows the
motor vehicle is registered in compliance with Cal. Vehicle Code, Section
6853;



         (c)   A resident for a guest parking permit, provided
that a guest parking permit shall only be valid for six months; or



         (d)   A new resident upon proof said resident has not
resided within the residential area since the resident's motor vehicle was
last registered.



      (3)   No more than two parking permits and one guest parking
permit shall be issued to a single address.



   (C)   Additional permits - Additional permits may be issued by the
Traffic Engineer or designee upon the application of a resident for use of
persons who, on a regular basis, provide health care or other related
services essential to the well-being of the resident applicant. The applicant
shall provide proof in the form of a statement by a licensed physician that
such services are required.



   (D)   Prohibiting issuance of permits for out-of-state vehicles;
exception for on-duty military personnel.



      (1)   Permits will not be issued for a motor vehicle unless
such motor vehicle is registered with the State of California Department of
Motor Vehicles.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) above,
the Traffic Engineer or designee may issue permits to a resident for motor
vehicles registered out-of-state, provided that the resident establishes that
he/she is on active military duty.



   (E)   Posting of residential permit parking area - The Traffic
Engineer shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in the residential area,
indicating the times parking permits and guest parking permits are required
to be displayed for parking on a public street.



   (F)   Display of permits - A parking permit or guest parking permit
shall be displayed face up on the driver's side of the front dashboard of the
motor vehicle.



   (G)   Permit parking exemption -



      (1)   A motor vehicle that displays a valid parking permit or
guest parking permit as provided herein shall be permitted to stand or be
parked on a public street in the residential area for which the permit has
been issued without being limited by the posted time restrictions established
pursuant to this section 8-56. Said motor vehicle shall not be exempt from
parking restrictions or prohibitions established pursuant to authority other
than this section 8-56. Except as provided in subsection (2) below, all other
motor vehicles parked within the residential area shall be subject to the
time restrictions posted in accordance with this section, as well as the
penalties provided for herein.



      (2)   The following motor vehicles shall not be subject to the
posted time restrictions authorized by this section when parked within the
residential area:



         (a)   Motor vehicles specified in section 8-36 (Public
Vehicles) of this code;



         (b)   Motor vehicles specified in Cal. Vehicle Code,
Section 22512 (Utility);



         (c)   Motor vehicles displaying special identification
license plates issued under Cal. Vehicle Code, Section 5007 or distinguishing
placards issued under Cal. Vehicle Code, Sections 22511.55 or 22511.59
(Disabled Placards).



      (3)   A residential parking permit or a guest parking permit
shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof an on-street parking
space within the designated residential area.



   (H)   Application for and duration of permit - Each parking permit
issued shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance and each guest
parking permit issued shall be valid for six months from the date of
issuance. Parking permits and guest parking permits may be renewed upon
reapplication in the manner required by the city. However, parking permits
and guest parking permits shall not be renewed for any holder or property for
which any notice of violation established by this code is outstanding and
unpaid.  Each application or reapplication for a parking permit or guest
parking permit shall contain information sufficient to identify the applicant
and the residence address of real property owned or leased within the
residential area.



   (I)   Penalty provisions -



      (1)   Unless expressly exempted by subsection (G), no person
shall stand or park a motor vehicle or other vehicle of a gross weight
exceeding 50 pounds upon a public street in the residential area during the
times requiring a parking permit or guest parking permit.



      (2)   No person shall falsely represent himself/herself as
eligible for a parking permit or guest parking permit or to furnish false
information to the city in an application for such a permit.



      (3)   No person shall copy, produce or create a facsimile or
counterfeit parking permit or guest parking permit.



      (4)   No person shall knowingly use or display any such permit
to evade time limitations in the residential area.



   (J)   Revocation of permit -  The Traffic Engineer or designee is
authorized to revoke the residential parking permit or guest parking permit
of any person found to be in violation of this section and, upon written
notification thereof, the person shall surrender such permit to the city.
Failure, when so requested, to surrender a residential parking permit or
guest parking permit so revoked is a violation of this code and the applicant
may be issued a civil citation pursuant to this code for each and every day
the applicant remains in violation.



(Ord. No. 2702, 2723)



SEC. 8-57.  ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING.



   No person shall park a vehicle in an off-street parking facility owned
or operated by the city in a stall or space designated exclusively for
parking an electric vehicle for charging purposes, which is posted in
accordance with California Vehicle Code section 22511, as it may be amended
or renumbered from time to time, for any purpose other than to charge an
electric vehicle.  Nor shall any person connect any device, item, equipment,
or thing to an electric charger located at such space or stall other than an
electric vehicle, as defined herein.  As used in this Section 8-57:



   (A)   An “electric vehicle” means a plug-in electric vehicle,
including an exclusively electric vehicle (“EV”) and a plug-in hybrid
electric vehicle (“PHEV”);



   (B)   An EV means a motor vehicle exclusively powered by an electric
propulsion system; and



   (C)   A PHEV means a motor vehicle primarily powered by an electric
propulsion system and secondarily by an internal combustion system, which
powers the electric propulsion system when the on-board source of electricity
is depleted or discharged.



(Ord. No. 2874)



DIVISION 2.  VIOLATION



SEC. 8-60.  VIOLATION.



   (A)   No person shall stop, park, stand or operate a vehicle,
non-motorized vehicle or non-motorized wheeled container contrary to the
provisions of this article or contrary to, or in a manner prohibited by
traffic signs, signals or markings placed by the traffic engineer.



   (B)   A violation of this section includes, but is not limited to:



      (1)   Parking where and when street sweeping is scheduled to
occur;



      (2)   Parking longer than the time allowed in a time-restrict
location;



      (3)   Parking where restricted or prohibited by a sign;



      (4)   Parking outside of stall markers; or



      (5)   Parking in an on-street stall or space designated for
disabled persons or disabled veterans.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-80)  (Ord. No. 2448, 2485)



ARTICLE V.  DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS AND TRAFFIC ENGINEER



SEC. 8-65.  TRAFFIC DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS.



   City police officers shall enforce the street traffic regulations of
this chapter and State laws applicable to street traffic in the city; make
arrests for traffic violations; investigate traffic accidents; cooperate with
the traffic engineer and other city officers and employees in administering
traffic laws and improving traffic conditions; and carry out duties imposed
on a police officer by this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-41)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-66.  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORT SYSTEM.



   Police officers shall maintain a system of filing traffic accident
reports and make the reports available to the traffic engineer.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-42)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-67.  ANNUAL TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORT SUMMARY.



   Police officers shall annually prepare a traffic accident report
summary for the city and file the report with the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-43)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-68.  APPOINTMENT OF TRAFFIC ENGINEER.



   The city traffic engineer shall be appointed by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-44)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-69.  DUTIES OF TRAFFIC ENGINEER.



   The traffic engineer shall determine the installation and proper timing
and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals; conduct engineering
analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures; conduct
engineering investigations of traffic conditions and cooperate with other
city officers and employees to improve traffic conditions; and exercise the
powers and duties provided in this chapter and in other city traffic
regulations.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-45)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-70.  REQUIRED TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   The traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic control devices
required by the Cal. Vehicle Code or this chapter or any other ordinance or
resolution of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-46)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-71.  ADDITIONAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   The traffic engineer shall place and maintain additional traffic
control devices as necessary to regulate, guide or warn traffic or to
effectuate any provision of the Cal. Vehicle Code or this chapter or any
other ordinance or resolution of the city council.  The traffic engineer
shall make such determination on the basis of traffic engineering principles
and traffic investigations and in accordance with State and city standards.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-47)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-72.  REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   The traffic engineer may remove, relocate or discontinue the operation
of any traffic control device not required by State law or this chapter or
any other ordinance or resolution of the city council whenever the traffic
engineer determines that the device is no longer necessary to maintain public
safety and welfare.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-48)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-73.  HOURS AND DAYS OF OPERATION.



   If the hours and days of operation of a traffic control device are not
specified in this chapter or any other ordinance or resolution of the city
council, the traffic engineer shall determine such hours and days of
operation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-49)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-74.  LANE MARKERS.



   (A)   The traffic engineer may mark center lines and lane lines on
the surface of roadways to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles.



   (B)   The traffic engineer may place signs temporarily designating
lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of
the center line of the roadway.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-50)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-75.  TURNS.



   As necessary to establish and maintain the orderly flow of traffic, the
traffic engineer may:



   (A)   Designate intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not
make right turns, left turns or U-turns;



   (B)   Place markers, buttons or signs between, within or adjacent to
intersections, indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at
such intersections; or



   (C)   Allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which
drivers may make right- or left-hand turns.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-51)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-76.  CROSSWALKS.



   The traffic engineer may establish crosswalks at and between
intersections as necessary to minimize hazards to pedestrians crossing the
streets.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-52)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-77.  PARKING.



   The traffic engineer may place and maintain traffic control devices,
such as signs and street markings, to designate areas where parking is
prohibited, restricted or subject to limitations, including, but not limited
to, the following situations:



   (A)   Parking on only one side of a one-way street, when the traffic
engineer determines that insufficient room exists for parking on both sides
of the street;



   (B)   Parking on an angle, where the traffic engineer determines
that insufficient room exists to provide an adequate amount of parallel
parking;



   (C)   Parking where street sweeping is scheduled to occur, where the
traffic engineer determines that parked vehicles will prevent or interfere
with street sweeping;



   (D)   Parking on property owned or leased by the city, where the
traffic engineer determines that unrestricted public parking will not allow
sufficient parking for vehicles used in the conduct of city business or the
business of persons leasing the property from the city;



   (E)   Parking on the street for disabled persons whose vehicles
display a special identification license plate or a distinguishing placard
issued pursuant to the Cal. Vehicle Code, where the traffic engineer
determines a need therefor;



   (F)   Parking on the side of a street adjacent to school property,
where the traffic engineer determines that parking would interfere with
traffic or create a hazard;



   (G)   Parking on streets that are no more than 30 feet wide;



   (H)   Parking of vehicles six feet or more in height (including any
load) within 100 feet of an intersection, where the traffic engineer
determines that so parking such vehicles will limit the area of vision of
approaching traffic and thereby create a hazard; or



   (I)   Parking in any other location where the traffic engineer
determines that time limits on parking or a prohibition on parking are
necessary to prevent congestion, allow more equitable access to parking
spaces, alleviate or avoid a hazard, preserve life or property, or for any
other reason.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-53)  (Ord. No. 2448)



SEC. 8-78.  TRAFFIC SIGNALS.



   The traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic signals at those
intersections and other places where traffic conditions require that the flow
of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or
relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional
hazard.  In determining the need for traffic signals, the traffic engineer
shall consult the California Department of Transportation Traffic Manual.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-54)  (Ord. No. 2448)



ARTICLE VI.  TOWING SERVICES



SEC. 8-85.  TOWING SERVICES PROVIDERS; REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All towing services providers that have entered into
agreements with the city shall perform motor vehicle towing and storage
services in response to requests from the police department subject to the
terms and conditions of the agreement and the Cal. Vehicle Code.



   (B)   Towing services providers that do not have agreements with the
city to respond to requests from the police department are hereby prohibited
from towing and removing motor vehicles from the public streets.  However,
the owner of the motor vehicle to be towed may designate any towing service
to be used for the removal and towing away of such vehicle.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-117)  (Ord. No. 2384)



SEC. 8-86.  REIMBURSEMENT OF CITY COSTS.



   (A)   All motor vehicles removed and stored at the direction of
police department employees shall be stored by the tow service providers
until the motor vehicle is ordered, in writing, to be released or disposed of
by an authorized city representative.



   (B)   The city council hereby establishes a stored motor vehicle fee
to be paid to the city by the registered owner of the motor vehicle or by the
person seeking the release of the motor vehicle in an amount established by
resolution of the city council.  This stored motor vehicle fee shall
reimburse the city for the costs of processing the towing and storage of the
motor vehicle and the processing of a written release, if any, for the motor
vehicle or other disposition thereof.



   (C)   The stored motor vehicle fee shall be a civil debt owed to the
city by the person seeking the release of the vehicle or by the registered
owner of the vehicle, whether or not the registered owner seeks release of
the vehicle.  If legal action is brought by the city or its assignee to
enforce collection of the stored motor vehicle fee, any judgment rendered in
favor of the city shall include costs of suit incurred by the city or its
assignee, including reasonable attorneys' fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 18-118)  (Ord. No. 2247, 2384, 2421)



ARTICLE VII.  AMBULANCES



SEC. 8-90.  COUNTY REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCES; COPIES OF REGULATIONS
ON FILE WITH CITY CLERK.



   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Section 50022.9, Ordinance No.
3694 of the board of supervisors of the county amending Article 2 of Chapter
4 of Division 2 of the Ventura County Ordinance Code entitled
“Ambulances” is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as
though fully set forth at this point.



   (B)   The city clerk is directed to keep on file three copies of
such Ordinance No. 3694 of the county for public inspection except one copy
may be retained by the chief enforcement officer.



(`64 Code, Sec. 4.1-1)  (Ord. No. 1326, 2093)



CHAPTER 9:  ADVERTISING



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   9-1.   Placards not to be affixed to private property without
consent of owner



   9-2.   Distribution of commercial advertising matter in public places



   9-3.   Unlawful to throw commercial advertising matter into vehicle



   9-4.   Advertising matter to be personally delivered



ARTICLE II. BENCHES



   9-10.   Authority to place or replace bus benches



   9-11.   Owner to perform maintenance and repair



   9-12.   Disposal of bus benches not in compliance with deadline



   9-13.   Owner to be notified of bus benches deemed unclaimed property



   9-14.   License for outdoor advertising on bus benches



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 9-1.  PLACARDS NOT TO BE AFFIXED TO PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT CONSENT OF
OWNER.



   No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise affix, or cause
same to be done by another, any notice, placard, bill, poster or
advertisement to or upon any street, sidewalk, crosswalk, curbing, hydrant,
tree, fence, enclosure, building, or telegraph, telephone or electrical
lighting pole, without first obtaining the permission of the owner, agent or
occupant thereof.



(`64 Code, Sec. 3-1)



SEC. 9-2.  DISTRIBUTION OF COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING MATTER IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   No person shall distribute or throw or cause to be distributed or
thrown along or upon any public street, park or other public place of the
city any commercial advertising matter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 3-2)



SEC. 9-3.  UNLAWFUL TO THROW COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING MATTER INTO VEHICLE.



   No person shall throw into any vehicle or to distribute to any occupant
thereof any commercial advertising matter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 3-3)



SEC. 9-4.  ADVERTISING MATTER TO BE PERSONALLY DELIVERED.



   No person shall throw or deliver any commercial advertising matter in
or onto any yard, building, store or vacant lot, unless the same is delivered
personally to a person in such yard, building, store or lot.



(`64 Code, Sec. 3-4)



ARTICLE II.  BENCHES



SEC. 9-10.  AUTHORITY TO PLACE OR REPLACE BUS BENCHES.



   (A)   No person except the city manager shall place or replace in
the city any bus bench.  For purposes of this article, a “bus bench” is
a seat along any street for the accommodation of passers-by or persons
awaiting transportation.



   (B)   Any person who owns one or more bus benches placed as of the
effective date of this article shall remove all such benches.



      (1)   Bus benches that are not on the list of bus benches as
to which the city license collector has issued a current business license for
outdoor advertising on bus benches shall be removed immediately.



      (2)   Bus benches that are on the list of bus benches as to
which the city license collector has issued a current business license for
outdoor advertising on bus benches and that do not contain advertising that
the bus bench owner is being paid to display shall be removed no later than
March 30, 1997.



      (3)   Bus benches that are on the list of bus benches as to
which the city license collector has issued a current business license for
outdoor advertising on bus benches and that contain advertising that the bus
bench owner is being paid to display, shall be removed no later than March
30, 1998.



      (4)   Bus benches that are on the list of bus benches as to
which the city license collector issued a business license for outdoor
advertising on bus benches for the period from July 1, 1994, through June 30,
1995, or any part thereof, shall be removed immediately when the license, or
any renewal thereof, expires and is not renewed beginning on July 1 next
succeeding the date of expiration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 3-47)  (Ord. No. 2361)



SEC. 9-11.  OWNER TO PERFORM MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.



   The owner of bus benches placed as of the effective date of this
article shall perform maintenance and repair as necessary to keep each bench
in a clean and safe condition and to immediately remove any graffiti on
benches.  If within ten days of the date that notice of noncompliance with
this section is mailed to the owner, the owner does not comply with this
section or remove the bench, the city manager may dispose of the bench as
provided in section 9-12.



(`64 Code, Sec. 3-48)  (Ord. No. 2361)



SEC. 9-12.  DISPOSAL OF BUS BENCHES NOT IN COMPLIANCE WITH DEADLINE.



   Any bus bench that is not removed by the time set out in section 9-10
may be disposed of by the city manager as provided in section 9-13.



(`64 Code, Sec. 3-49)  (Ord. No. 2361)



SEC. 9-13.  OWNER TO BE NOTIFIED OF BUS BENCHES DEEMED UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.



   The city manager may deem any bus bench that is not maintained,
repaired or removed as required by this article to be unclaimed property. 
In such case, the city manager shall notify the owner by certified or
registered mail that the bench is deemed to be unclaimed property and that if
the owner does not claim and remove the bench within three months of the date
of mailing the notice, the bench will be disposed of either by sale at public
auction to the highest bidder or by retention and use by the city, which may
thereafter destroy or dispose of the bench.  If a public auction is held,
the city manager shall give notice of the sale at least five days before the
time fixed for the sale by publication once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city.  If the bench remains unsold after being offered at
public auction, the bench may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the
city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 3-50)  (Ord. No. 2316)



SEC. 9-14.  LICENSE FOR OUTDOOR ADVERTISING ON BUS BENCHES.



   The license collector shall issue no business license for outdoor
advertising on bus benches:



   (A)   To a business that did not hold such a city business license
for the period from July 1, 1994, to June 30, 1995, or any part thereof.



   (B)   To a business that includes in its list of bus benches any bus
bench at a location that was not included in the list of bus benches for
which a business license was issued for the period from July 1, 1994, through
June 30, 1995, or any part thereof.



   (C)   To a business that does not provide with its application for a
business license a cash deposit, or a bond or letter of credit in a form
satisfactory to the city attorney, conditioned on the applicant's
maintaining, repairing and removing all benches as and within the time
required by this article.  Such security shall be in the amount of $50 times
the number of bus benches for which the business license is applied.  The
city manager may draw on such security in the amount of $50 for each bus
bench that is not maintained, repaired or removed within the time required by
this article and shall use such amount to defray the costs of public auction
or conversion of the bus bench to city use, as provided by section 9-13.  No
part of amounts so drawn shall be refunded to the owner, whether or not such
costs equal $50 per bench.  Requiring and drawing on such security are
additional remedies to, and do not preclude, the remedies provided in section
9-13.  Such security shall remain in full force and effect, and in the case
of a cash deposit, such deposit shall be retained by the license collector,
for 90 days after the expiration of the license.



   (D)   For the period from July 1, 1997, to June 30, 1998, or any
part thereof, to a business that has not removed all of its bus benches that,
as of the effective date of this article, did not contain advertising that
the business was being paid to display.



   (E)For the period from and after July 1, 1998, to any business.



(`64 Code, Sec. 3-51)  (Ord. No. 2361)



CHAPTER 10:  BINGO GAMES



   10-1.   Definitions



   10-2.   Eligible organization



   10-3.   Bingo license



   10-4.   Application procedure



   10-5.   Fees



   10-6.   Investigation of applicant



   10-7.   Effective date of license



   10-8.   Denial of license



   10-9.   License renewal



   10-10.   Appeal of denial



   10-11.   Revocation of license



   10-12.   Notice of revocation



   10-13.   Appeal of revocation



   10-14.   Appeal hearing



   10-15.   Conduct of hearings



   10-16.   Decision



   10-17.   Application for new license after revocation



   10-18.   Judicial action



   10-19.   Location of bingo



   10-20.   Posting of license



   10-21.   Nontransferability of license



   10-22.   Posting of prizes and rules



   10-23.   Maximum amount of prizes



   10-24.   Inspections



   10-25.   Open to the public



   10-26.   Maximum attendance



   10-27.   Maintenance of records



   10-28.   Proceeds from games



   10-29.   Reports on proceeds



   10-30.   Annual report



   10-31.   Financial interest



   10-32.   Exclusive operation



   10-33.   Minors; intoxicated person



   10-34.   Days and hours of operation



   10-35.   Participant to be present



   10-36.   Use of credit prohibited



   10-37.   No admission charge



   10-38.   Violations



   10-39.   City attorney may enjoin violation



SEC. 10-1.  DEFINITIONS.



    For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   BINGO - A game of chance in which participants are awarded
prizes on the basis of having designated numbers or symbols on a card which
conform to numbers or symbols selected at random.



   (B)   RECREATIONAL BINGO - Bingo that complies with the following:



      (1)   The purchase price of individual bingo card does not
exceed $.25;



      (2)   No person is allowed to purchase more than 12 individual
bingo cards during each separate game;



      (3)   No more than a total of 600 individual bingo cards are
used by all participants during each separate game;



      (4)   Prizes for each separate game are limited to goods, gift
certificates, or cash that does not exceed $25 in fair market value.



      (5)   The organization conducting the game is not required to
comply with the reporting requirements of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-1)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-2.  ELIGIBLE ORGANIZATION.



   No bingo shall be conducted in the city except by an organization
exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Cal. Rev. and
Tax. Code, Sections 23701(a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g) or (1), a mobile home
park association or a senior citizen organization.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-2)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-3.  BINGO LICENSE.



   Prior to conducting bingo, an organization will obtain and maintain a
bingo license.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-3)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-4.  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   To obtain a bingo license, an organization has to first file
one of the following documents with the license collector:



      (1)   Proof of exemption under Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code,
Sections 23701(a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g) or (1); or



      (2)   A letter of good standing from the exemption division of
the State Franchise Tax Board, showing exemption under one of such code
sections listed in subsection (A)(1); or



      (3)   Proof satisfactory to the license collector that the
organization is either a valid and duly organized mobile home park
association or senior citizen organization.



   (B)   If the organization satisfies the requirements of this
section, the license collector shall provide the organization with a bingo
license application.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-4)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-5.  FEES.



   (A)   Upon completing and filing a bingo license application, the
applicant shall pay a fee of $50.



   (B)   Upon completing and filing a bingo license application for
recreational bingo, the applicant shall pay a fee of $25.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-5)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-6.  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.



   The license collector will determine if all the statements on any bingo
license application are true and the appropriateness of the applicant to
conduct bingo in the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-6)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-7.  EFFECTIVE DATE OF LICENSE.



   If the license collector grants the license, the license shall be
effective on the date of issuance.  Any license issued prior to July 1 of
any year shall be valid until December 31 of that same year.  Any license
issued after July 1 of any year shall be valid until December 31 of the
following year.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-7)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-8.  DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   The license collector may not issue or renew a license or may condition
the license if, after consideration of any application, the license collector
determines that the operation of bingo by the applicant or licensee would be
injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or that an
application is incomplete or fraudulent.  If the applicant or licensee is
denied an original license, or a renewal, the license collector shall refund
one-half of the fee and immediately notify the applicant or licensee as set
forth in section 10-12.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-8)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-9.  LICENSE RENEWAL.



   A licensee shall renew the license annually.  The license renewal
shall be accompanied by payment of a fee set forth in section 10-5 and
processed as an original application.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-9)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-10.  APPEAL OF DENIAL.



   The applicant or licensee may appeal any decision of the license
collector to deny or condition an original license or not to renew a license
as set forth in section 10-13.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-10)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-11.  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The license collector may revoke a license if a licensee violates any
provision of this chapter or if the operation of the bingo game would be
injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the public.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-11)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-12.  NOTICE OF REVOCATION.



   (A)   The license collector shall notify a licensee of any license
revocation.



   (B)   The notice shall be effective immediately if personally
served, or 48 hours after the notice has been deposited postage prepaid in
the United States mail.



   (C)   Upon the notice becoming effective, the licensee shall
immediately cease all bingo operations.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-12)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-13.  APPEAL OF REVOCATION.



   A licensee objecting to the revocation of the license may file with the
city clerk a written request for an appeal hearing, accompanied by the
hearing fee as established by resolution of the city, within 14 days of
receiving the notice.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-13)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-14.  APPEAL HEARING.



   (A)   (1)   Upon receiving a request for an appeal hearing, the
city clerk shall send the request to a hearing officer.



      (2)   The hearing officer shall promptly schedule the matter
for hearing.



   (B)   At least ten days before the hearing, the hearing officer
shall mail written notice of the date, time and place of hearing to the
applicant or licensee and license collector.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-14)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-15. CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.



   (A)   All hearings shall be open to the public.



   (B)   A representative of the license collector shall first present
evidence to justify the denial, revocation or conditioning of a license. 
Thereafter, the applicant or licensee may present evidence.



   (C)   The burden of proof to justify revocation or conditioning of
the license is on the license collector.  The burden of proof is on the
applicant or licensee seeking to reverse the denial of a request for an
original license or license renewal.



   (D)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
fashion and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-15)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-16.  DECISION.



   Within 14 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
shall issue and mail to the licensee and license collector a written decision
containing a statement of the reasons for the decision.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-16)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-17.  APPLICATION FOR NEW LICENSE AFTER REVOCATION.



   If a license is revoked, the former licensee may apply for a new
license after waiting one year from the date the revocation of the license is
final.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-17)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-18.  JUDICIAL ACTION.



   The applicant or licensee may seek judicial review of the hearing
officer's decision within the time and in the manner provided by Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure, Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-18)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-19.  LOCATION OF BINGO.



   (A)   A licensee shall conduct bingo only on property owned or
leased by the licensee, or donated to the licensee.  The property used by
the licensee for bingo shall also be used for an office by the licensee or
for performance of the purposes for which the licensee is organized.



   (B)   In the event the licensee ceases to use such property as an
office or as a place for the performance of the purposes for which the
licensee is organized, the license shall automatically be deemed revoked.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-19)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-20.  POSTING OF LICENSE.



   Licensee shall post the license in a conspicuous location during any
bingo game.  Licensee shall produce the license upon request by the license
collector or any member of a law enforcement agency.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-20)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-21.  NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE.



   A bingo license is not transferable.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-21)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-22.  POSTING OF PRIZES AND RULES.



   Prior to playing bingo, the licensee shall announce the nature and
amount of the prizes, the type of bingo, the rules of the bingo and clearly
display same to all participants.  The licensee shall award all prizes
immediately upon conclusion of each bingo game.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-22)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-23.  MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF PRIZES.



   The total fair market value of prizes awarded during any single bingo
game shall not exceed $500.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-23)  (Ord. No. 2435, 2805)



SEC. 10-24.  INSPECTIONS.



   No person shall interfere with, prevent or refuse to permit a member of
a law enforcement agency or the license collector to inspect, without notice,
any property licensed for bingo.  This inspection shall be to determine
whether the licensee is complying with the provisions of this chapter, State
and federal law.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-24)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-25.  OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.



   Licensee shall maintain bingo open to the public and shall not reserve
seats or space for any person.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-25)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-26.  MAXIMUM ATTENDANCE.



   Licensee shall limit attendance at bingo to the occupancy capacity of
the location where the bingo is conducted as determined by the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-26)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-27.  MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.



   For a period of at least three years from the year of preparation, the
licensee shall maintain accurate and complete records of the total number of
persons participating in each bingo game and the number of bingo cards, pull
tabs, punch boards, or other devices which are sold during each game.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-27)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-28.  PROCEEDS FROM GAMES.



   (A)   Any licensee exempt from payment of the bank and corporation
tax by Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code, Section 23701(d) shall deposit all profits
derived from bingo in a special fund or account and shall not commingle such
funds with any other funds. Such funds shall be used only for charitable
purposes.



   (B)   All other licensees shall deposit all proceeds derived from
bingo in a special fund or account and shall not commingle such funds with
any other funds.  The proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes,
with the following exceptions:



      (1)   The proceeds may be used for prizes.



      (2)   A portion of the proceeds, not to exceed 20% of the
total before deduction for prizes, or $2,000 per month, whichever is less,
may be used for the rental of property to conduct bingo and for overhead,
including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security
equipment and security personnel.



      (3)   The proceeds may be used to pay license fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-28)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-29.  REPORTS ON PROCEEDS.



   The licensee shall file with the license collector on the fifteenth day
of each month a report specifying the use of proceeds generated from bingo
during the previous month.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-29)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-30.  ANNUAL REPORT.



   On or before January 31 of each year, a licensee shall file a report
under penalty of perjury with the license collector containing the following
information:



   (A)   Total amount of funds received from the operation of bingo
during the previous 12 months;



   (B)   Total amount paid out in prizes or cash; and



   (C)   Detailed costs for the operation of bingo.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-30)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-31.  FINANCIAL INTEREST.



   No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity, except
licensee, shall hold a financial interest in bingo.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-31)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-32.  EXCLUSIVE OPERATION.



   (A)   Bingo shall be operated and staffed only by the members and
the manager of the licensee.  Such members or manager shall not receive a
percentage of profit, wage, salary, or any other direct or indirect
consideration from bingo, nor shall they receive payments from the licensee
for such purpose.



   (B)   Only the licensee shall operate bingo or participate in the
promotion, supervision or any other phase of bingo. Security personnel do not
have to be members of licensee.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-32)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-33.  MINORS; INTOXICATED PERSON.



   No person under the age of 18 years or any intoxicated person shall be
allowed to participate in a bingo game.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-33)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-34.  DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Licensee shall not operate bingo games more than one day per
calendar week, unless the licensee receives prior written permission from the
license collector to exceed this limitation, which permission may be withheld
for any reason, and shall not be granted more than two times in any calendar
year.



   (B)   The licensee hours of operation may not exceed six hours
within a single day, unless the licensee receives prior written permission
from the license collector to exceed this limitation, which permission may be
withheld for any reason, and shall not be granted more than two times in any
calendar year.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-34)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-35.  PARTICIPANT TO BE PRESENT.



   No person shall be allowed to participate in bingo unless the person is
physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being
conducted.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-35)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-36.  USE OF CREDIT PROHIBITED.



   No person shall be permitted to play bingo on a credit basis.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-36)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-37.  NO ADMISSION CHARGE.



   The licensee shall not impose a fee, donation, dues or other charge as
a requirement for admission or entry into any bingo location.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-37)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-38.  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a $1,000 fine and/or one year in
county jail.



   (B)   Notwithstanding subsection (A), any person who receives or
pays a percentage of profit, wage or salary from any bingo licensed pursuant
to this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $10,000.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-38)  (Ord. No. 2435)



SEC. 10-39.  CITY ATTORNEY MAY ENJOIN VIOLATION.



   The city attorney may bring an action to enjoin a violation of Cal.
Penal Code, Section 326.5 or of any provision of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 8.1-39)  (Ord. No. 2435)



CHAPTER 11:  PERMITS



ARTICLE I.  BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATES



DIVISION 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   11-1.   Definitions



   11-2.   Purpose



   11-3.   Payment of other business taxes



   11-4.   Business tax certificate required



   11-5.   Multiple tax certificates; branch establishments



   11-6.   Evidence of conducting business



   11-7.   Apportionment of tax



   11-8.   Exemption procedure



   11-9.   Exempt organizations, activities, persons



   11-10.   Application



   11-11.   Information on tax certificate; identification stickers



   11-12.   Renewal of tax certificate



   11-13.   Amendment



   11-14.   Financial information; audit and examination



   11-15.   Information confidential



   11-16.   Determination of business tax



   11-17.   Extensions of time for filing sworn statement or application



   11-18.   Nontransferability



   11-19.   Duplicate business tax certificates



   11-20.   Posting and carrying business tax certificate



   11-21.   Time for payment



   11-22.   Delinquency; penalties; installment payments



   11-23.   Refund for overpayment



   11-24.   No refund on cessation of business



   11-25.   Suspension; revocation; notice



   11-26.   Appeal



DIVISION 2.  RATES



   11-30.   Definitions



   11-31.   Vending machine lessor, retail sales, small home business
and general business



   11-32.   Entertainment



   11-33.   Wholesalers



   11-34.   Manufacturers and transporters



   11-35.   Food markets, dealers in vehicles and equipment



   11-36.   Professions, occupations and services



   11-37.   Contractors



   11-38.   Public utilities



DIVISION 3.  PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS



   11-45.   Business tax certificate to peddle food; public health
permit required



   11-46.   Business tax certificate and vendor permit to peddle,
solicit or canvass in residential area; fingerprint report required



   11-47.   Employment of minors



   11-48.   Time restrictions on peddling, canvassing, and soliciting
in residential areas



   11-49.   Request for hearing by applicant



   11-50.   Revocation or modification of vendor permit



DIVISION 4.  RULES AND ENFORCEMENT



   11-55.   Rules and regulations



   11-56.   Enforcement



   11-57.   Tax and penalty deemed debt to city



   11-58.   Remedies cumulative



   11-59.   Punishment



ARTICLE II.  ALARM SYSTEMS



DIVISION 1.  SECURITY ALARMS (POLICE)



   11-63.   Security alarms: definitions



   11-64.   Duties



   11-64.1.   Security alarm business duties



   11-64.2.   Alarm agent duties



   11-64.3.   Alarm user duties



   11-64.4.   Alarm user duties imposed jointly and severally



   11-64.5.   Business tax certificates



   11-65.   Silent or audible alarm presumption



   11-66.   No duty to respond



   11-67.   Exemptions



   11-68.   Prohibited acts



DIVISION 2.  ALARM SYSTEM PERMITS



   11-69.   Alarm system permit required



   11-70.   Security alarm application; fees; appeals



   11-70.1.   Security alarm application



   11-70.2.   Permit issuance or denial



   11-70.3.   Right to appeal



   11-70.4.   Appeal procedure



   11-70.5.   Change in application information



DIVISION 3.  SECURITY ALARM SYSTEM STANDARDS



   11-71.   Security alarm system standards



   11-71.1.   Deactivation of audible alarm



   11-71.2.   Emergency power supply



   11-71.3.   Automatic dialing device



   11-71.4.   Audible alarms



   11-71.5.   Activation of alarms



DIVISION 4.  EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS



   11-72.   Excessive false alarms prohibited



   11-73.   Fees and penalties for excessive false security alarms



   11-74.   False alarm notices; bills for fines and fees; hearing



   11-74.1.   False alarm notices



   11-74.2.   Bills for fines, fees, and penalties; hearing



DIVISION 5.  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF SECURITY ALARM PERMIT



   11-75.   Suspension or revocation of security alarm permit;
procedures



   11-75.1.   Suspension or revocation of security alarm permit



   11-75.2.   Notice and hearing



   11-75.3.   Duties after suspension or revocation



DIVISION 6.  ENFORCEMENT



   11-75.4.   Collection of civil debt



DIVISION 7.  CONFIDENTIALITY



   11-76.   Confidentiality



DIVISION 8.  GOVERNMENT IMMUNITY



   11-77.   Government immunity



DIVISION 9.  FIRE ALARMS



   11-78.   Purpose



   11-79.   Fire alarms: definitions



   11-80.   Notification of fire alarm system



   11-81.   Fire alarm system approval



   11-82.   Fire alarm inspection, testing, and maintenance



   11-83.   Fire alarm activation; response



   11-84.   Nuisance fire alarms



   11-85.   Fire alarm service fees and fines



   11-86.   Remedies and penalties



   11-87.   Appeals



   11-88.   Fire alarm system return to service



   11-89.   Exemptions



   11-90.   Confidentiality



   11-91.   Government immunity



ARTICLE III.  ARCADES



   11-130.   Definitions



   11-131.   Arcade permit not required



   11-132.   Facility requirements



   11-133.   Operating standards



ARTICLE IV.  DANCE PERMIT PROCEDURES



   11-140.   Purpose



   11-141.   Applications



   11-142.   Investigation and report



   11-143.   Issuance of permit



   11-144.   Notice of corrective action



   11-145.   Taking corrective action



   11-146.   Denial of permit



   11-147.   Hearing officer



   11-148.   Request for hearing by applicant



   11-149.   Form and content of applicant's request for hearing



   11-150.   Setting hearings; notice



   11-151.   Conduct of hearings



   11-152.   Decision



   11-153.   Judicial action



   11-154.   Revocation or modification



   11-155.   Reapplication



   11-156.   Effective date of permit



   11-157.   Duration and renewal



   11-158.   No transfer



   11-159.   Display of permit



ARTICLE V.  DANCES



   11-170.   Definitions



   11-171.   Dance permit required



   11-172.   Term; fees



   11-173.   Exceptions



   11-174.   Security



   11-175.   Conditions



   11-176.   Hours of dance



   11-177.   Minors



   11-178.   Termination by police chief



ARTICLE VI.  ENTERTAINMENT



   11-185.   Definitions



   11-186.   Entertainment permit not required



   11-187.   Conditions



   11-188.   Termination by police chief



ARTICLE VII.  FILMING



   11-200.   Permit required; business tax certificate required



   11-201.   Exemptions from permit requirements



   11-202.   Designated liaison



   11-203.   Standardized permit application form



   11-204.   Expedited process



   11-205.   Maximum time requirements for issuance



   11-206.   Permit riders



   11-207.   Concurrent jurisdiction



   11-208.   Fees



   11-209.   Insurance, indemnity and bond



   11-210.   Revocation



ARTICLE VIII.  PERMITS TO SELL CONCEALABLE FIREARMS



   11-220.   Concealable firearm permit required; business tax
certificate required



   11-221.   Application



   11-222.   Investigation of applicant



   11-223.   Revocation or modification of permit



   11-224.   Request for hearing



   11-225.   Hearings; notice



   11-226.   Conduct of hearings



   11-227.   Decision



   11-228.   Judicial action



ARTICLE IX.  MASSAGE



   11-232.   Definitions



   11-233.   Massage therapy certificate required; renewal of massage
establishment and technician permits; technician identification badges
required; fees



   11-234.   Exemptions



   11-235.   [Reserved]



   11-236.   [Reserved]



   11-237.   Business tax certificate required; denial, revocation,
restriction, or suspension of business tax certificate



   11-238.   Registration and notification requirements



   11-239.   Hours of operation



   11-240.   Prohibited advertising practices



   11-241.   Minors



   11-242.   Physical facility and building code requirements - state
certified massage businesses or establishments



   11-243.   Physical facility and building code requirements - city
licensed massage businesses or establishments



   11-244.   Health and safety requirements



   11-245.   Attire and physical hygiene requirements



   11-246.   Inspections



   11-247.   Owner and/or operator responsibility



   11-248.   Persons using alcohol or drugs prohibited



ARTICLE X.  POOL HALLS



   11-250.   Definitions



   11-251.   Pool hall permit not required



   11-252.   Conditions



   11-253.   Hours of operation



ARTICLE XI.  TAXICABS



   11-260.   Purpose



   11-261.   Definitions



   11-262.   Taxicab permits required; fees



   11-263.   Application for taxicab permit



   11-264.   Controlled substance and alcohol testing program



   11-265.   Grant or denial of taxicab application



   11-266.   Notice to applicant



   11-267.   Request for hearing by applicant



   11-268.   Conditions of taxicab operator permit



   11-269.   Conditions of taxicab driver permit



   11-270.   Annual permit renewal



   11-271.   Revocation, suspension or modification of taxicab permit



ARTICLE XII.  JOLLY JUMPS



   11-280.   Purpose



   11-281.   Definitions



   11-282.   Permit required; penalties



   11-283.   Application for permit



   11-284.   Permit conditions



   11-285.   Parks available for jolly jumps; daily limit



ARTICLE XIII.  CERTIFIED UNIFIED PROGRAM AGENCY



DIVISION 1.  UNIFIED PROGRAM GENERAL PROVISIONS



   11-300.   Purpose



   11-301.   Definitions



   11-302.   Implementation of the unified program



   11-303.   Unified program facility permit required



   11-304.   Scope of unified program facility permit



   11-305.   Unified program facility permit fees



   11-306.   Terms of unified program facility permit



   11-307.   Late payment surcharges



   11-308.   One-time processing fee



   11-309.   Denial, suspension, or revocation of unified program
facility permit or permit element



DIVISION 2.  HAZARDOUS WASTE CONTROL



   11-315.   Purpose



   11-316.   Hazardous waste facility permit required



   11-317.   Hazardous waste facility permit fees



DIVISION 3.  HAZARDOUS WASTE ON-SITE TREATMENT



   11-325.   Hazardous waste on-site treatment permit required



   11-326.   Hazardous waste on-site treatment permit fees



DIVISION 4.  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RELEASE RESPONSE PLANS AND INVENTORY



   11-335.   Purpose



   11-336.   Hazardous materials business plan fees



   11-337.   Reporting of carbon dioxide compressed gas



   11-338.   Compressed gas cylinder exemption



   11-339.   Compressed air and oxygen exemption



   11-340.   Risk management plan fees



DIVISION 5.  UNDERGROUND STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES



   11-345.   Purpose



   11-346.   Underground storage tank permit fees



   11-347.   Re-inspection fee



   11-348.   Installation, repair, replacement, modification, or
closure permit required



DIVISION 6.  ABOVEGROUND STORAGE OF PETROLEUM



   11-355.   Purpose



   11-356.   Aboveground storage tank permit required



   11-357.   Aboveground storage tank fees



   11-358.   Aboveground storage tank closure permit required



ARTICLE XIV.  TOBACCO RETAILERS



   11-370.   Definitions



   11-371.   Tobacco retailer permit required; compliance with other
laws



   11-372.   Term; fees



   11-373.   Restrictions



   11-374.   Permit application procedures



   11-375.   Issuance of permit



   11-376.   Permit renewal



   11-377.   Permits nontransferable



   11-378.   Modification, suspension, or revocation of permit



   11-379.   Tobacco retailing without a permit



   11-380.   Enforcement



ARTICLE XV.  MEDICAL CANNABIS DELIVERY



   11-390.   Definitions



   11-391.   Permits required; compliance with other laws



   11-392.   Permit exception



   11-393.   Term; fees



   11-394.   Application for medical cannabis delivery permit and
renewal



   11-395.   Application for delivery driver permit and renewal



   11-396.   Investigation of application; decision and notification



   11-397.   Suspension or revocation of permit



   11-398.   Grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of medical
cannabis delivery permit



   11-399.   Grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of delivery
driver permit



   11-400.   Appeal of denial of application, suspension, or revocation
of medical cannabis delivery permit or delivery driver permit



   11-401.   Delivery service regulations



   11-402.   Insurance and hold harmless requirements



   11-403.   Enforcement



ARTICLE I.  BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATES



DIVISION 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 11-1.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   ANNIVERSARY MONTH - The month in which a business first
applied for a business tax certificate from the city. For those businesses in
which the original anniversary month cannot be determined, the city shall
assign an anniversary month and that date shall be the anniversary month for
purposes of this article.



   (B)   BRANCH ESTABLISHMENT - A separate location of the same
business for which a business tax certificate is obtained.



   (C)   BUSINESS - Professions, trades and occupations and every kind
of calling, whether or not carried on for profit, not including the
performance of a governmental function by a public agency.



   (D)   BUSINESS TAX SCHEDULE - The schedule of taxes and fees applied
to businesses pursuant to this chapter, enacted or revised by resolution of
the city council.



   (E)   CITY - The City of Oxnard.



   (F)   COLLECTOR - The city treasurer or designee.



   (G)   COST OF OPERATIONS - The total amount expended for conducting
a business within the city, including, but not limited to, wages, salaries,
benefits, bonuses, leases and rentals for equipment and facilities,
utilities, telephone, maintenance and general overhead expenses.



   (H)   EMPLOYEE - Any person engaged in conducting any business and
earning regular wages or salary or directly participating in the profits of
the business, including, but not limited to, owners, any member of an owner's
family, proprietors, officers, directors, partners, managers, operators,
trustees, trustors, beneficiaries, associates, salespeople, solicitors and
joint venturers, but not including independent contractors.



   (I)   FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS - A store, office or place, with a
person or persons who are regularly in charge, where business is regularly
conducted from day to day, week to week, for a period of six months or more,
not including lodging rooms or places used temporarily, or not equipped with
furniture, equipment and stock in trade customary to the particular business,
but including a residence if the business is conducted from such residence in
compliance with the city code and other laws.



   (J)   GROSS RECEIPTS - The total of amounts actually received or
receivable from sales or for the performance of any act or service for which
a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is
done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares
or merchandise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property of any
kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the
property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest
paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever, but not including
the following:



      (1)   Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;



      (2)   Credits allowed on property accepted as part of the
purchase price and which property may later be sold;



      (3)   Any tax required by law to be included in or added to
the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;



      (4)   Such part of the sale price of property returned by
purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in
cash or by credit;



      (5)   Amounts collected for others where the business is
acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to
those for whom collected and the agent or trustee has furnished the collector
with the names and addresses of such persons and the amounts paid to them;



      (6)   That portion of the receipts of a general contractor
which represent payments to subcontractors, provided that such subcontractors
that do business in the city are licensed and the general contractor
furnishes the collector with the names and addresses of the subcontractors
and the amounts paid each subcontractor;



      (7)   Receipts of refundable deposits other than refundable
deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business;



      (8)   As to a real estate agent or broker, the sales price of
real estate sold for the account of others except that portion that
represents commission or other income to the agent or broker;



      (9)   As to a retail gasoline dealer, a portion of receipts
from the sale of motor vehicle fuels to the motor vehicle license tax imposed
by and previously paid under the Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code; and



      (10)   As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel
tax imposed by federal law if paid by the dealer or collected by the dealer
from the consumer or purchaser.



   (K)   INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR - Any person engaged to aid in the
business of another person and compensated through commission or in any
manner other than regular wages or salary or direct participation in the
profits of the business.



   (L)   PERSON - Any agent, receiver, administrator, executor,
assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, partnership, joint
venture, club, association, company, joint stock company, business trust,
domestic or foreign corporation, syndicate, society, any group of individuals
acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, non-profit or
otherwise, and an individual or natural person who is 18 years of age or
older, not including an employee, and not including the city.



   (M)   PUBLIC AGENCY - The United States, the State, a county, a
city, a county and a city, a public authority, a public district, and any
other political subdivision of the State.



   (N)   SALE - The transfer, in any manner or by any means, of title
to real or personal property for consideration, or the serving, supplying, or
furnishing for consideration of any property, including a transaction whereby
the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as
security for the payment of the price, including any transaction that is or
that, in effect, results in a sale within the law.



   (O)   SWORN STATEMENT - An affidavit sworn to before a person
authorized to take oaths, or a declaration or certification made under
penalty of perjury.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-1)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2804, 2838)



SEC. 11-2.  PURPOSE.



   The business tax imposed by this article is for revenue purposes only.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-2)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-3.  PAYMENT OF OTHER BUSINESS TAXES.



   Any person required to pay a business tax for conducting a business
under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any business tax
for the privilege of conducting such business required under any provision of
the code or any other ordinance or regulation of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-3)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-4.  BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any person conducting a business within the city shall obtain
a business tax certificate and pay a business tax and the following business
tax fees when applicable:  an application fee, a renewal fee, an amendment
fee, a duplicate tax certificate fee, a duplicate sticker fee and a
fingerprint report fee. The amount of the business tax and the fees shall be
set in the business tax schedule. The amount of the fees shall not exceed the
city's actual cost of processing applications, renewals, amendments,
duplicate business tax certificates, duplicate stickers and fingerprint
reports.



   (B)   This article applies to any business conducted within the
city, regardless of whether the business is conducted from a fixed or other
place of business or outside of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-4)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-5.  MULTIPLE TAX CERTIFICATES; BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   A person shall obtain a separate business tax certificate for
each separate type of business conducted at the same or different locations.



   (B)   Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, any person
conducting two or more types of businesses at the same location or at
different locations, which businesses are under the same management and are
all taxable herein on gross receipts, whether optionally or otherwise, and
which use a single set or an integrated set of books and records, may, at
his/her option, pay only one business tax calculated on all gross receipts of
the type of businesses under the schedule that applies to the business of
such person that requires the highest percentage payment on such gross
receipts.  In such case, such person shall obtain a business tax certificate
for each branch establishment or location.



   (C)   A person shall obtain a business tax certificate for each
branch establishment of the same business.



   (D)   A person shall conduct only the business for which a business
tax certificate is obtained at the location and in the manner stated in such
business tax certificate.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-5)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-6.  EVIDENCE OF CONDUCTING BUSINESS.



   When any person shall by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone
book, newspapers, computer network, or other means, advertise, hold out or
represent that he/she is conducting business in the city, or when any person
submits a bid or proposal to do work or supply goods or materials in the
city, or when any person holds an active license or permit or fictitious
business name statement or seller's permit issued by a governmental agency
indicating that he/she is conducting business in the city, and such person
fails to deny by a sworn statement given to the collector that he/she is not
conducting a business in the city, after being requested to do so by the
collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that
such person is conducting a business in the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-6)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-7.  APPORTIONMENT OF TAX.



   (A)   The business taxes shall not be so applied as to occasion an
undue burden on interstate, intercity or intrastate commerce or bear an
unfair relationship to the proportion of the taxed activity taking place
within the city or be violative of the equal protection and due process
clauses of the Constitution of the United States and the State.



   (B)   If a certificant or applicant for a business tax certificate
believes that the business tax imposed places an undue burden upon
interstate, intercity or intrastate commerce or bears an unfair relationship
to the proportion of the taxed activity taking place within the city or is
violative of such constitutional clauses, such person may apply to the
collector for an apportionment of the tax.



   (C)   Such application may be made before, at the time of, or within
six months after payment of the business tax.  The applicant or certificant
shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, show his/her method of
business, the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business, and such
other information as the collector may deem necessary in order to determine
the extent, if any, of such undue burden or violation.



   (D)   The collector shall then conduct an investigation and fix as
the business tax for the applicant or certificant, an amount that is
reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or if the business tax has already been
paid, order a refund of the amount over and above the business tax so
fixed.  In fixing the business tax to be collected, the collector may base
the business tax on a percentage of gross receipts or any other measure that
will assure that the business tax assessed is uniform with that assessed on
businesses of like nature.



   (E)   Should the collector determine the gross receipts measure of
business tax to be the proper basis, the collector may require the applicant
or certificant to submit, either at the time of termination of the business
of the city or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of
the gross receipts and may require the applicant or certificant to pay the
amount of business tax therefor.



   (F)   The collector shall give the applicant or certificant notice
of a determination made pursuant to section 11-7(D) by personal service or by
depositing the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed
to the applicant or certificant at his/her last known address. The applicant
or certificant may within 15 days after the mailing or serving of such
notice, appeal the collector's decision to the city manager in accordance
with section 11-26.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-7)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-8.  EXEMPTION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any person claiming an exemption from taxation under this
chapter shall file a sworn statement with the collector, stating the facts on
which exemption is claimed, as well as documentation requested by the
collector to support the requested exemption, such as, but not limited to,
evidence of non-profit status, prior year's tax returns, or licensing by the
State. If the claim is not substantiated, such person shall be required to
obtain the business tax certificate and pay the taxes imposed by the business
tax schedule.



   (B)   The collector shall give the person claiming an exemption from
taxation notice of the collector's decision by personal service or by
depositing the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed
to such person at his/her last known address.  Such person may, within 15
days after the mailing or serving of such notice, appeal the collector's
decision to the city manager in accordance with section 11-26.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-8)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-9.  EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS, ACTIVITIES, PERSONS.



   (A)   Nothing in this article shall be deemed or construed to apply
to any person, business or activity exempt by virtue of the Constitution,
statutes or law of the United States or the State from the requirement to
obtain a business tax certificate or pay a business tax or an application,
renewal, amendment or duplicate business tax fee.



   (B)   In addition, the following organizations, activities and
persons are exempt from certain provisions of this article, as follows:



      (1)   Non-profit organizations - An institution or
organization that is exempt from the payment of federal income taxes under
Subchapter F, commencing with Section 501 of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time, or that is
exempt from the payment of State income taxes under Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code,
Chapter 4, commencing with Section 23701, of Part 11 of Division 2, as
amended from time to time, shall register such institution or organization
with the collector and is exempt from the requirements imposed by this
article to obtain a business tax certificate and pay business taxes. 
However, persons who peddle, solicit or canvass for such institutions or
organizations shall comply with applicable requirements imposed by division 3
of this article.



      (2)   Benefit, charitable and non-profit activities - Any
entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture from which the total
receipts are to be donated to a non-profit institution or organization
described in subsection (1) of this section, to the State, the county, the
city or to any church or school, is exempt from the requirements imposed by
this chapter to obtain a business tax certificate and pay business taxes,
provided that profit, other than wages paid to employees of such institutions
or organizations, is not derived from such activity, either directly or
indirectly, by any person.  However, persons who peddle, solicit or canvass
for such institutions or organizations shall comply with applicable
requirements imposed by division 3 of this article.  The exemption set out
in this subsection shall not apply to persons employed to promote benefit,
charitable and non-profit activities.



      (3)   Persons of limited income -



         (a)   Any person who receives social security retirement
benefits or any other type of retirement benefits and whose income from any
business does not exceed the limits established by the laws of the United
States and administered by the Social Security Administration that determine
whether such person qualifies for full social security retirement benefits,
is exempt from the requirements imposed by this article to obtain a business
tax certificate and pay business taxes.



         (b)   However, such a person shall provide the collector
with a list of any independent contractors hired by such person, and such
persons who peddle, solicit or canvass shall comply with applicable
requirements imposed by division 3 of this article.



      (4)   Persons paying location use fees - Any person who has
paid location use fees to the city is exempt from the requirements imposed by
this article to obtain a business tax certificate and pay business taxes for
the same activity.



      (5)   Disabled veterans - Any person applying for a business
tax certificate pursuant to Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code, Sections 16001 or
16001.5, to distribute circulars or to hawk, peddle and vend any goods, wares
or merchandise owned by such person, except spirituous, malt, vinous or other
intoxicating liquor, is exempt from the requirement to pay the business tax,
business tax application, renewal, amendment and duplicate business tax
certificate fees, and the fingerprint report fee, but is subject to the
following requirements:



         (a)   Every applicant must furnish a certificate of
physical disability to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, executed by a
qualified physician; a certificate of honorable discharge or honorable relief
from the military, naval or air service of the United States; and proof of
residence in the State.



         (b)   A business tax certificate when issued is subject
to the following conditions:



            (i)   The business tax certificate is
nontransferable and for the exclusive use of the certificant.



            (ii)   A business tax certificate found in the
possession of one other than the certicant shall be surrendered to the
collector and canceled, and neither the certificant nor the holder thereof
shall thereafter be entitled to hold a business tax certificate under this
subsection.



            (iii)   The certificant must identify
himself/herself whenever required to so by a police officer or a tax
inspector of the city or the collector.



            (iv)   Whenever the certificant uses any wagon,
cart, tray, basket or other vehicle or receptacle in vending any goods, wares
or merchandise, the business tax certificate shall be carried in a tax
certificate holder attached to such vehicle or receptacle and in plain view.



      (6)   Certain independent contractors hired by the city - Any
person hired by the city as an independent contractor to provide babysitting
services; to perform artistic demonstrations or give other performances; to
provide classes in art, dance, crafts, cooking, sports, music, fitness, or
dog obedience; to give lectures, readings, gallery talks, or workshops; or to
officiate at city-owned locations are exempt from the requirements imposed by
this article to pay business taxes for any fiscal year in which the city does
not pay such person more than $2,400 for such services; provided, however,
that this exemption shall apply only to income received from the city and not
to income from any other source.



      (7)   Persons presenting events at the Performing Arts Theater
- Any person who presents an event, program or performance at the Performing
Arts Theater of the Performing Arts and Convention Center is exempt from the
requirements imposed by this article to obtain a business tax certificate and
pay business taxes for an itinerant show based on such program or
performance; provided, however, that this exemption shall apply only to such
event, program or performance and the income therefrom and not to any other
business conducted in the city or income therefrom; and further provided that
this exemption does not apply to any business tax certificate or business tax
required for the business of promoting such an event, program or performance.



      (8)   Physicians occasionally providing services at St. John's
Regional Medical Center - Physicians, surgeons and doctors of osteopathic
medicine who provide services at St. John's Regional Medical Center in the
city on no more than 24 days in a calendar year are exempt from the
requirements imposed by this chapter to obtain a business tax certificate and
pay business taxes. This exemption does not apply to any other services that
such physicians, surgeons and doctors of osteopathic medicine may provide
within the city.



   (C)   No person other than the certificant shall use any business
tax certificate issued pursuant to this subsection.



   (D)   No person shall purchase or transfer any business tax
certificate issued pursuant to this subsection.



   (E)   Every applicant who wishes to peddle, solicit or canvass shall
comply with applicable requirements imposed by division 3 of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-9)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2603, 2629, 2665, 2838)



SEC. 11-10.  APPLICATION.



   (A)   On applying for the first business tax certificate under this
article or for a newly established business, the applicant shall furnish to
the collector a sworn statement, on a form provided by the collector, setting
forth the following information:



      (1)   The exact nature or kind of business for which a
business tax certificate is applied;



      (2)   The street address where such business is to be
conducted, and if the business is not to be conducted at a fixed place of
business, the street addresses of the residences of the owners of the
business;



      (3)   If the application is for a business tax certificate to
be issued to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the names and
street addresses of the residences of the owners of the business;



      (4)   If the application is for a business tax certificate to
be issued to a corporation or a partnership, the names and street addresses
of the officers or partners thereof;



      (5)   If the amount of the business tax is measured by gross
receipts, the information required by the application and any additional
information required by the collector to determine the amount of the business
tax;



      (6)   Federal and State employer identification numbers,
social security numbers, State resale numbers, driver's license numbers,
telephone numbers and State contractor's license number, class and expiration
date; and



      (7)   Any further information the collector may require to
identify the applicant or the business or to determine the type of business
tax certificate to be issued or the amount of business tax to be imposed.



   (B)   The applicant shall pay the business tax application fee at
the time of submitting the completed application.



   (C)   If the amount of the business tax to be paid by the applicant
is measured by gross receipts, the applicant shall estimate the gross
receipts for a period of one full calendar year.  Such estimate, if accepted
by the collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of
business tax.  However, the amount of such business tax is only provisional.



   (D)   At the end of the business tax period, the collector may
request the certificant to verify gross receipts or cost of operations. 
Within 30 days of the request, the certificant shall report to the collector
the gross receipts or cost of operations during the business tax period, and
the business tax will be redetermined.  If the certificant underpaid the
redetermined business tax, the certificant shall immediately pay the amount
due.  If the certificant overpaid the redetermined business tax, the
collector shall refund the overpayment.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-10)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-11.  INFORMATION ON TAX CERTIFICATE; IDENTIFICATION STICKERS.



   (A)   On payment of the business tax application or renewal fee
and/or the prescribed business tax, the collector shall issue such person a
business tax certificate containing the following information:



      (1)   The name of the certificant;



      (2)   The name of the business for which the business tax
certificate was issued;



      (3)   The place where such business is to be conducted;



      (4)   The date of expiration of the business tax certificate;
and



      (5)   Any other information necessary for the enforcement of
this chapter.



   (B)   Whenever the business tax is measured by the number of
vehicles, devices, machines or other pieces of equipment, or whenever the
business tax is measured by the gross receipts from the operation of such
items, the collector shall issue only one business tax certificate, provided,
the collector may issue for each tax period for which the business tax has
been paid one identification sticker, tag, plate, or symbol for each such
vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-11)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-12.  RENEWAL OF TAX CERTIFICATE.



   An applicant for renewal of a business tax certificate shall submit to
the collector a sworn statement, on a form to be provided by the collector,
setting forth such information, including tax returns, concerning the
applicant's business during the preceding year as the collector may require
in determining the amount of the business tax to be paid.  The applicant
shall pay the business tax certificate renewal fee at the time of submitting
the completed renewal application.  Business taxes based on gross receipts
shall be based on the actual gross receipts for the preceding year.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-12)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-13.  AMENDMENT.



   An amendment is any addition or deletion of the name, telephone number
or address of any business owner or change of the address at which a business
is conducted.  A business tax certificate or application may be amended at
the request of a certificant as long as the ownership of that business has
not been substantially transferred to a new owner or the business has not
been terminated.  The certificant or applicant shall pay the business tax
amendment fee at the time of requesting the amendment.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-13)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-14.  FINANCIAL INFORMATION; AUDIT AND EXAMINATION.



   (A)   No financial information in an application shall be conclusive
as to the matters set forth therein. The filing of the application shall not
preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is
actually due and payable under this article.  Such information shall be
subject to audit and verification by the collector or designee, who are
hereby authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records of any
certificant or applicant for a business tax certificate, as may be necessary
in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of the business tax and
fee due.



   (B)   All persons subject to this article shall keep complete
records of business transactions, including sales, receipts, purchases, and
other expenditures, and shall retain all such records for examination by the
collector or designee for a period of at least three years.  No person
required to keep records under this section shall refuse to allow the
collector or designee to examine the records at reasonable times and places.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-14)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-15.  INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.



   (A)   No person shall make known in any manner whatever the business
affairs, operations or other information obtained by an investigation of the
records or equipment of any applicant or certificant under this chapter or
any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or
the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any
particular thereof set forth in any sworn statement or application, or to
permit any sworn statement or application, or copy of either, or any book
containing any abstract or particulars thereof, to be seen or examined by any
person.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:



      (1)   The disclosure of information to, or the examination of
records and equipment by, a city official, employee or agent for collection
of taxes, for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions
of this chapter or collecting taxes imposed hereunder;



      (2)   The disclosure of information to, or the examination of
records by, federal or State officials, or the tax officials of another city
or county, or city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a
grand jury or court of law upon subpoena;



      (3)   The disclosure of information and results of examination
of records of particular certificants, or relating to particular
certificants, to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the
existence or amount of any business tax liability of the particular
certificants to the city;



      (4)   The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to
that effect, to the certificant, or to his/her successors, receivers,
trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly
interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any
tax, whether paid, unpaid or required to be collected, and any interest and
penalties thereon or any information in the certificant's application;  (The
collector may refuse to make any such disclosure if in his/her opinion the
public interest would suffer thereby.)



      (5)   The disclosure to the city council, in a public meeting
or otherwise, of facts concerning a matter to be acted on by the city council;



      (6)   The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes
collected or business conducted in the city;



      (7)   The disclosure of information and examination of records
of any certificant who is a litigant in a lawsuit to which the city is a
party and in which such information or records are relevant to the issues in
the lawsuit; and



      (8)   The disclosure to the extent otherwise required by law.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-15)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-16.  DETERMINATION OF BUSINESS TAX.



   (A)   If any person fails to file any required sworn statement
within the time prescribed, or fails to file a corrected sworn statement
demanded by the collector, or if the collector is not satisfied with the
information supplied in sworn statements or applications filed, or if any
person subject to the business tax fails to apply for a business tax
certificate, the collector may determine the amount of business tax due from
such person by means of information reasonably available to the collector.



   (B)   (1)   If such a determination is made, the collector shall
give the person so assessed notice thereof by personal service or by
depositing the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed
to the person so assessed at his/her last known address.



      (2)   Such person may, within 15 days after the mailing or
serving of such notice, appeal the amount of the business tax to the city
manager in accordance with section 11-26.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-16)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-17.  EXTENSION OF TIME FOR FILING SWORN STATEMENT OR APPLICATION.



   The collector may, for good cause shown, extend the time for filing any
required sworn statement or application for a period not exceeding 30 days,
and waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued.  Any person
receiving such extension shall pay 10% simple interest for the period of
extension added to any business tax the collector determines to be payable.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-17)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-18.  NONTRANSFERABILITY.



   No business tax certificate issued pursuant to this article shall be
transferable.  If a business is transferred by sale or otherwise to another
person, the transferee shall apply for a new business tax certificate and
shall not be entitled to operate the business pursuant to the business tax
certificate issued to the transferor.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-18)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-19.  DUPLICATE BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATES.



   If a certificant files a sworn statement that a business tax
certificate has been lost or destroyed and pays the duplicate business tax
certificate fee, the collector may issue a duplicate business tax certificate.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-19)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-20.  POSTING AND CARRYING BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   Any certificant conducting business at a fixed place of
business in the city shall post the business tax certificate in a conspicuous
public location at the place of business.



   (B)   Any certificant conducting business, but not operating at a
fixed place of business in the city, shall keep the business tax certificate
on his/her person at all times while conducting the business.



   (C)   Whenever an identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol has
been issued for any vehicle, device, machine, or other piece of equipment
included in the measure of a business tax, the person to whom such sticker,
tag, plate, or symbol has been issued shall keep it firmly affixed on each
vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment at the locations designated
by the collector.  During the period of issuance, the sticker, tag, plate,
or symbol shall not be removed from any vehicle, device, machine, or piece of
equipment in use.



   (D)   No person shall fail to affix any identifying sticker, tag,
plate, or symbol to the vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment for
which the same has been issued at the location designated by the collector,
or give away, sell or transfer any identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol
to another person, or permit its use by another person.



   (E)   No person shall photocopy or duplicate in any other manner or
possess any photocopied or duplicated identifying sticker, tag, plate, or
symbol to a vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment.



   (F)   A business tax certificate, identifying sticker, tag, plate,
or symbol found in the possession of one other than the certificant shall be
surrendered to the collector and canceled.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-20)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-21.  TIME FOR PAYMENT.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, annual business
taxes shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of the anniversary
month of each year.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, business taxes,
other than annual, shall be due and payable as follows:



      (1)   Daily flat-rate business taxes are due and payable each
day in advance.



      (2)   Other flat-rate business taxes are due and payable in
advance on the first day of business and thereafter on the first day of any
applicable period.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-21)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-22.  DELINQUENCY; PENALTIES; INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS.



   (A)   If a person fails to pay a business tax when due, the
collector shall add a penalty of $10 or 10% per month of the delinquent
amount of business tax, whichever is greater. This penalty shall be assessed
on the first day of each month after the due date of the business tax, up to
a maximum of 50% of the amount of the business tax due.



   (B)   No business tax certificate or sticker, tag, plate, or symbol
shall be issued, nor shall a business tax certificate that has been suspended
or revoked be reinstated or reissued, to any person who at the time of
applying therefor is indebted to the city for any delinquent business taxes
or penalties, unless such person, with the consent of the collector, enters
into a written agreement with the city, through the collector, to pay such
delinquent business taxes and penalties, plus 10% simple annual interest on
the unpaid balance, in monthly installments or more often, extending over a
period not to exceed one year.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-22)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-23.  REFUND FOR OVERPAYMENT.



   No refund of an overpayment of business taxes shall be allowed in whole
or in part unless a claim for refund is filed with the collector within one
year from the day on which the payment was due. Refund claims must be filed
in the manner and on the form prescribed by the collector.  The collector
shall review such claims and refund any amount that the collector determines
to have been overpaid.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-23)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-24.  NO REFUND ON CESSATION OF BUSINESS.



   A certificant shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of any
business tax or fee paid by reason of cessation of the business prior to the
expiration of the business tax period.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-24)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-25.  SUSPENSION; REVOCATION; NOTICE.



   (A)   The collector may suspend or revoke a business tax certificate
if a person fails to pay business tax fees or the business tax or penalties,
when the business is being conducted or the premises are being used in
violation of any law of the United States, the State, or the city, when the
premises are being used for a business different from that for which the
business tax certificate was issued, when the certificant provided false
information in the application for the business tax certificate, or for any
other reason set out in this chapter.



   (B)   The collector shall give the certificant written notice of
suspension, specifying the grounds for suspension, the certificant's right to
appeal, and the fact that if an appeal is not timely filed, the business tax
certificate will be revoked.  A copy of this section and the following
section of the code shall be enclosed with the notice.  The notice shall be
given to the certificant by personal service or by depositing the notice in
the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the certificant at the
address listed on the application for the business tax certificate.  All
rights of the certificant to engage in the business subject to the business
tax certificate shall be suspended immediately on receipt of the notice of
suspension.



   (C)   Within 15 days after receipt of the notice of suspension, the
certificant may appeal pursuant to section 11-26.  If no appeal is filed,
the collector shall revoke the business tax certificate and give the
certificant written notice of revocation in the same manner as the notice of
suspension.



   (D)   The collector's revocation of the business tax certificate
shall be conclusive as to all issues involved.  A certificant thereafter
conducting any business subject to the revoked business tax certificate shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-25)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-26.  APPEAL.



   (A)   Any person contesting any decision of the collector with
respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a business tax certificate, the
suspension of a business tax certificate, the amount of the business tax or
entitlement to exemption from the business tax may appeal by filing within 15
days of the decision a notice of appeal with the collector and paying the
appeal fee set by resolution of the city council.



   (B)   (1)   The collector shall immediately refer the notice of
appeal to the city manager or designee, who shall set the appeal for hearing
within 30 days after the notice of appeal is filed.



      (2)   The city manager shall provide the appellant at least
ten days' notice of the time and place of hearing by personal service or by
depositing the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed
to the appellant at the address stated in the notice of appeal.



   (C)   (1)   The city manager shall have authority to determine
all issues raised in such appeal.



      (2)   The city manager shall conduct the appeal in an informal
manner and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence.



      (3)   Within 14 days of the conclusion of the appeal, the city
manager shall issue and mail to the appellant a written decision containing a
statement of the reasons on which the decision is based.



   (D)   The decision of the city manager shall be final and may be
reviewed in accordance with Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, Sections 1094.5 and
1094.6.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-26)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2493, 2838)



DIVISION 2.  RATES



SEC. 11-30.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   ARCADE - Any place open to the public where five or more coin
or slug-operated amusement devices are maintained for use.



   (B)   ASSEMBLING - Filling or joining together pieces of articles or
commodities to create an article that is substantially more valuable than the
total of its parts valued separately, not including the mere putting together
of articles for more convenient packaging, transportation or sale.



   (C)   AUCTIONEER - Any person selling or offering to sell any
property by public outcry to the highest bidder, or any person advertising as
a public auctioneer or in any manner holding himself/herself out as such, or
receiving fees or a commission for services as such.



   (D)   CHARITY - An institution or organization that is exempt from
the payment of federal income taxes under Subchapter F, commencing with Sec.
501, of Ch. 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended
from time to time, or from the payment of State income taxes under Cal. Rev.
and Tax. Code, Chapter 4, commencing with Section 23701, of Part 11 of
Division 2, as amended from time to time.



   (E)   CONTRACTOR - Every person conducting a business who is
licensed as a contractor by the State and who undertakes to, or offers to
undertake to, or purports to have the capacity to undertake to, or submit
bids to, or does himself/herself or by or through others, alter, repair, add
to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway,
road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development, or
improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding
or other structures or works in connection therewith, whether as a prime
contractor, a subcontractor or a specialty contractor, and whether or not
having a fixed place of business in the city.



   (F)   DANCE - A dance that is not conducted in a private residence
by one or more occupants thereof and attended only by persons invited by the
occupant; or a dance where dancing partners are employed or provided by the
certificant or permittee; or a dance conducted by any club or association
that conducts dances for its members and guests more often than once per
month, at which a fee is charged either for admission or for participation
therein, or at which any collection or donation of money is made, solicited
or received, or at which the amount of dues to be paid by each member depends
on attendance at such dances.



   (G)   DELIVERY SERVICE VEHICLE - A motor vehicle used by any
business not otherwise taxed herein in which vehicles are driven in or into
the city on an established periodic route, including baggage vehicles,
express and freight delivery service vehicles, and vehicles that deliver
wholesale goods, wares, produce or merchandise for resale.



   (H)   ENTERTAINMENT - Any live or mechanically or electronically
produced performance involving words, actions, music, sounds, animals, visual
displays or other methods or devices intended to amuse, divert or please,
performed in connection with the activities described in section 11-32 or for
which an admission fee is charged, or at which any collection or donation of
money is made, solicited or received, but not including dances.



   (I)   ESTABLISHED PERIODIC ROUTE - A route where stops are made in
the city on a fixed basis, day to day, week to week, month to month, at the
request of specific customers.



   (J)   FABRICATION - Combining materials or parts made or
manufactured by others into other finished products sold as individual units
to distributors, wholesalers or government agencies.



   (K)   HOTEL or MOTEL - A dwelling place consisting of three or more
rental units or rooms.



   (L)   ITINERANT MERCHANT - Any person, whether principal or agent,
who for 180 days or less sells goods, wares, merchandise or services, and who
hires, leases or occupies any room, building, vacant lot or other facility,
or a portion thereof, for such purpose, but not including persons selling
goods by sample or for future delivery when such goods are intended for
resale.



   (M)   JUNK - Rags, sacks, bottles, cans, paper, metal, recyclable
materials or other articles commonly discarded, but not including auto
salvage operations and auto salvage yards.



   (N)   JUNK COLLECTOR - A person not having a fixed place of business
in the city who goes from house to house or from place to place gathering,
collecting, buying, selling or otherwise dealing in junk.



   (O)   JUNK DEALER - A person having a fixed place of business in the
city and conducting the business of gathering, collecting, buying, selling or
otherwise dealing in junk.



   (P)   LABOR HOUSING FACILITY or LABOR CAMP - Permanently constructed
housing for agricultural or industrial workers, whether or not boarding
services are offered therein.



   (Q)   MANUFACTURING - Using labor or machinery on raw materials,
supplies or parts to produce a different product, which is usually sold to
wholesalers, jobbers or government agencies.



   (R)   MOBILE HOME PARK - Three or more contiguous mobile home rental
spaces owned by the same person and located in the same division.



   (S)   MOTOR VEHICLE FOR HIRE - Every motor vehicle hired for
compensation fixed in accordance with the distance traveled, time engaged, or
both, excluding taxis.



   (T)   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING - Painting or placing signs or
advertisements on the exterior walls of buildings or other structures, or
erecting and maintaining outdoor advertising structures or outdoor
advertising signs, for compensation.



   (U)   PACKING - Processing food and farm products and produce into
marketable products intended for sale to distributors or wholesalers.



   (V)   PEDDLER - Any person who travels from place to place or from
house to house or any person who stands in a residential area or in a public
right of way, including a public sidewalk, within the city, peddling,
hawking, vending or selling any goods, wares, merchandise or services.



   (W)   PROCESSING - Altering the basic substance of an article or
commodity by liquefying, cooking, melting, powdering or otherwise
substantially changing its chemical or physical composition.



   (X)   RENTAL UNIT - A portion of an apartment house or other
dwelling rented or available for rent.



   (Y)   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL - An apartment house, court or other
dwelling, containing three or more rental units.



   (Z)   SMALL HOME BUSINESS - A business that is operated entirely
from a residence in the city and that does not have gross receipts of more
than $1,000 per year.



   (AA)   SOLICITOR or CANVASSER - Any person who travels from place to
place or from house to house within the city, soliciting or taking orders for
any goods, wares, merchandise or services to be provided in the future.



   (BB)   TAXI - Every motor vehicle of a distinct color or commercial
appearance used in the business of carrying passengers for compensation and
the destination and route of which are under control of the passenger or
passengers being carried therein.



   (CC)   VENDING MACHINE LESSOR - A person who places one or more
currency or slug-operated vending machines, amusement devices, video games or
pool tables at any business location in the city and leases the machine to
the owner of the business, and who receives some form of consideration from
the owner of the business or from the currency used to operate the machine.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-30)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2731, 2838)



SEC. 11-31.  VENDING MACHINE LESSOR, RETAIL SALES, SMALL HOME BUSINESS AND
GENERAL BUSINESS.



   Every person who is a vending machine lessor or who is engaged in any
retail sales business, small home business, or any business not otherwise
specifically mentioned in sections 11-32 through 11-38, shall pay a business
tax based on annual gross receipts as required by the business tax schedule.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-31)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-32.  ENTERTAINMENT.



   (A)   Every person conducting any business that provides or
participates in entertainment shall pay a business tax as required by the
business tax schedule.



   (B)   Entertainment is divided into the following classifications:



      (1)   Class “A” - A business providing entertainment in
conjunction with the operation of a tavern, bar, night club or cocktail
lounge, which for purposes of this section means a business selling or
serving alcoholic beverages to the public for consumption on the premises and
where food is not sold or served as in a bona fide public eating place, but
where some limited food products may be sold or served incidentally to the
sale or service of alcoholic beverages.



      (2)   Class “B” - A business providing entertainment in
conjunction with the operation of a bona fide public eating place, which for
purposes of this section means a place that regularly serves meals to persons
for compensation and has full kitchen facilities, including refrigeration for
keeping food and conveniences for cooking an assortment of foods eaten as
ordinary meals, and the kitchen complies with all regulations of the
Department of Health.  The service of only sandwiches and salads is not
sufficient to meet this definition.  Nothing in this section shall require
that food be sold with any ordered beverage.  This section applies whether
or not alcoholic beverages are sold.



      (3)   Class “C” - A business providing entertainment in
situations not covered by Classes A and B.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-32)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-33.  WHOLESALERS.



   Every person conducting a business involving the selling at wholesale
any goods, wares, merchandise, or commodities within the city or in one or
more transactions in which the point of sale is deemed to be within the city,
shall pay a business tax based on annual gross receipts as required by the
business tax schedule.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-33)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-34.  MANUFACTURERS AND TRANSPORTERS.



   Every person conducting the business of manufacturing, processing,
assembling, packing, or fabricating from a fixed place of business, or the
business of transporting persons or property by motor vehicle for hire over
the public streets and highways of the city, shall pay a business tax as
required by the business tax schedule.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-34)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-35.  FOOD MARKETS, DEALERS IN VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.



   Every person conducting the business of food marketing or in the
business of dealing in new or used automobiles, farm machinery, trucks,
trailers, house trailers, tractors, boats, or construction equipment, at
retail or to the consumer, shall pay a business tax based on annual gross
receipts as required by the business tax schedule.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-35)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-36.  PROFESSIONS, OCCUPATIONS AND SERVICES.



   (A)   Every person conducting any business hereinafter enumerated or
similar thereto shall pay a business tax as required by the business tax
schedule: abstract and title; accountant or auditor; advertising agent;
appraiser; architect; artist; assayer; attorney; bacteriologist; book agent;
broker or commission agent; business school; certified public accountant;
chemist; chiropodist; chiropractor; civil, electrical, mining, chemical,
structural, consulting or hydraulic engineer; collection agency; credit
reporting bureau; dance school; dental laboratory; dentist; dermatologist;
draftsman; drugless practitioner; detective agency or private patrol;
electrologist; employment office; engraver; entomologist; feed, grain or
fruit broker; geologist, herbalist; illustrator; interpreter; landscape
architect; lapidary; locksmith; masseuse; medical laboratory; mercantile
agency; mortician; naturopath; news agency; oculist; optician; optometrist;
osteopath; pest control; physician; physiotherapist; piano tuner; podiatrist;
printer; public relations; public stenographer; real estate broker;
roentologist; sign painter; stock broker; surgeon; surveyor; taxidermist;
teacher of music or dancing; telephone answering service, termite inspector;
trading stamps; travel agency; veterinarian.



   (B)   Any person subject to subsection 11-36(A) whose business
income is measurable in gross receipts may on the application for a business
tax certificate or on annual renewal thereof apply in writing to the
collector to report and pay a business tax measured by annual gross receipts
as required by the business tax schedule for persons subject to section
11-31.  Once a certificant makes this selection, the certificant may not
reverse it.



   (C)   Every person conducting any business hereafter enumerated or
similar thereto shall pay a business tax as required by the business tax
schedule of rates and fees: arcade; auctioneer; auto wrecking yard; bowling
alley; circus, carnival, animal exhibit, itinerant show, rodeo, parade and
sporting event (except when the exhibition or performance is given in
connection with the regular operation of a  theater, hall or stadium in the
city for which a business tax certificate has been issued); dance; hotel,
motel or residential rental; itinerant merchant; itinerant show or itinerant
merchant sponsored by a shopping center (the ownership or management of a
shopping center may pay a flat business tax for an unlimited number of
itinerant shows and merchants sponsored by the shopping center and located on
the shopping center premises); junk collector; junk dealer; labor housing
facility or labor camp; mobile home park; mechanical amusement ride; outdoor
advertising; pawnshop; poolroom; secondhand store; shooting gallery, golf
course or archery range; skating rink; solicitor or peddler; taxi or motor
vehicle for hire; telephone solicitation; theater; vehicle used in a
wholesale, retail or service business that has a fixed place of business,
delivery service vehicle.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-36)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-37.  CONTRACTORS.



   (A)   Every contractor shall pay a business tax as required by the
business tax schedule.



   (B)   Any contractor conducting the business of selling goods, wares
or merchandise at retail or wholesale in addition to the business of
contracting shall obtain a business tax certificate for such retail or
wholesale business as well as a business tax certificate for the contracting
business.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-37)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-38.  PUBLIC UTILITIES.



   (A)   Every person conducting business as a public utility or
otherwise in the distribution, transportation or transmission of electricity,
gas or communications shall pay a business tax as required by the business
tax schedule.



   (B)   Any person subject to this section may on the application for
a business tax certificate or on annual renewal thereof apply in writing to
the collector to report and pay a business tax measured by annual gross
receipts as required by the business tax schedule for persons subject to
section 11-31.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-38)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



DIVISION 3.  PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS



SEC. 11-45.  BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATE TO PEDDLE FOOD; PUBLIC HEALTH PERMIT
REQUIRED.



   (A)   An applicant for an initial or renewed business tax
certificate to peddle food anywhere in the city shall provide the collector
with a current public health permit issued to the applicant by the county
pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 113923.  The collector
shall make a copy thereof and keep the copy with the initial application or
renewal application.



   (B)   A person, institution, or organization exempted by section
11-9 from some of the requirements of this chapter is not exempt from the
requirement to provide the collector with a current public health permit
issued to the person, institution or organization by the county pursuant to
Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 113923.  The permit shall be presented
to the collector before the person, institution or organization engages in
peddling food anywhere in the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-40)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-46.  BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATE AND VENDOR PERMIT TO PEDDLE, SOLICIT
OR CANVASS IN RESIDENTIAL AREA; FINGERPRINT REPORT REQUIRED.



   (A)   An applicant for an initial or renewed business tax
certificate to peddle, solicit or canvass in residential areas, as shown on a
map prepared by staff in the planning department, shall pay the business tax,
unless exempt therefrom.



   (B)   Every person who peddles, solicits or canvasses in residential
areas, as shown on a map prepared by staff in the planning department and
regardless of whether that person is an independent contractor or employed by
a certificant, shall pay an annual vendor permit fee and obtain a vendor
permit from the collector before peddling, soliciting or canvassing in such
areas. Vendor permit fees shall be established by resolution of the city
council and shall be renewed annually.



   (C)   An applicant for a business tax certificate or a vendor permit
shall pay an annual fee for a fingerprint report on himself/herself,
performed by the State Department of Justice. The applicant, other than a
disabled veteran applying for a business tax certificate as set out in
section 11-9(B)(5), shall pay such fee even if the applicant is exempt from
the business tax and other business tax fees.  The applicant shall provide
the collector with one of the following forms of identification and shall be
fingerprinted by the police department:



      (1)   Alien registration card issued by the United States
Immigration and Naturalization Service;



      (2)   Driver's license or any identification containing a
photograph, issued by any state or the District of Columbia;



      (3)   Passport issued by the United States or a foreign
country;



      (4)   Foreign national identification issued by a foreign
country; and/or



      (5)   Foreign military identification issued by a foreign
country.



   (D)   The police department shall inform the collector whether the
fingerprint report revealed that within seven years of the date the
application was filed, the applicant was convicted of or pled no contest to
any of the following crimes, or of an attempt or conspiracy to commit any of
the following crimes:



      (1)   Murder, mayhem, kidnapping, robbery, assault with intent
to commit a felony, assault, battery, rape, arson, burglary, or possession of
burglarious instruments or deadly weapons, as defined in the Cal. Penal Code;



      (2)   Cal. Penal Code Sections 184 (theft), 484b (diversion of
funds), 484e (theft of access card), 496(a) (receiving stolen property), or
503 (embezzlement);



      (3)   Crimes involving a controlled substance, as defined in
Cal. Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11057, or 11058; and



      (4)   Any crime for which the applicant is required to
register as a sex offender pursuant to Cal. Penal Code Section 290.



   (E)   If the police department informs the collector that the
applicant has been so convicted or has so pled no contest within seven years
of the date the application was filed, the collector shall deny the
application for the business tax certificate and/or permit.  The collector
shall deposit in the United States mail, postage prepaid, directed to the
applicant at the mailing address stated in the application, a notice of
denial, stating the reasons for denial.  An applicant whose business tax
certificate application is denied may appeal the decision to the collector in
accordance with section 11-26.  An applicant whose vendor permit application
is denied may appeal the decision to the collector in accordance with section
11-49.



   (F)   If the police department informs the collector that the
fingerprint report did not reveal that within seven years of the date the
application was filed the applicant was so convicted or pled no contest, the
collector shall grant the business tax certificate and/or permit and deposit
the business tax certificate and/or permit in the United States mail, postage
prepaid, directed to the applicant at the mailing address stated in the
application.



   (G)   If the fingerprint report is not received by the police
department from the State Department of Justice within 30 days of the date
the applicant was fingerprinted, the collector, on request of the applicant,
shall issue to the applicant a temporary business tax permit and/or a
temporary permit to peddle, solicit or canvass in residential areas, which
shall expire when upon receipt of the fingerprint report, the collect grants
the application and sends the business tax certificate and/or permit to the
applicant or the collector denies the application and gives written notice
thereof to the applicant.



   (H)   While engaged in peddling, soliciting or canvassing in
residential areas, certificants and all of their employees or independent
contractors shall carry the business tax certificate, or a photocopy thereof,
the vendor permit issued by the collector, and the identification provided to
the collector pursuant to subsection (C) of this section.



   (I)   Certificants shall require that any of the following persons
have a valid vendor permit issued by the collector:



      (1)   Any person who sells items owned by the certificant; or



      (2)   Any person who operates or sells items from a pushcart,
wagon, or other non-motorized container owned by the certificant.



   (J)   If the city council adopts ordinances or resolutions
restricting the locations, days and hours of the day that persons may peddle,
solicit or canvass, or similar restrictions, the collector may state any such
applicable restrictions on the business tax certificate and/or permit. The
collector's failure to state restrictions on the business tax certificate
and/or permit shall not relieve the certificant or permittee of the duty to
comply with applicable ordinances and resolutions.



   (K)   (1)   A person, institution or organization, other than a
disabled veteran applying for a business tax certificate as set out in
section 11-9(B)(5), that is exempted by section 11-8 from some of the
requirements of this chapter and that wishes to peddle, solicit or canvass in
residential areas, as shown on a map prepared by staff in the planning
department, shall, before engaging in such activities, apply to the collector
for written approval to do so, pay a fee for a fingerprint report on each
person who wishes to do so, and obtain written approval from the collector,
in accordance with subsections (A) through (J) of this section. References in
subsections (A) through (J) of this section to business tax certificates and
permits and applications for business tax certificates and permits shall be
deemed to refer to written approval and applications for written approval
required for this subsection (K).



      (2)   All procedures and requirements contained in subsections
(A) through (J) of this section for granting and denying business tax
certificates and permits, including but not limited to carrying business tax
certificates and permits while engaged in peddling, soliciting or canvassing
in residential areas, shall apply to written approvals required by this
subsection (K).



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-41)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2519, 2820, 2838)



SEC. 11-47.  EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS.



   (A)   Any person who hires a minor to peddle, solicit or canvass
shall note that fact on his/her application for a business tax certificate
and shall present to the collector a certificate of workers' compensation
insurance for the business and a work permit for the minor.  The business
tax certificate shall contain the condition that the applicant supervise or
provide adult supervision of each minor at all times while the minor is
peddling, soliciting or canvassing and that the applicant not allow any minor
14 years of age or younger to peddle, solicit or canvass after 8:00 p.m. or
such earlier hours as are set forth in section 11-48.



   (B)   (1)   Persons, institutions and organizations that are
exempted by section 11-9 from some of the requirements of this chapter are
subject to subsection (A) of this section.



      (2)   References in subsection (A) of this section to business
tax certificates and applications for business tax certificates shall, as
applied to such persons, institutions and organizations, other than disabled
veterans applying for business tax certificates as set out in section
11-9(B)(5), be deemed to refer to written approval and applications for
written approval issued by and made to the collector.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-42)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2731, 2838)



SEC. 11-48.  TIME RESTRICTIONS ON PEDDLING, CANVASSING, AND SOLICITING IN
RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   In residential areas, as shown on a map on file with the collector, no
person shall peddle, canvass, or solicit on any day before 7:00 a.m. or
sunrise, whichever is later, or after 7:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever is
earlier.



(Ord. No. 2731)



SEC. 11-49.  REQUEST FOR HEARING BY APPLICANT.



   (A)   (1)   The applicant for a vendor permit may request a
hearing if the applicant receives written notice from the license collector
that the application is denied.



      (2)   The request for hearing must be received by the license
collector within 14 days after the license collector mailed the notice of
denial to the applicant.



   (B)   An applicant's request for hearing shall be in writing, a copy
of the notice of denial shall be attached to the request, and the request
shall state the reasons that the applicant alleges the notice to be incorrect.



   (C)   An applicant's request for hearing shall be accompanied by the
hearing fee set by resolution of the city council.



   (D)   The procedures for setting and holding a hearing, rendering
decision, and seeking judicial review of the decision shall be as provided in
Sec. 11-154(H) through (N), inclusive.



(Ord. No. 2820)



SEC. 11-50.  REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF VENDOR PERMIT.



   (A)   A vendor permit may be revoked or modified or conditions may
be imposed for failure of the permittee to comply with applicable laws and
regulations, based on matters occurring after the permit is issued or on
matters not considered at the time of issuance of the permit that would have
authorized denial of the permit or the imposition of conditions on the permit.



   (B)   A city officer or employee may file with the license collector
a written request for revocation or modification of a vendor permit, stating
facts showing that the permittee failed to comply with applicable laws,
regulations or permit conditions. The request shall be accompanied by a
written report, stating wherein the permittee has not complied with
applicable laws, regulations or permit conditions and recommending that the
permit be revoked or in what respect the permit should be modified or
conditioned.



   (C)   On receiving the request and report referred to in subdivision
(B) of this section, the license collector shall mail to the permittee a
notice that the permit is recommended for revocation, modification or
conditioning in a specific manner and stating the reasons for that
recommendation. The notice shall inform the permittee that the recommendation
will be adopted and the permittee will be deemed to concur with the
recommendation if the permittee does not make a written request for a hearing
as provided in subsection (D) of this section.



   (D)   On receiving the notice referred to in subsection (C) of this
section, the permittee may make a written request for a hearing. The request
must be received by the license collector within 14 days after the license
collector mailed the notice referred to in subsection (C) of this section to
the permittee and be accompanied by the hearing fee set by resolution of the
city council. The request for hearing shall be attached to a copy of the
notice of recommended revocation, modification or conditioning received by
the permittee and shall state the reasons that the permittee alleges the
notice to be incorrect.



   (E)   The procedures for setting and holding a hearing, rendering
decision, and seeking judicial review of the decision shall be as provided in
Sec. 11-154(H) through (N), inclusive.



(Ord. No. 2820)



DIVISION 4.  RULES AND ENFORCEMENT



SEC. 11-55.  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The collector may issue administrative rules and regulations not
inconsistent with this article as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the
enforcement of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-43)  (Ord. No. 2456)



SEC. 11-56.  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The collector shall enforce this article, and the police chief
shall assist in enforcement as requested by the collector or the city manager.



   (B)   The collector and his/her representatives shall examine or
cause to be examined all places of business in the city to confirm compliance
with this article.



   (C)   The collector and his/her representatives and any police
officer shall have the power and authority, on obtaining an inspection
warrant therefor, to enter, free of charge and at any reasonable time, any
place of business required to have a business tax certificate as set forth
herein, and demand an exhibition of its business tax certificate.  Any
person having such business tax certificate in his/her possession or under
his/her control, who willfully fails to exhibit the same on demand, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (D)   The collector and his/her representatives may cause a
complaint to be filed against any person who violates any provision of this
chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-44)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-57.  TAX AND PENALTY DEEMED DEBT TO THE CITY.



   The amount of any business tax fee, business tax and penalty imposed by
this article shall be deemed a debt to the city.  An action may be commenced
in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount
of any delinquent business tax fees, business taxes and penalties.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-45)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



SEC. 11-58.  REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.



   All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative, and the use of
one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy
for the purpose of enforcing this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-46)  (Ord. No. 2456)



SEC. 11-59.  PUNISHMENT.



   (A)   Any person making a false statement in any application for a
business tax certificate shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a
fine of not less than $150 or by imprisonment for not less than ten days nor
more than 180 days, or both.



   (B)   Except as provided herein, all other violations of this
article shall be punishable according to section 1-10 of the code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-47)  (Ord. No. 2456, 2838)



ARTICLE II.  ALARM SYSTEMS



DIVISION 1.  SECURITY ALARMS (POLICE)



SEC. 11-63.  SECURITY ALARMS: DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall
have the following meanings.



   (A)   ALARM - A sound, signal, or message generated by an alarm
system, alarm user, or other person.



   (B)   ALARM ADMINISTRATOR - The person or entity designated by the
police chief to administer and determine security alarm system permit
applications, permits, and alarm dispatch requests.



   (C)   ALARM AGENT - A person employed by an alarm business, whose
duties include installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, altering,
replacing, or servicing alarm systems.



   (D)   ALARM BUSINESS - A business that sells, leases, installs,
moves, maintains, repairs, alters, replaces, services, or monitors alarm
systems, not including a business that only sells alarm systems from a fixed
location, or that only manufactures alarm systems sold to retailers, and not
to the public.



   (E)   ALARM CALL CONFIRMATION - An attempt by the alarm company or
its representative to contact the alarm site by telephonic or other
electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, before
requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary
alarm dispatch request.



   (F)   ALARM CANCELLATION - The termination of an alarm response
following an alarm business’s dispatch request, when the alarm business
advises the police department that there is not a situation at the alarm site
that requires a response. If cancellation occurs prior to police or fire
personnel arriving at the scene, this shall not be considered a false alarm
for the purpose of civil penalty.



   (G)   ALARM DISPATCH - A notification to police or fire personnel
that an alarm has been activated at an alarm site and a response is requested.



   (H)   ALARM SITE - A single fixed premises or location served by an
alarm system or systems. Each unit, if served by a separate alarm system in a
multi-unit building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site.



   (I)   ALARM SYSTEM - Any device, whether mechanical or electrical,
designed and used to notify police or fire personnel, either directly or
through a third party, of an event to which police or fire personnel are
requested to respond. An alarm system does not include a battery operated
smoke detector or the conventional use of a cellular or landline telephone.
An alarm system includes both manual and automatic alarm systems. An alarm
system that notifies police personnel is a security alarm system. An alarm
system that notifies fire personnel is a fire alarm system.



   (J)   ALARM USER - An individual, corporation, partnership,
association, organization, or other entity, including a permittee, owning,
leasing, or controlling an alarm site.



   (K)   AUDIBLE ALARM - An alarm system device that, when activated,
emits an audible sound at or around the alarm site.



   (L)   AUTOMATIC ALARM SYSTEM - An alarm system that is activated
automatically by one or more sensors such as, but not limited to, motion
detectors, reed switches, vibration sensors, acoustic sensors, glass break
detectors, smoke sensors, heat detectors, or fire suppression devices.
Manually activated alarms or alarms operating from a mobile security device
are not automatic alarms.



   (M)   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE - A device that automatically sends
over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of some
type of emergency to which police or fire personnel are requested to respond.



   (N)   BUILDING - A structure used or intended for use as human
habitation, including attached non-habitable areas, such as storage and
garage areas, and excluding yards and open areas, and detached accessory
buildings not used or intended for use as human habitation.



   (O)   DURESS ALARM - A silent alarm system signal generated by the
entry of a designated code into an arming station, in order to signal that
the alarm user is being forced to turn off the system and requests a law
enforcement response.



   (P)   EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARM - The occurrence of two or more false
alarms, generated by an alarm user's alarm system, within a 12-month period.



   (Q)   FALSE ALARM - An alarm to which responding personnel, having
investigated the alarm site, find no evidence of a situation requiring a
response by such personnel, or, except for an alarm based on fire or medical
emergency, find that the alarm site contains one or more unsecured exterior
doors or windows. A false alarm includes an alarm caused by a power outage,
but does not include an alarm caused by a force majeure or an extraordinary
condition not reasonably within the control of the alarm business or alarm
user. False alarms include situations involving an authorized person or
persons at the alarm location who do not use the proper alarm code.



   (R)   FEE - The assessment of a monetary charge based on the cost of
services provided by the city, payable to the city pursuant to this division.



   (S)   FINE - The assessment of a monetary charge for noncompliance
with this division, payable to the city pursuant to this division.



   (T)   HEARING OFFICER - A person appointed by the city to hear and
decide certain matters arising under this article.



   (U)   MANUAL ALARM SYSTEM - An alarm system that is hand-activated
by one or more devices such as, but not limited to: buttons, keys, switches,
or rails, and are sometimes referred to as panic alarms, panic buttons,
trouble alarms, hold-up alarms, emergency buttons, emergency keys, medical
alarms, robbery alarms, duress alarms, takeover alarms, hostage alarms,
ambush alarms, bill traps, money traps, medical alarms, pull stations, early
morning switches, foot rails, or foot switches.



   (V)   MONITORING - The process by which an alarm business or alarm
user receives signals from alarm systems or otherwise monitors alarm sites,
and relays an alarm dispatch request to response personnel.



   (W)   "MONITOR IT YOURSELF” ALARM SITE - An alarm site that is
monitored directly by its alarm user and not by an alarm business.



   (X)   PANIC ALARM - A manual alarm system designed to alert others
of emergency situations where an immediate threat to persons or property
exists.



   (Y)   PERMIT REVOKED - The status of an alarm permit that has been
rendered null and void as a result of excessive false alarms and/or other
violations of this article.



   (Z)   PERMIT SUSPENDED - The status of an alarm permit that has been
rendered inactive as a result of excessive false alarms and/or other
violations of this article, and until corrected is not valid.



   (AA)   PERMITTEE - A person holding a valid alarm system permit
issued pursuant to this article, or a person having an alarm system for which
this article does not require a permit.



   (BB)   PERSON - Any person as defined in section 1-3 of this code or
any other firm, institution, or public entity.



   (CC)   POLICE OR FIRE PERSONNEL - Sometimes referred to as
"officer” throughout this article; employees of the city's police and fire
departments; employees of police and fire departments of other public
entities with which the city has entered into mutual aid agreements.



   (DD)   PRIVATE PATROL OPERATOR - A person licensed as a private
patrol operator by the Chief of the California Bureau of Security and
Investigative Services pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code,
Section 7582.11, and holding a current city business tax certificate for a
private patrol business.



   (EE)   ROBBERY ALARM/HOLD UP ALARM/211 ALARM - A silent alarm
generated by a manual alarm system located at a place of business or
residence, intended to signal that a robbery is in progress or that the alarm
site is being taken over by intruders.



   (FF)   SECURITY ALARM SYSTEM - An alarm system that is intended to
notify and/or request the dispatching of police personnel.



   (GG)   SILENT ALARM - An alarm system device that is connected to a
telephone line, and when activated, automatically transmits a message or
signal to an alarm business, indicating the request for an response to the
alarm site.



   (HH)   UNSECURED - Not equipped with a functioning lock, bar, or
other device that is attached to or in contact with the door or window, that
is in the fixed or locked position, and that prevents the door or window from
being opened from the exterior of the alarm site without breaking the door or
window.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-64.  DUTIES.



   The city council finds and determines that alarm businesses, alarm
agents, and alarm users shall adhere to the requirements prescribed in this
article.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-64.1.  SECURITY ALARM BUSINESS DUTIES.



   A security alarm business performing or contracting monitoring services
shall:



   (A)   Establish and maintain written procedures to ensure efforts
are made to verify alarm signal activations prior to making a dispatch
request to the police department, with exception given to robbery alarms,
panic alarms, or duress alarms;



   (B)   Alarm call confirmation requirements - With exception to
robbery, panic, or duress alarms, alarm signals received from a commercial
burglar alarm system or a residential burglar alarm system shall be processed
in accordance with the following procedures:



      (1)   Call number one -  Upon receipt of the alarm signal,
and prior to making an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring facility shall
attempt telephonic confirmation with the alarm site's designated primary
contact number.



      (2)   Call number two - If a monitoring facility operator is
not successful at making direct, verbal contact with a person on the first
call to the alarm site's primary designated number, the monitoring facility
shall make a call to the alarm site's designated secondary contact number
before making an alarm dispatch request.



      (3)   Person on premises without proper alarm code - If the
monitoring facility reaches a designated contact number, and the person
answering the phone does not have the correct pass code, the monitoring
facility may notify the police department to initiate an alarm dispatch.



      (4)   Scheduled events - If an alarm signal is received in
connection with an abort/cancel event, then the operator shall not contact
the police department.



      (5)   Alarm confirmed as false - If the alarm is confirmed as
being false during the first, second, or succeeding call, or as a result of
getting a valid pass code, the monitoring facility operator shall cancel any
previous alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to police or
fire personnel arriving at the scene, this shall not be considered a false
alarm for the purposes of assessing civil penalties.



      (6)   Notification call - The monitoring facility's operator
shall notify the police department and initiate an alarm dispatch.



      (7)   Call lists and priority - Following the notification to
the police department and subsequent alarm dispatch request, the monitoring
facility shall continue efforts to attempt to contact additional designated
telephone numbers on the alarm site's entire designated call list, with the
intent to achieve a cancellation of the alarm dispatch request if it is
verified that no emergency exists. Subsequent to dispatch of police
personnel, the priority of notification calls to the telephone numbers in a
customer's database shall first be two telephone numbers with the highest
probability of reaching an alarm user or their authorized designee.



      (8)   Additional methods - Audio-based confirmation,
video-based confirmation, or cross-zoning shall be permitted in place of
first and second layer call confirmation, and shall be considered in
compliance with this section.



      (9)   Call confirmation procedures in subsections (B)(1) and
(B)(2) of this section shall not apply to gun stores, banks, pharmacies, and
other specific locations determined by the police chief;



   (C)   Maintain records for at least two years following a request
for an alarm dispatch to an alarm site: records relating to the dispatch,
including the name, address, and telephone number of the alarm user; the
alarm system zones or points activated; the time of request for dispatch; and
information concerning the alarm businesses attempt to contact the alarm
site's designated contacts by telephone or other electronic means before
requesting the dispatch;



   (D)   Make such records available to the alarm administrator upon
request;



   (E)   Not install a single-action, non-recessed button as a device
to activate a manual alarm;



   (F)   Not install an automatic dialing device in an alarm system;



   (G)   When making alarm dispatch requests, not use incorrect,
misleading, or unverified information or terminology, or withhold information
to facilitate an alarm dispatch;



   (H)   After making an alarm dispatch request, remain in continuous
contact with police or fire personnel if requested; and



   (I)   Provide its alarm user clients with a written or digital copy
of this article, in order to inform them of its provisions and requirements.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-64.2.  ALARM AGENT DUTIES.



   An alarm agent shall, on request, display the registration issued by
the California Department of Consumer Affairs to any alarm user, police or
fire personnel, or alarm administrator.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-64.3.  ALARM USER DUTIES.



   (A)   If requested, an alarm user shall respond or make a
representative available to respond to the alarm site within 45 minutes of
notification by city staff to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to
provide needed access to the alarm site, or to assume responsibility for an
alarm site that is unsecured.



      (1)   If the alarm user is unwilling or unable to respond to
the alarm site within 45 minutes after city staff requests a response from
the alarm user, the alarm user shall be subject to cost recovery from the
city, for personnel and equipment costs incurred for the time after the 45
minutes of being notified by city staff has passed.



      (2)   If the alarm user is unresponsive, unwilling, or unable
to respond to the alarm site, and the site cannot be secured by police
personnel, the city shall be held harmless for leaving the site unsecured.



   (B)   An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site a set of
operating instructions for each alarm system.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-64.4.  ALARM USER DUTIES IMPOSED JOINTLY AND SEVERALLY.



   The duties imposed by this article on alarm users are imposed jointly
and severally on each alarm user for an alarm site, regardless of whether
each alarm user installed, operated, or knew of the existence of an alarm
system at the alarm site.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-64.5.  BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATES.



   Before doing any business in the city, alarm businesses and those alarm
agents who are independent contractors shall obtain a business tax
certificate from the city.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-65.  SILENT OR AUDIBLE ALARM PRESUMPTION.



   When a silent or audible alarm of an alarm system is activated, a
conclusive presumption arises that an alarm dispatch request is made, whether
by an alarm user, an alarm business, or another person hearing or otherwise
alerted by the alarm.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-66.  NO DUTY TO RESPOND.



   Nothing in this article shall impose a duty on city personnel to
respond to any security alarm, whether or not the alarm is false.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-67.  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this article shall not apply to:



   (A)   Mobile security devices;



   (B)   Alarm systems that are designed to alert only the inhabitants
of the alarm site and that do not have audible alarms that can be heard
beyond the interior of the alarm site; and



   (C)   Video doorbell systems.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-68.  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to intentionally or willfully activate a
security alarm system, including a robbery, panic, or duress alarm for the
purpose of summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other
crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the
premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm. Violators of this provision
shall be subject to a civil penalty of $250 per occurrence.



   (B)   Any person who makes any intentionally false statement of a
material matter in the application for their permit shall be subject to a
fine of $500, and their alarm permit may be subject to suspension or
revocation for a period of up to one year.



(Ord. 2951)



DIVISION 2.  ALARM SYSTEM PERMITS



SEC. 11-69.  ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Alarm user - An alarm user is required to apply and pay for an
alarm system permit within 30 days after the installation of an alarm system.



   (B)   Alarm user - Except as provided in section 11-67, no person or
business shall operate a security alarm system in the city without first
obtaining a permit from the police department or alarm administrator, in
accordance with the provisions of this article.



      (1)   Operating a security alarm system without a valid permit
for the alarm site is an infraction, punishable by a fine in an amount
adopted by city council resolution.



      (2)   Operating a security alarm system with an expired permit
is an infraction, punishable by a fine in an amount adopted by city council
resolution.



         (a)   Operating an alarm system with an expired permit
is a correctable violation, provided that the alarm permit had been in an
expired status for less than 60 days, and that the alarm user pays the
required permit renewal fee within ten calendar days of being noticed for the
violation.



         (b)   Penalties for responses to false alarms at the
alarm system site are considered separately.



   (C)   Any alarm site that is monitored by an alarm business is
required to obtain a permit.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-70.  SECURITY ALARM APPLICATION; FEES; APPEALS.



   Sections 11-70.1 through 11-70.5 shall govern the security alarm
application process, related fees, and appeals process.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-70.1.  SECURITY ALARM APPLICATION.



   (A)   An initial application for an alarm system permit shall be on
a form provided by the alarm administrator, and shall be filed with the alarm
administrator. Renewal applications for alarm system permits shall require
the permittee to update the information contained in the initial application.
The alarm administrator shall advise the alarm permittee at least 30 days
before the permit expires.



   (B)   The owner or property manager of a multi-unit structure
containing alarm systems in unoccupied units or in common, storage, or
equipment areas shall obtain an alarm system permit in accordance with
subsection (A) of this section for each such alarm system.



   (C)   Each initial and renewal application shall be submitted with a
non-refundable fee, in an amount set by resolution of the city council.



   (D)   A person whose request to submit an application without paying
a fee or surcharge is denied by the alarm administrator may file with the
alarm administrator a notice of appeal, stating the reasons why the applicant
is entitled to file such application without paying the fee or surcharge. The
notice of appeal shall be accompanied by the appeal fee set by resolution of
the city council. The appeal procedure is provided in section 11-70.4,
excluding subsection (D) thereof. Instead of the procedure provided in
subsection 11-70.4(D), the appellant shall first present evidence, by written
statement or otherwise, that he or she is entitled to exemption from the fee
or surcharge, and the alarm administrator may then present evidence that the
appellant is not entitled to exemption.



   (E)   Permits are not transferable to another alarm user or another
alarm site.



   (F)   Permits shall be issued for one year periods, and are valid
from the date the permit is issued until one calendar year after the permit
is issued.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-70.2.  PERMIT ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.



   The alarm administrator shall determine whether the alarm system
described in the application meets the standards established by this article.
If so, the permit shall be issued. If not, the permit shall be denied. If
denied, the alarm administrator shall state in writing the reasons why the
alarm system does not meet the standards established by this article.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-70.3.  RIGHT TO APPEAL.



   (A)   Within ten days after the alarm administrator determines
whether the alarm system meets the standards established by this article, the
alarm administrator shall send a permit to an applicant whose alarm system
meets such standards, or shall send to an applicant whose alarm system does
not meet such standards a notice that the application is denied, together
with a statement of reasons why the alarm system does not meet such standards.



   (B)   A notice that the application is denied shall also advise the
applicant of the right to appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the alarm
administrator within 15 days after the notice of denial was mailed. The
notice of appeal shall state the reasons why the alarm system is claimed to
meet the standards established by this article and shall be accompanied by
the appeal fee set by resolution of the city council.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-70.4.  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   On receipt of the notice of appeal and the appeal fee, the
alarm administrator shall immediately refer the notice of appeal to a hearing
officer, who shall schedule a hearing within 30 days after the notice of
appeal is filed.



   (B)   The hearing officer shall provide the appellant at least ten
calendar days notice of the time and place of hearing by personal service, or
by depositing the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to the appellant at the address stated in the notice of appeal.



   (C)   The appellant may appear at the hearing in person or through a
representative. The appellant may also submit a written statement of the
appellant's position, which the hearing officer shall consider if the hearing
officer receives the statement at or before the time of the hearing.



   (D)   The hearing officer shall determine all issues raised in the
appeal. The hearing officer shall conduct the appeal in an informal manner,
and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence. The hearing
officer shall make a decision on the basis of the preponderance of the
evidence.



   (E)   The alarm administrator shall first present evidence that the
alarm system does not meet the standards established by this article. The
appellant may then present evidence, by written statement or otherwise, that
the alarm system does meet the standards established by this article.



   (F)   Within 14 calendar days of the conclusion of the appeal, the
hearing officer shall issue and mail to the appellant a written decision
containing a statement of the reasons on which the decision is based.



   (G)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and maybe
reviewed only within the time and in the manner provided by Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure, Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-70.5.  CHANGE IN APPLICATION INFORMATION.



   Whenever any change occurs in the information contained in the
application, the alarm permittee shall give the alarm administrator written
notice of the change within 30 days of the date that the change becomes
effective. Failure to do so may prompt a review of the permit's status by the
alarm administrator.



(Ord. 2951)



DIVISION 3.  SECURITY ALARM SYSTEM STANDARDS



SEC. 11-71.  SECURITY ALARM SYSTEM STANDARDS.



   All security alarm systems and appurtenant equipment shall meet the
standards contained in this article.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-71.1.  DEACTIVATION OF AUDIBLE ALARM.



   (A)   Every audible alarm shall have a timer that automatically
deactivates the alarm within 15 minutes after it begins to emit sound.



   (B)   If an audible alarm continues to emit sound after police
personnel have been on the scene for at least 45 minutes, whether
continuously or intermittently, police personnel may take reasonable measures
to silence the alarm, and shall not be liable to the alarm user for any
damage to the alarm system caused thereby, or for any other matter arising
out of silencing the alarm.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-71.2.  EMERGENCY POWER SUPPLY.



   Alarm systems shall be equipped with an uninterruptible power supply so
that the failure or interruption of utility electricity will not activate or
deactivate the alarm system. The emergency power supply must be capable of at
least four hours of operation.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-71.3.  AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE.



   An alarm system shall not consist of or include an automatic dialing
device.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-71.4.  AUDIBLE ALARMS.



   An alarm system shall not consist of or include an audible alarm that:



   (A)   Sounds similar to the noise made by an emergency vehicle,
siren, or civil defense warning system; and/or



   (B)   Activates for any purpose other than detection of an
unauthorized entry into the alarm site or a hazard requiring attention.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-71.5.  ACTIVATION OF ALARMS.



   (A)   Manual alarms installed on or after January 1, 2018 shall not
be activated by means of a single-action, non-recessed button.



   (B)   An alarm user shall not activate a manual alarm system for any
situation other than an unauthorized entry into the alarm site or a hazard
requiring attention.



(Ord. 2951)



DIVISION 4.  EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS



SEC. 11-72.  EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   A false alarm generated by a security alarm system with two or
more false alarms during a 12- month period is an excessive false alarm, and
is a violation of this article.



   (B)   The excessive false alarm fees and penalties referred to in
section 11-73 are civil penalties for which an alarm user is liable. If an
alarm user does not timely pay the fees and penalties when billed in
accordance with section 11-74.2, the city may recover such fees and penalties
by any legally enforceable means.



   (C)   If an alarm user does not make payment within 60 days for
excessive false alarm fees and penalties referred to in section 11-73 when
billed in accordance with section 11-74.2, the city shall suspend the alarm
user's permit.



   (D)   A suspension of an alarm user's permit includes the cessation
of police responses to burglary alarm calls to a specified alarm site.



      (1)   Absent the alarm user's written request to their alarm
service and the alarm administrator that indicates otherwise, the suspension
of an alarm user's permit will not discontinue dispatch responses to the
alarm site for robbery, panic, and duress alarms.



      (2)   All police alarm dispatch responses to the alarm site
whose permit has been suspended shall be treated and fined as the equivalent
of a response to an excessive false alarm, regardless of circumstance or call
disposition.



   (E)   If a security alarm system generates five or more false alarms
within a period of 12 consecutive months, the city may revoke the permit for
the alarm system, regardless of whether or not the alarm user has made timely
payment of excessive false alarm penalties.



      (1)   Absent the alarm user's written request to their alarm
service and the alarm administrator that indicates otherwise, the revocation
of an alarm user's permit will not discontinue dispatch responses to the
alarm site for robbery, panic, and duress alarms.



      (2)   All police alarm dispatch responses to an alarm site
whose permit has been revoked shall be treated and fined at an amount
established by city council resolution, regardless of circumstance or call
disposition.



      (3)   Revoked alarm permits that persist with five or more
false alarms following the permit's revocation shall be deemed a nuisance,
and may be abated at the alarm user's cost.



   (F)   Sections 11-72(A) and (B) shall apply to "monitor it
yourself” alarm sites.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-73.  FEES AND PENALTIES FOR EXCESSIVE FALSE SECURITY ALARMS.



   (A)   Alarm related fees and penalties shall be established by city
council resolution.



   (B)   An alarm user shall pay for each excessive false alarm, and
its associated fees and penalties, the amounts of which are established by
city council resolution.



   (C)   An alarm business shall pay fees and penalties established by
city council resolution.



      (1)   A false alarm includes an alarm activation directly
caused by an onsite employee of an alarm business.



         (a)   A false alarm directly caused by an onsite
employee shall be counted toward the number of excessive false alarms against
the alarm business, and not counted against the alarm user.



         (b)   The count toward the number of excessive false
alarms against the alarm business is limited to the alarm site's location,
and not count toward the overall operation of the alarm business.



      (2)   If a pattern of improper alarm call confirmation is
established by an officer, the alarm business shall be issued a civil fine of
$100 per occurrence for failure to follow the required alarm call
confirmation procedures, as prescribed in section 11-64.1. Prior to the
issuance of a civil fine, the alarm administrator shall first warn the alarm
business in writing that improper alarm call confirmation was detected, cite
the instance(s) in which the improper call confirmation occurred, and warn
that additional lapses within 12 months of the warning may result in a civil
fine.



      (3)   If an alarm business employee or alarm agent willfully
makes a false statement concerning the inspection of an alarm site or the
performance of an alarm system, the alarm business shall be issued a civil
fine of $1,000 per occurrence.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-74.  FALSE ALARM NOTICES; BILLS FOR FINES AND FEES; HEARING.



   Sections 11-74.1 and 11-74.2 shall govern the security alarm
application process for noticing false alarms, bills for fines and fees, and
the hearing process.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-74.1.  FALSE ALARM NOTICES.



   (A)   A retrievable record shall be generated for every alarm
dispatch request to which police personnel respond.



   (B)   The alarm administrator shall prepare a notice of false alarm
responses, including the date and time of response; an identification of the
responding agency; a statement urging the alarm user to ensure proper
operation of the alarm system in order to avoid fees and penalties; and the
fees and penalties that are in effect for false alarms.



   (C)   The alarm administrator shall deposit such notice in the
United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the alarm user at the
mailing address stated in the application for the alarm permit for the alarm
site. If an alarm permit is not in effect for the alarm site, the alarm
administrator shall address the bill to the owner of the alarm site, as shown
in the records of the Ventura County Assessor.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-74.2.  BILLS FOR FINES, FEES, AND PENALTIES; HEARING.



   (A)   The alarm administrator shall review each record prepared for
alarm dispatch requests, and determine whether an alarm permit is required
for the alarm site, and if so, whether an alarm permit is in effect for the
alarm site. The alarm administrator shall determine if the permit was valid
at the time of the alarm dispatch requests. If an alarm permit is required
and is either not in effect or never existed, the alarm administrator shall
mail to the alarm user an application form for an alarm permit and a bill for
the fee and penalty referred to in section 11-69(B).



   (B)   When the alarm administrator determines that an excessive
false alarm has occurred, whether or not an alarm permit is required for the
alarm site, the alarm administrator shall mail to the alarm user a bill for
the prescribed fees and penalties.



   (C)   The alarm administrator shall mail a bill to each alarm user
that incurs a fine, fee, or penalty.



   (D)   The fines, fees, and penalties referred to in this article are
cumulative. The alarm administrator may prepare a separate bill for each
fine, fee, and penalty, or may include in the same bill all or some of the
fines, fees, and penalties incurred by an alarm user.



   (E)   Each bill shall state that the alarm user shall pay the bill
within 30 days of the date the bill was mailed.



   (F)   The alarm administrator shall deposit each bill in the United
States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the alarm user at the mailing
address stated in the application for the alarm permit for the alarm site. If
an alarm permit is not in effect for the alarm site, the alarm administrator
shall address the bill to the owner of the alarm site, as shown in the
records of the Ventura County Assessor.



   (G)   The alarm administrator shall include with every bill such
information that provides an overview of the process, including fees, fines,
and penalties if not timely paid.



   (H)   If the fees, fines, and penalties are not timely paid, the
hearing officer shall hold a hearing and issue a decision as to whether
imposition of the fees, fines, and penalties is justified by this article.
The hearing officer shall hold the hearing in the manner set out in
subsections 11-75.2(C) through (F) of this article, whether or not the alarm
user attends the hearing.



(Ord. 2951)



DIVISION 5.  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF SECURITY ALARM PERMIT



SEC. 11-75.  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF SECURITY ALARM PERMIT; PROCEDURES.



   Sections 11-75.1 through 11-75.3 shall govern the suspension and
revocation of security alarm permits and related procedures.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-75.1.  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF SECURITY ALARM PERMIT.



   (A)   An alarm user's permit shall be suspended or revoked when an
alarm system generates five or more false alarms in a period of 12
consecutive months.



   (B)   In accordance with the procedure contained in section
11-72(C), a permit may be suspended or revoked if the permittee fails to make
timely payment of false alarm dispatch fees, or false alarm fines or
penalties.



   (C)   The city shall suspend burglary alarm call dispatches to alarm
sites whose permit is in a suspended or revoked status.



      (1)   Absent the alarm user's written request to their alarm
business and the alarm administrator that indicates otherwise, the suspension
of an alarm user's permit will not discontinue responses to robbery, panic,
and duress alarms.



      (2)   Regardless of circumstance or call disposition, all
police alarm dispatches to the alarm site whose permit is under suspension
shall be treated and fined as the equivalent of a response to an excessive
false alarm, as prescribed in subsection 11-72(D)(2).



      (3)   Regardless of circumstance or call disposition, all
police alarm dispatches to an alarm site with a revoked alarm permit shall be
treated and fined at an amount established by city council resolution,
regardless of circumstance or call disposition, as prescribed in subsection
11-72(E)(2).



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-75.2.  NOTICE AND HEARING.



   (A)   The hearing officer shall give to the permittee written notice
of the alarm administrator's recommendation for revocation or suspension of
the permit. Such notice shall include the reason for the proposed revocation
or suspension, and the time, place, and date of a hearing thereon, which date
shall be no sooner than ten days, nor longer than 15 days from the date of
the notice. Such notice shall be deposited in the United States mail, postage
prepaid, addressed to the permittee at the mailing address stated in the
application for the permit.



   (B)   The hearing shall be held before a hearing officer, who shall
decide all issues raised by the proposed revocation or suspension. The
permittee may appear at the hearing in person or through a representative.
The permittee may also submit a written statement of the permittee's
position, which the hearing officer shall consider if the hearing officer
receives the statement at or before the time of the hearing.



   (C)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
manner and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence. The hearing
officer shall make a decision based on the preponderance of the evidence
presented at the hearing.



   (D)   The alarm administrator shall first present evidence of the
basis for the recommended action. The permittee (or other person billed
pursuant to section 11-74.2) may then present evidence, by written statement
or otherwise. The burden of proof by preponderance of the evidence is on the
alarm administrator.



   (E)   Within 14 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing
officer shall issue and mail to the permittee (or other person billed
pursuant to section 11-74.2), a written decision containing a statement of
reasons on which the decision is based. If the hearing was held pursuant to
subsection 11-74.2(H), and the decision is that imposition of the fees and
penalties is justified by this article, the decision shall also add to the
amount of the fees and penalties a fee for the hearing and provide that
interest at the rate provided by resolution of the city council shall be
added to the total amount until paid.



   (F)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and may be
reviewed only within the time and in the manner provided by Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure, Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.



   (G)   A hearing not yet held or completed may be terminated or a
suspension may be rescinded if the permittee proves to the satisfaction of
the alarm administrator that action has been taken to resolve the basis for
suspension.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-75.3.  DUTIES AFTER SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   After a permit is suspended or revoked, the alarm administrator shall
not issue a new permit for the same type of alarm system for which the permit
was revoked at the same alarm site unless the applicant:



   (A)   Submits a new application; and



   (B)   Pays the application fee and all due fines and penalties; and



   (C)   Submits a signed letter from an alarm business, indicating
that the alarm business has inspected the alarm system, and has found that
the alarm system is in good operating condition, and complies with the
standards contained in this article.



(Ord. 2951)



DIVISION 6.  ENFORCEMENT



SEC. 11-75.4.  COLLECTION OF CIVIL DEBT.



   The fees, fines, and penalties imposed by this chapter shall be deemed
a civil debt owed to the city by the alarm user or alarm business. If legal
action is brought by the city or its assignee against the alarm user or alarm
business to enforce collection of such fees, fines, or penalties, any
judgment rendered in favor of the city shall include costs of suit incurred
by the city or its assignee, including reasonable attorneys' fees.



(Ord. 2951)



DIVISION 7.  CONFIDENTIALITY



SEC. 11-76.  CONFIDENTIALITY.



   In the interest of public safety, to the extent allowed by local,
state, and federal laws, information contained in and gathered through the
alarm registration applications, records relating to alarm dispatch requests,
and applications for appeals shall be held in confidence by all employees or
representatives of the city, and by any third-party administrator or
employees of a third-party administrator with access to such information.



(Ord. 2951)



DIVISION 8.  GOVERNMENT IMMUNITY



SEC. 11-77.  GOVERNMENT IMMUNITY.



   Alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it create a contract,
duty, or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all
liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a
notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by
law is retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user
acknowledges that law enforcement response may be influenced by factors such
as the availability of response resources, priority of calls, weather
conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, and
prior response history.



(Ord. 2951)



DIVISION 9.  FIRE ALARMS



SEC. 11-78.  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this division is to encourage owners and fire
alarm businesses to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness
of fire alarm systems in order to improve their reliability and reduce or
eliminate false fire alarm and nuisance fire alarm dispatching.



   (B)   This division governs fire alarm systems intended to summon
fire department personnel and requires reporting the state mandated annual
testing results to the fire department via the department's third party
vendor for data collection. Assessment of fee based inspections for excessive
fire alarms and nuisance fire alarms dispatching provides procedures for
repeat offenders which may include cost recovery for the fire department
response.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-79.  FIRE ALARMS: DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this division, the following words and terms shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   ADOPTED CODE(S) - Codes adopted by this code. In the absence
of any such code adoption, the National Fire Protection Association National
Fire Alarm and Signaling Code 72 ("NFPA 72") shall apply as referenced in one
or more of the following codes: the National Fire Protection Association,
Life Safety Code 101 ("NFPA 101"), the International Building Code ("IBC"),
the California Fire Code ("CFC"), and the International Residential Code
("IRC").



   (B)   COMMERCIAL FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS - Those alarm systems installed
in other than one-family and two-family homes.



   (C)   ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL - The fire chief or his or her designee.



   (D)   FALSE FIRE ALARM - The activation of any fire alarm system not
caused by heat, smoke, or fire, exclusive of a nuisance fire alarm.



   (E)   FEE - The assessment of a monetary charge based on the cost of
services provided by the city, payable to the city pursuant to this division.



   (F)   FINE - The assessment of a monetary charge for noncompliance
with this division, payable to the city pursuant to this division.



   (G)   FIRE ALARM ACTIVATION REPORT - A document issued by the
enforcement official indicating that the activation was deemed to be the
result of fire alarm activation due to fire, a nuisance fire alarm, or a
false fire alarm.



   (H)   FIRE ALARM BUSINESS - Any individual, partnership,
corporation, or other entity that is appropriately licensed in the
state/jurisdiction and installs, causes to be installed, permits to be
installed, alters, maintains, repairs, replaces, or services any fire alarm
system.



   (I)   FIRE ALARM SYSTEM - A commercial or household system, or
portion of a combination system, consisting of components and circuits
arranged to monitor and/or annunciate the status of a fire alarm, or
supervisory signal-initiating device(s), and to initiate the appropriate
response to those signals.



   (J)   FIRE DEPARTMENT - The Oxnard Fire Department.



   (K)   FIRE WATCH - An enforcement official approved person or
persons assigned to the premises for the purpose of protecting the occupants
from fire or similar emergencies. A fire watch may involve at least some
special action beyond normal staffing, such as assigning an additional
security guard(s) to walk the premises who has been specially trained in fire
prevention and in the use of fire extinguishers, in notifying the fire
department, in sounding the fire alarm system located on the premises, and in
understanding the particular fire safety situation.



   (L)   INITIATING DEVICE - A system component that originates
transmission of a change of state condition, such as in a smoke detector,
manual fire alarm box. or supervisory switch.



   (M)   MONITORED SYSTEM - The process by which a supervising station
receives fire alarm, supervisory, and trouble signals, from a fire alarm
system for the purpose of re-transmission.



   (N)   NUISANCE FIRE ALARM - The activation of any fire alarm system,
which results in a response by the fire department, caused by mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation, lack of proper maintenance,
human activity that is determined by the fire chief or his or her designee to
be negligent, or any other response for which the fire department personnel
are unable to determine the apparent cause of the alarm activation. A false
alarm includes an alarm caused by a power outage, but does not include an
alarm caused by a force majeure or an extraordinary condition not reasonably
within the control of the alarm business or alarm user.



   (O)   OWNER - Any person who owns the premises in which a fire alarm
system is installed or the person or persons, who lease, operate, occupy, or
manage the premises.



   (P)   PREMISES - Any building, structure, or combination of
buildings and structures, which serve as dwelling units such as
single-family, multi-family, or any other area within a building, structure,
or combination thereof, which is used for any purpose, wherein a fire alarm
system is installed.



   (Q)   QUALIFIED FIRE ALARM TECHNICIAN - Any person who inspects,
installs, repairs, or performs maintenance on fire alarm systems. This person
shall be:



      (1)   Factory trained and certified;



      (2)   National Institute of Certification in Engineering
Technologies (NICET) Fire Alarm Level II certified;



      (3)   Electronic Security Association (ESA) Certified Fire
Alarm Technician; or



      (4)   Licensed or certified by state or local authority.



   (R)   RECORD OF COMPLETION - The completion of a form equivalent to
the record of completion form included in the National Fire Protection
Association's National Fire Alarm Code ("NFPA 72").



   (S)   REPORT OF SERVICE/REPAIR - Appropriate documentation in a
format acceptable to the fire department's third party vendor for data
collection that verifies proper repairs or maintenance performed by the fire
alarm business and/or the owner.



   (T)   REPORTING - The annual notification by the occupant/owner's
contractor to the fire department's third party vendor for data collection,
that a commercial fire alarm system is installed and 100% tested.



   (U)   RESPONSIBLE PERSON - Owner or occupant responsible for the
alarm system for the building/occupancy.



   (V)   SUPERVISING STATION - An approved facility that monitors the
signals transmitted from a protected premises fire alarm system, at which
trained personnel are in constant attendance to take the appropriate action
in response to those signals.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-80.  NOTIFICATION OF FIRE ALARM SYSTEM.



   (A)   An annual notification shall be required for each commercial
fire alarm system and a record of completion shall be submitted to the fire
department or its third party vendor for data collection.



   (B)   The responsible person shall be required to give notification
to the fire department via its third party vendor for data collection
whenever there is a change in the fire alarm business responsible for
maintaining, servicing, and/or monitoring the fire alarm system.



   (C)   Every fire alarm business shall notify the fire department via
its third party vendor for data collection of the existence of a commercial
fire alarm system prior to the fire alarm system being operational. It shall
be the responsibility of the installing fire alarm business to advise the
responsible person with notice of the existence of this division a copy of
the fire alarm system operation instructions in accordance with adopted codes
and the manufacturer's instructions.



   (D)   Commercial fire alarm contact information to fire department's
third party vendor for data collection shall include the following
information:



      (1)   The name(s), address of the premises, mailing address
(if different from the address of the premises), business and home and/or
cell telephone number of the owner, lessee, operator, manager, or person in
possession of the premises wherein the fire alarm system is installed;



      (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of a minimum of
two persons who can be notified by the enforcement official in the event of
the activation of the fire alarm system, who shall be capable of responding
to the premises within a time period adopted by code, and who are authorized
to enter the premises to ascertain the status thereof;



      (3)   The name, address, and telephone number of the fire
alarm business which has contracted to service the fire alarm system and
proof of proper state licensing/registration with the enforcement official,
if required. Proof of proper state licensing may be a valid state licensing
number; and



      (4)   Any other documentation that is required by adopted
codes.



   (E)   When any of the information required in subsections
11-80(D)(1) through (3) has changed, it shall be reported to the fire
department via its third party vendor for data collection by the responsible
person within 15 days of becoming aware of such change.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-81.  FIRE ALARM SYSTEM APPROVAL.



   All newly installed commercial fire alarm systems shall be approved by
the enforcement official. The record of completion document shall indicate
that the fire alarm system is in compliance with adopted codes, and when the
fire alarm system is approved and accepted, it shall be signed and dated by a
qualified fire alarm technician and by the enforcement official.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-82.  FIRE ALARM INSPECTION, TESTING, AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   The responsible person shall ensure that all fire alarm
systems are inspected and tested at least once per year or in accordance with
adopted codes. The results of the required annual testing shall be submitted
to the fire department via its third party vendor for data collection.



   (B)   The responsible person shall ensure that all fire alarm
systems are periodically maintained per manufacturer specifications and
adopted codes.



   (C)   The responsible person shall be responsible for notifying the
enforcement official, in writing, when, for any reason, a monitoring contract
or testing contract has been discontinued or canceled, and for any other
interruption in service required by the adopted code.



   (D)   The responsible person shall provide the enforcement official
a current copy of the record of completion or test/inspection reports
utilizing the designated and approved single point repository service to file
all records of all system inspections, tests, and maintenance required by the
referenced standards.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-83.  FIRE ALARM ACTIVATION; RESPONSE.



   (A)   The responsible person shall be responsible for the operation
of a fire alarm system.



   (B)   A response to the activation of a fire alarm signal shall
result when any officer or member of the fire department is dispatched to the
premises where the fire alarm system has been activated.



      (1)   If the commercial fire alarm system is not a monitored
system, the fire department shall notify any person identified in the
notification documents pursuant to subsections 11-80(D)(1) through (3) and
shall require such person to respond to the premises.



      (2)   If the responsible person of the commercial fire alarm
system has a contract with a remote station for the monitoring of the system,
the remote station personnel shall notify any person identified by the
responsible person.



      (3)   If a household fire alarm system is a monitored system,
the remote station shall verify the fire alarm signal before dispatch, as
allowed by the adopted code.



      (4)   If a household fire alarm system is a monitored system,
the remote station shall forward any cancellation of a fire alarm signal to
the fire department.



   (C)   The member of the fire department who responds to the premises
shall serve the responsible person or authorized representative with a fire
alarm activation report.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-84.  NUISANCE FIRE ALARMS.



   If the activation of a fire alarm system is deemed by the enforcement
official to be a nuisance fire alarm, the responsible person shall be served
with a fire alarm activation report by an officer or member of the fire
department, indicating that the activation was deemed to be the result of a
nuisance fire alarm.



   (A)   The responsible person shall return a completed report of
service/repair within 30 days of receipt of the fire alarm activation report
to verify, to the reasonable satisfaction of the enforcement official, that:



      (1)   The fire alarm system has been examined by a qualified
fire alarm technician; and



      (2)   Inspection has been made to identify and correct any
defect of design, installation, or improper operation of the fire alarm
system which was identifiable as the cause of the nuisance fire alarm.



   (B)   Failure to return a report of service/repair within the 30 day
period, which is reasonably satisfactory to the enforcement official, shall
result in a fee-based fire life safety inspection by a fire inspector to
determine the condition of the facility. Such fees are based upon those
adopted by city council resolution.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-85.  FIRE ALARM SERVICE FEES AND FINES.



   (A)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a newly
installed fire alarm system.



      (1)   No fee or fine shall be assessed for the first two
residential or commercial false fire alarms at the same premises responded to
by the fire department during each calendar year. Thereafter, the fire
marshal shall have a fire inspector conduct a fire life safety inspection to
determine the condition of the facility. A cost recovery fee for all
responding units shall apply for additional false alarms at the same premises
after the fire life safety inspection.



      (2)   The activation of a fire alarm system will not be
considered a false fire alarm if the alarm is activated due to malicious
causes beyond the control of the responsible person.



   (B)   Nuisance fire alarms - After the first two residential or
commercial false fire alarms at the same premises responded to by the fire
department during each calendar year, the fire marshal shall have a fire
inspector conduct a complete fire life safety inspection to determine the
condition of the facility. A cost recovery fee for all responding units shall
apply for additional false alarms at the same premises after the fire life
safety inspection.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-86.  REMEDIES AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Due to repetitive nuisance fire alarms and/or false fire
alarms, the enforcement official has the authority to order a fire watch in
accordance with adopted codes, until corrective action is taken, or to revoke
the occupancy certificate for the premises by written notice to the owner of
the premises, for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Failure to meet all requirements or pay the fees
required by this chapter within 30 days after the notice is mailed to the
responsible person;



      (2)   Failure of the responsible person to provide a written
report of service/repair required by this chapter; or



      (3)   A fourth false fire alarm or nuisance fire alarm at a
premises for which a fee is charged pursuant to this chapter as a result of
the failure of the responsible person to take corrective action to eliminate
the cause of the false fire alarm or nuisance fire alarm.



   (B)   The enforcement official has the authority to temporarily
suspend the occupancy certificate for non-compliance of this chapter.



   (C)   Anyone convicted of falsifying reports as required under this
chapter is subject to penalties established by city council resolution



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-87.  APPEALS.



   (A)   A responsible person may appeal the assessment of fees and
fines to the enforcement official. A filing of an appeal with the enforcement
official stays the assessment of the fee or fine until the enforcement
official makes a final decision. The responsible person shall file a written
appeal to the enforcement official setting forth the reasons for the appeal
within 15 calendar days of the date of the notice.



   (B)   The enforcement official or designee shall review the facts
and circumstances and shall determine whether the responsible person has
shown good cause to withdraw the order.



   (C)   If the appeal is not upheld, the responsible person is
entitled to an administrative hearing as set forth in Chapter 1, Article V of
this code.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-88.  FIRE ALARM SYSTEM RETURN TO SERVICE.



   (A)   After the responsible person has taken corrective action to
remedy the cause of the disconnect or deactivation of the fire alarm system,
a fire alarm system may be returned to service upon enforcement official
approval.



   (B)   In making a request for a fire alarm system reactivation, the
responsible person shall have the burden of proving that corrective action
has been taken.



   (C)   Prior to approving the reactivation of the fire alarm system,
the enforcement official shall have the right to inspect and test the fire
alarm system.



   (D)   The enforcement official shall not approve the reactivation if
the responsible person has failed to pay any fee or fine pursuant to this
chapter.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-89.  EXEMPTIONS.



   Unless preempted by applicable law, local, state, and federal
government facilities (including educational use groups) are not exempt from
the provisions of this chapter and must pay assessed fees and otherwise
comply with all requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-90.  CONFIDENTIALITY.



   To the extent allowed by local, state, and federal laws, information
contained in and gathered through the alarm notifications, records relating
to alarm dispatch requests, and applications for appeals shall be held in
confidence by all employees or representatives of the municipality and by any
third-party administrator or employees of a third-party administrator with
access to such information.



(Ord. 2951)



SEC. 11-91.  GOVERNMENT IMMUNITY.



   Notification to the fire department of a fire alarm system is not
intended to, nor will it create a contract, duty, or obligation, either
expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential
damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby
disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. The fire
alarm system owner acknowledges that fire department response may be based on
factors such as availability of fire department units, priority of calls,
weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing
levels, and/or adopted fire alarm codes. The city, its officers, employees,
and agents shall not assume any duty or responsibility for the installation,
maintenance, operation, repair, or effectiveness of any privately owned fire
alarm system, those duties or responsibilities being solely those of the
occupant/owner of the premises.



(Ord. 2951)



ARTICLE III.  ARCADES



SEC. 11-130.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   ARCADE - Any place of business open to the public containing
five or more amusement devices on the premises.



   (B)   AMUSEMENT DEVICE - A machine on which a person plays a game
involving some degree of skill, activated mechanically, electrically,
electronically or by coins, including pinball machines and video games, but
not including coin-operated pool tables, athletic devices, shuffleboard games
and bowling machines.



   (C)   PRIMARY ARCADE - Any arcade that derives over 50 percent of
its gross receipts from amusement devices.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-6.1)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-131.  ARCADE PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.



   No person is required to obtain an arcade permit in order to operate an
arcade.  This section does not exempt persons operating arcades from
compliance with any other requirements, including the requirement for another
permit, business tax certificate or clearance, imposed by the code or by any
ordinance, statute, rule or regulation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-6.2)  (Ord. No. 2386, 2838)



SEC. 11-132.  FACILITY REQUIREMENTS.



   The location and facilities of every arcade shall meet the following
standards:



   (A)   Parking and storage - Accessible and adequate off-street
parking facilities for motor vehicles, bicycles, skate boards and other means
of personal transportation, and storage facilities to prevent an accumulation
of bicycles and skate boards on any public right-of-way.



   (B)   Location of arcade - Located beyond 500 feet of the boundary
of any real property parcel on which a public or private elementary school,
junior high school, or senior high school is located.



   (C)   Floor space - A minimum floor space of 750 square feet, with
at least 25 additional square feet for each amusement device in excess of
five.



   (D)   Location of amusement devices -



      (1)   The amusement devices shall be located no closer than 12
inches from any wall assembly separating the arcade from any adjacent portion
of the building.  When the amusement devices are located along only one side
of an aisle, the aisle shall be a minimum of 66 inches in width and shall be
unobstructed.



      (2)   When the amusement devices are located on both sides of
the aisle, the aisle shall not be less than 90 inches in width and shall be
unobstructed.  No amusement device shall be located closer than 24 inches
from any other amusement device.



   (E)   Toilets - At least two toilet and lavatory facilities
accessible to the customers, employees and business invitees.



   (F)   Visibility - All portions of the interior of a primary arcade,
except the restrooms, shall be plainly visible from the outside of the
building through unobstructed windows and glass doors.



   (G)   Lighting - All entrances and interior areas shall provide at a
minimum lighting in accordance with the city building code.



   (H)   Noise - Separation from any adjacent occupied unit by a wall
assembly, extending from the floor to roof, having an airborne sound
transmission class of 56, as set out in Standard 35-1 of the Uniform Building
Code Standards so that the intrusion sound level in adjacent areas does not
exceed 40 db.



   (I)   Bicycle racks - Bicycle racks located within 25 feet of the
arcade, with at least one bicycle stall for each amusement device, up to a
maximum of 30 stalls, and not located on any required landscape areas, common
walkways to the building, common driveways, required parking space, public
way, or in such a fashion as to obstruct any entrance or exit to any
premises.  Bicycle racks shall be of a type that allows bicycles to be
locked thereto.



   (J)   Permitted zones - Located only in C-1 or C-2 Zones.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-6.3)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-133.  OPERATING STANDARDS.



   Every arcade shall comply with the following operating standards:



   (A)   No primary arcade shall be open for business between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   (B)   No arcade shall be open unless there is an adult manager on
the premises at all times.



   (C)   No person shall enter, be or remain in any part of a primary
arcade while in possession of, using or under the influence of any alcoholic
beverage or drug.



   (D)   The operator shall obtain from each school located within a
radius of 1,000 feet of the arcade a schedule of all school holidays,
vacations and other days when students are not in attendance, as well as a
statement of the hours during which students are in attendance.  The
operator shall maintain the schedule and update it as necessary. 



   (E)   Between 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., the operator shall require
persons under the age of 16 years to produce a school identification, from
which the operator can determine that the person is not required to be in
attendance at school, or a written statement from the person's parent or
guardian stating that the child is not required to be in school. 



   (F)   After 10:00 p.m., the operator shall not permit any person
under the age of 18 years to enter or remain in the arcade unless accompanied
by a parent or guardian. 



   (G)   Each arcade shall maintain signs informing the public that
school age persons must produce proof that they are legitimately not in
attendance at school between 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and that persons under
the age of 18 years are prohibited from entering or remaining in an arcade
after 10:00 p.m. unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.  The signs must
be posted in at least two locations in the arcade in letters at least two
inches in height.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-6.4)  (Ord. No. 2386)



ARTICLE IV.  DANCE PERMIT PROCEDURES



SEC. 11-140.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish a procedure for processing
dance permits required by article V of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.1)  (Ord. No. 2386, 2811, 2851)



SEC. 11-141.  APPLICATIONS.



   The license collector shall provide each applicant for a dance permit
with a form specifying the information required for the permit.  The city
shall begin processing an application when the completed form, the applicable
fee, and documents required are provided to the license collector.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.2)  (Ord. No. 2386, 2811, 2851)



SEC. 11-142.  INVESTIGATION AND REPORT.



   On receiving the completed form and applicable fee, the license
collector shall refer the completed application to appropriate city service
providers, such as police, fire, building and planning, to investigate and
report as to whether the applicant and the activity for which the permit is
sought comply with applicable laws and regulations.  The report shall state
with specificity any corrective action that the applicant must take in order
to so comply and any conditions to be imposed on the permit.  All service
providers to which the application was referred shall give written reports of
their investigations to the license collector.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.3)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-143.  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   If the reports state no basis on which the permit cannot be issued and
state no corrective action that must be taken before the permit can be
issued, the license collector shall issue the permit, subject to any
conditions recommended by the service providers.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.4)  (Ord. No. 2386, 2811, 2851)



SEC. 11-144.  NOTICE OF CORRECTIVE ACTION.



   If the reports state that corrective action must be taken before the
permit can be issued, the license collector shall give written notice to the
applicant of the corrective action to be taken, describing the corrective
action with specificity.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.5)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-145.  TAKING CORRECTIVE ACTION.



   If within 60 calendar days of the mailing of the notice of corrective
action, the applicant submits evidence that the corrective action has been
taken, the license collector shall refer such evidence to the service
provider requiring the corrective action for verification that the corrective
action was taken.  The service provider to which the evidence was referred
shall give a written report to the license collector, stating whether the
corrective action described in the notice to the applicant was taken. If the
report states that all corrective action was taken as described in the
notice, the license collector shall issue the permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.6)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-146.  DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   In the following circumstances, the license collector shall send the
applicant written notice that the application is denied:



   (A)   A service provider's report given to the license collector
pursuant to section 11-142 states that the applicant or the activity for
which the permit is sought does not comply with applicable laws and
regulations, and the report states no corrective action.



   (B)   The applicant is sent a notice of corrective action and does
not timely appeal such notice or submit timely evidence that the corrective
action has been taken, or a service provider's report given to the license
collector pursuant to section 11-145 states that the corrective action of
which evidence was submitted was not taken as described in the notice.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.7)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-147.  HEARING OFFICER.



   The city manager shall act as hearing officer in matters for which this
article provides a hearing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.8)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-148.  REQUEST FOR HEARING BY APPLICANT.



   The applicant may request a hearing if:



   (A)   The applicant receives written notice that the application is
denied.  The request for hearing must be received by the license collector
within 14 days after the license collector mailed the notice of denial to the
applicant.



   (B)   The applicant receives written notice that corrective action
must be taken to comply with applicable laws and regulations, and the
applicant does not agree that such corrective action is necessary in order to
so comply.  The request for hearing must be received by the license
collector within 14 days after the license collector mailed such notice of
corrective action to the applicant.



   (C)   The applicant receives a permit on which conditions have been
imposed, and the applicant does not agree that one or more such conditions
are necessary.  The request for hearing must be received by the license
collector within 14 days after the license collector mailed the permit to the
applicant.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.9)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-149.  FORM AND CONTENT OF APPLICANT'S REQUEST FOR HEARING.



   An applicant's request for hearing shall be in writing, shall attach a
copy of the notice of denial, notice of corrective action or permit received
by the applicant, and shall state the reasons that the applicant alleges the
notice or permit conditions to be incorrect or unnecessary.  An applicant's
request for hearing must be accompanied by the hearing fee set by resolution
of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.10)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-150.  SETTING HEARINGS; NOTICE.



   On receiving a request for hearing, accompanied by the hearing fee, the
license collector shall send the request to the hearing officer, and the
hearing officer shall set the matter for hearing.  At least ten days before
the hearing, the hearing officer shall mail written notice of the date, time
and place of hearing to the applicant.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.11)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-151.  CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.



   (A)   All hearings shall be open to the public.



   (B)   The applicant shall first present evidence to justify issuance
of the permit or noncompliance with corrective action or removal of permit
conditions.  Thereafter, a representative of the city may present
evidence.  The burden of proof to justify issuance of the permit or
noncompliance with corrective action or removal of permit conditions is on
the applicant for the permit.



   (C)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
fashion and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.12)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-152.  DECISION.



   Within 14 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
shall issue and mail to the applicant a written decision containing a
statement of the reasons on which the decision is based.  The hearing
officer shall give such decision to the license collector, who shall keep the
decision with the application for the permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.13)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-153.  JUDICIAL ACTION.



   The applicant may seek judicial review of the decision of the hearing
officer in accordance with Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, Sections 1094.5 and
1094.6.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.14)  (Ord. No. 2386, 2493)



SEC. 11-154.  REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION.



   (A)   A dance, massage technician or massage establishment permit
may be revoked or modified or conditions may be imposed for failure of the
permittee to comply with applicable laws and regulations, based on matters
occurring after the permit is issued or on matters not considered at the time
of issuance of the permit that would have authorized denial of the permit or
the imposition of conditions on the permit.  If a massage technician permit
is revoked, the massage technician identification badge shall also be revoked.



   (B)   Any person, including a city officer or employee, may file
with the license collector a written request for revocation or modification
of a permit, stating facts showing that the permittee failed to comply with
applicable laws, regulations or permit conditions.



   (C)   If the request is filed by a city officer or employee on
behalf of a city service provider, the request shall be accompanied by a
written report, stating wherein the permittee has not complied with
applicable laws, regulations or permit conditions and recommending that the
permit be revoked or in what respect the permit should be modified or
conditioned.



   (D)   If the request is not filed by a city officer or employee, the
request shall be accompanied by the investigation and report fee set by
resolution of the city council.  On receiving the request and fee, the
license collector shall refer the request to the appropriate city service
provider for investigation and report.  The service provider shall give a
written report to the license collector, stating whether the permittee has
complied with applicable laws, regulations or permit conditions and
recommending whether and in what respect the permit should be revoked,
modified or conditioned.



   (E)   If the report referred to in subsection (D) of this section
states no basis on which the permit should be revoked, modified or
conditioned, the license collector shall mail to the permittee and to the
person who filed the request for revocation or modification a notice that the
permit will not be revoked, modified or conditioned and stating the reasons
for that decision.



   (F)   If the report referred to in subsections (C) or (D) of this
section states that the permittee has not complied with applicable laws,
regulations or permit conditions and recommends revocation, modification or
conditioning of the permit, the license collector shall mail to the permittee
and to the person who filed the request for revocation or modification a
notice that the permit is recommended for revocation, modification or
conditioning in a specific manner and stating the reasons for that
recommendation.  The notice shall inform the permittee that the
recommendation will be adopted and the permittee will be deemed to concur
with the recommendation if the permittee does not make a written request for
a hearing as provided in subsection (G) of this section.



   (G)   On receiving the notice referred to in subsection (F) of this
section, the permittee may make a written request for a hearing.  The
request must be received by the license collector within 14 days after the
license collector mailed the notice of recommended revocation or modification
to the permittee and be accompanied by the hearing fee set by resolution of
the city council. The request for hearing shall attach a copy of the notice
of recommended revocation, modification or conditioning received by the
permittee and shall state the reasons that the permittee alleges the notice
to be incorrect.



   (H)   If a timely request for hearing, accompanied by the hearing
fee, is received by the license collector, the procedure set out in
subsections (I) through (N) of this section shall apply.  If such a request
is not so received, the license collector shall mail to the permittee a
notice that the recommended revocation, modification or conditions have been
adopted.



   (I)   The license collector shall send the request for hearing to
the hearing officer, and the hearing officer shall set the matter for
hearing.  At least ten days before the hearing, the hearing officer shall
mail written notice of the date, time and place of hearing to the permittee.



   (J)   The hearing shall be open to the public.



   (K)   A representative of the city shall first present evidence to
justify the proposed revocation, modification or conditioning of the
permit.  Thereafter, the permittee may present evidence.  The burden of
proof to justify revocation, modification or conditioning of the permit is on
the city.



   (L)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
fashion and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence.



   (M)   Within 14 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing
officer shall issue and mail to the applicant a written decision containing a
statement of the reasons on which the decision is based.  The hearing
officer shall give such decision to the license collector, who shall keep the
decision with the application for the permit.



   (N)   The permittee may seek judicial review of the decision of the
hearing officer in accordance with Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, Sections
1094.5 and 1094.6.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.15)  (Ord. No. 2386, 2412, 2493, 2811)



SEC. 11-155.  REAPPLICATION.



   An applicant whose application for a permit is denied, or a permittee
whose permit is modified or revoked, whether or not the denial, revocation or
modification was heard by a hearing officer, may not apply for the same type
of permit for six months after the decision by the license collector or the
hearing officer, unless the applicant or permittee demonstrates changed
circumstances sufficient to justify issuance of the permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.16)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-156.  EFFECTIVE DATE OF PERMIT.



   A permit shall be effective to allow the permittee to exercise the
privileges conferred by the permit only after the license collector has
issued a written permit.  Issuance of a permit does not relieve the
permittee of the continuing duty to meet the requirements of other applicable
laws and regulations, including the Uniform Building, Electrical, Plumbing,
Mechanical and Fire Codes, as adopted and modified by the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.17)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-157.  DURATION AND RENEWAL.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specified in the permit, dance, massage
technician and massage establishment permits issued shall remain in effect
until modified or revoked or until the activity for which the permit was
issued ceases to be provided at the same address or facility or by the same
permittee.



   (B)   If an expiration date is specified in the permit, the permit
shall expire on that date. Unless the permit was issued for a specific event
or events, a massage technician permit issued before January 1, 2012, a
massage establishment permit issued before January 1, 2012, and any dance
permit may be renewed in the following manner:



      (1)   Dance and massage establishment permits may be renewed
by submitting to the license collector a renewal application, accompanied by
the renewal fee set by resolution of the city council, no later than 30 days
before the date the permit expires.



      (2)   Massage technician permits may be renewed by submitting
the following to the license collector:



         (a)   A renewal application, accompanied by the renewal
fee set by resolution of the city council, no later than 30 days before the
date the permit expires;



         (b)   Proof of successful completion of a written
practical examination administered by a certificant certified by the National
Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork dated within one
year of the date the renewal application is submitted or a certificate issued
by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork.



   (C)   Submittal of a renewal application less than 30 days before
the date the permit expires or after the date the permit expires does not
keep the permit in effect.  Such an application shall be accompanied by the
fee for an original application and be processed in the same manner as an
original application.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.18)  (Ord. No. 2386, 2811, 2823, 2851)



SEC. 11-158.  NO TRANSFER.



   A permit may not be assigned by the original permittee to another
person or transferred from the original location or facility to another
location or facility.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.19)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-159.  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   The permit issued pursuant to this article shall be displayed
conspicuously at all times at the location where the activity is authorized.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-1.20)  (Ord. No. 2386)



ARTICLE V.  DANCES



SEC. 11-170.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   PUBLIC DANCE - A dance that is not conducted in a private
residence by one or more occupants thereof and attended only by persons
invited by the occupant.



   (B)   SECURITY PERSONNEL - Any person licensed by the State pursuant
to Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code, Division 3, Chapter 11.4, as a proprietary
private security officer, or Chapter 11.5, as a security guard, who is
uniquely attired so as to be easily identifiable to attendees of the public
dance and to police officers and so as to differentiate himself/herself from
attendees of the public dance, from other employees or contractors of the
location where the public dance is held, and from other employees or
contractors of any promoter of the public dance, and who has no duties in the
public dance except duties related to security, and who has completed a
police department training class on security issues.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-2.1)  (Ord. No. 2386, 2850)



SEC. 11-171.  DANCE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall conduct a public dance without a valid dance permit
obtained pursuant to this chapter.  If a public dance is held in a location
that is rented or provided for consideration in any form to the person
holding the public dance, the person providing the location and the person in
charge of the public dance are jointly and severally responsible for
obtaining a dance permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-2.2)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-172.  TERM; FEES.



   (A)   A public dance permit may be issued for the duration of the
city's fiscal year or for any specific day or days.  If a dance permit is
issued for a fiscal year, the permit shall specify the location in which
public dances may be held, and the permittee shall give the police chief at
least ten days' written notice of each date and time that a public dance will
be held pursuant to the permit.



   (B)   Fees for dance permits shall be established by resolution of
the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-2.3)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-173.  EXCEPTIONS.



   No dance permit is required for either of the following public dances:



   (A)   Those sponsored by public or private schools, churches, or the
city; and



   (B)   Those conducted by nonprofit associations, provided that the
prior approval of the police chief and the fire chief has been obtained. 
Such approval may be conditional or may be withheld.  If approval is
withheld, the public dance may be held only if a dance permit is obtained.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-2.4)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-174.  SECURITY.



   Security personnel shall be present during and within one-half hour
before and after the time that any music is played. Security personnel shall
keep order inside and immediately outside the location where the public dance
is held, including the parking areas adjacent thereto. Security personnel
shall not permit loitering outside the public dance. Security personnel at a
public dance shall cooperate with law enforcement officers conducting any
investigation in or around the location of the public dance. One security
person shall be present when 50 to 100 patrons are present, and one
additional security person shall be present for each additional increment of
1 to 50 patrons, unless the dance permit is conditioned otherwise.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-2.5)  (Ord. No. 2386, 2850)



SEC. 11-175.  CONDITIONS.



   The license collector may impose reasonable conditions on dance permits
relating to supervision, security, crowd control, noise, fire regulations,
and the avoidance of adverse impacts on persons or activities nearby.  A
dance permit may be denied if problems created by the public dance cannot
adequately be mitigated by conditions.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-2.6)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-176.  HOURS OF DANCE.



   No public dance shall be conducted or permitted between 2:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-2.7)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-177.  MINORS.



   (A)   A person under the age of 18 may attend a public dance only if
no alcohol is allowed to be consumed in or about the location where the
public dance is held.  A person under the age of 18 who attends such a
public dance shall leave the public dance no later than 10:00 p.m.



   (B)   The person in charge of a public dance to which persons under
the age of 18 are admitted shall not permit alcohol to be consumed in or
about the location where the public dance is held and shall either terminate
the public dance no later than 10:00 p.m. or shall require all persons under
the age of 18 to leave the public dance no later than 10:00 p.m.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-2.8)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-178.  TERMINATION BY POLICE CHIEF.



   (A)   The police chief or designee may terminate any public dance
that creates a public nuisance by reason of excessive noise, congestion,
disturbances of the peace, or any other reason, or that is operated without a
required dance permit or in violation of the conditions of a dance permit.



   (B)   All direct and indirect costs of providing the police response
necessary to terminate the public dance shall be charged to the permittee or
person presenting the dance.  Such costs shall be deemed a debt to the city,
and any person required to pay such costs shall be liable in an action
brought in the name of the city for recovery of such costs, including
reasonable attorneys' fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-2.9)  (Ord. No. 2386)



ARTICLE VI.  ENTERTAINMENT



SEC. 11-185.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   ENTERTAINMENT - Any live or mechanically or electronically
produced performance involving words, actions, music, sounds, animals, visual
displays or other methods or devices intended to amuse, divert or please
persons in the vicinity of the performance, excluding dancing for which a
permit is required by article V of this chapter.



   (B)   BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT - Any commercial or noncommercial
venture that is open to the public and that operates inside a building or
structure, as defined by the city building code; provided, however, that this
definition shall not include the Oxnard Performing Arts and Convention Center.



   (C)   SECURITY PERSONNEL - Any person licensed by the State pursuant
to Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code, Division 3, Chapter 11.4, as a proprietary
private security officer, or Chapter 11.5, as a security guard, who is
uniquely attired so as to be easily identifiable to attendees of the business
establishment and to police officers and so as to differentiate
himself/herself from attendees of the business establishment, from other
employees or contractors of the business establishment, and from other
employees or contractors of any entertainment promoter, and who has no duties
in the business establishment except duties related to security, and who has
completed a police department training class on security issues.



   (D)   Security personnel shall keep order inside and immediately
outside the business establishment, including the parking areas adjacent
thereto. Security personnel shall not permit loitering outside the business
establishment.



   (E)   Management, employees and security personnel of a business
establishment where entertainment is presented shall cooperate with law
enforcement officers conducting any investigation in or around the business
establishment.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-4.1)  (Ord. No. 2386, 2660, 2850)



SEC. 11-186.  ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.



   No person is required to obtain an entertainment permit in order to
present entertainment.  This section does not exempt persons presenting
entertainment from compliance with any other requirements, including the
requirement for another permit, license or clearance, imposed by the code or
by any ordinance, statute, rule or regulation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-4.2)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-187.  CONDITIONS.



   Persons presenting entertainment shall comply with the following
conditions:



   (A)   Entertainment shall be subject to and shall not exceed the
sound level standards contained herein.



   (B)   In any business establishment in which entertainment is
presented, there shall be at least ten lux of illumination at floor level at
entrances, at exits and at entrance and exit access and discharge areas.



   (C)   If a business establishment sells or allows the consumption of
alcoholic beverages on the premises, security personnel shall be present in
the business establishment during the time that live entertainment is
presented in the business establishment and within one-half hour before and
one-half hour after such time. One security person shall be present when 50
to 100 patrons are present, and one additional security person shall be
present for each additional increment of 1 to 50 patrons.



   (D)   Security guards shall keep order inside and immediately
outside the business establishment, including the parking areas adjacent
thereto.  Security guards shall not permit loitering outside the business
establishment.



   (E)   Management, employees and security guards of a business
establishment where entertainment is presented shall cooperate with law
enforcement officers conducting any investigation in or around the business
establishment.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-4.3)  (Ord. No. 2386, 2850)



SEC. 11-188.  TERMINATION BY POLICE CHIEF.



   (A)   The  police chief or designee shall have the right to
terminate any entertainment that creates a public nuisance because of noise,
congestion, disturbances of the peace or any other reason, or that violates
any of the conditions set out in section 11-187.



   (B)   All direct and indirect costs of providing the police response
necessary to terminate the entertainment shall be charged to the person
presenting the entertainment.  Such costs shall be deemed a debt to the
city, and any person required to pay such costs shall be liable in an action
brought in the name of the city for recovery of such costs, including
reasonable attorneys' fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-4.4)  (Ord. No. 2386)



ARTICLE VII.  FILMING



SEC. 11-200.  PERMIT REQUIRED; BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall use any public or private property, facility
or residence for filming, videotaping, broadcasting or photographing a
person, event or activity for commercial use without first applying for and
receiving a filming permit from the designated liaison, as defined herein.



   (B)   A business tax certificate shall be obtained pursuant to
Article I of Chapter 11 of this code before a filming permit is issued unless
the person, organization, or entity applying for the filming permit is exempt
from paying business tax fees pursuant to section 11-9 or section 11-208(B)
of this code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-7.1)  (Ord. No. 2386, 2838)



SEC. 11-201.  EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect:



      (1)   Reporters, photographers or camera operators in the
employ of a newspaper, news service, television station or similar entity
engaged in broadcasting news events concerning persons, events or activities
that are in the news and of general public interest;



      (2)   Persons filming, videotaping or photographing events or
activities solely for personal noncommercial use; and



      (3)   Persons filming; videotaping, broadcasting or
photographing, or the products thereof, that are exempt from taxation under
the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code relating to charities.



   (B)   A permittee shall keep a copy of the filming permit on the
site of the event or activity at all times.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-7.2)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-202.  DESIGNATED LIAISON.



   The city manager shall appoint, in writing, a designated liaison and
alternate designated liaison (“designated liaison”) to work with
applicants for filming permits, process and issue filming permits and collect
applicable fees relative thereto.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-7.3)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-203.  STANDARDIZED PERMIT APPLICATION FORM.



   (A)   The filming permit application form shall be the standardized
form approved by the California Film Commission.



   (B)   The permit application form information may be provided to the
designated liaison by the applicant by telephone, unless the applicant
prefers to file the application in person.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-7.4)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-204.  EXPEDITED PROCESS.



   The designated liaison shall expedite the filming permit process by
coordinating all city program reviews and approvals of the application.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-7.5)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-205.  MAXIMUM TIME REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE.



   The designated liaison shall issue filming permits within the following
maximum time requirements:



   (A)   Two business days for approval and issuance of a standard
permit;



   (B)   Four business days for approval of a permit involving:



      (1)   Traffic control on any public street;



      (2)   Stunts; or



      (3)   Special effects.



   (C)   Ten business days for approval of a permit involving closures
of a public street or right-of-way.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-7.6)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-206.  PERMIT RIDERS.



   (A)   The designated liaison shall allow unlimited written riders to
a filming permit that accommodate minor changes.



   (B)   The designated liaison shall not amend a filming permit by
permit rider after completion of the event or activity.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-7.7)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-207.  CONCURRENT JURISDICTION.



   If other public agencies have concurrent jurisdiction as to a
particular filming permit application, the designated liaison shall inform
the permittee in writing on the permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-7.8)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-208.  FEES.



   (A)   Filming permit application fees and filming permit fees, other
than location fees, shall not exceed the actual cost of processing the
application and issuing the permit.  Such fees shall be established by
resolution of the city council.



   (B)   Location use fees for public property shall be $300 for one
day's use or $200 per day for two or more days' use.  The designated liaison
shall not collect business tax fees when location use fees for public
property are collected.



   (C)   Before a filming permit is issued, the applicant shall pay all
city fees associated with the subject event or activity.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-7.9)  (Ord. No. 2386, 2838)



SEC. 11-209.  INSURANCE, INDEMNITY AND BOND.



   (A)   Before the designated liaison issues a filming permit, the
applicant shall complete and submit all of the following:



      (1)   The standardized liability insurance form approved by
the California Film Commission;



      (2)   Evidence of the liability insurance coverages
established by the designated liaison;



      (3)   Evidence of workers' compensation insurance meeting all
applicable State and federal requirements; and



      (4)   An executed indemnity agreement in a form provided by
the designated liaison and approved by the city attorney.



   (B)   To ensure cleanup and restoration of the activity site, the
designated liaison may require the applicant to post a faithful performance
bond, in an amount to be determined by the designated liaison, at the time of
application.  On completion of the activity and inspection of the site by
the designated liaison, the bond shall be returned to the applicant if all
conditions of cleanup and restoration have been completed.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-7.10)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-210.  REVOCATION.



   (A)   If an applicant violates any provision of this article or a
filming permit issued pursuant hereto, the designated liaison may revoke the
permit.  In such event, the permittee shall not be entitled to a refund of
any fees.



   (B)   If an applicant cancels a filming permit or permit application
after 3:00 p.m. of the last business day before the scheduled activity, the
designated liaison shall charge the applicant a cancellation fee in an amount
equal to half of the permit fee.  If the permit fee has been paid, the
designated liaison shall deduct the cancellation fee from the permit fee and
return the remaining half of the permit fee to the applicant.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-7.11)  (Ord. No. 2386)



ARTICLE VIII.  PERMITS TO SELL CONCEALABLE FIREARMS



SEC. 11-220.  CONCEALABLE FIREARM PERMIT REQUIRED; BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATE
REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall offer for sale, sell, transfer, or advertise
any firearm capable of being concealed upon the person without first
obtaining a concealable firearm permit ("permit") from the police chief.



   (B)   A business tax certificate shall be obtained pursuant to
Article I of Chapter 11 of this code before a permit is issued unless the
person, organization, or entity applying for the permit is exempt from paying
business tax fees pursuant to section 11-9 of this code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16.1-10)  (Ord. No. 2411, 2838)



SEC. 11-221.  APPLICATION.



   (A)   The application for a permit shall be on a form approved by
the police chief.  An applicant for a permit shall file the application with
the chief of police with payment of the appropriate fee as established by
resolution of the city council.



   (B)   The fee shall not be returned whether the application is
approved, conditioned or denied.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16.1-11)  (Ord. No. 2411)



SEC. 11-222.  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.



   (A)   By filing an application, the applicant consents to the police
chief undertaking an investigation of the applicant and a review of the
information contained in the application.  Thereafter, the police chief
shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the permit.



   (B)   If the application is approved or conditionally approved, the
police chief shall issue the permit.



   (C)   If the application is denied, the police chief shall promptly
notify the applicant, in writing, of the denial by certified or registered
mail.  The applicant may request a hearing as provided for herein, to review
the conditions or denial of a permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16.1-12)  (Ord. No. 2411)



SEC. 11-223.  REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The police chief may revoke or modify a permit for failure of
the permittee to comply with laws, regulations, or permit conditions.



   (B)   The police chief shall mail to the permittee a notice that the
permit is proposed for revocation or modification.  The notice shall state
the reasons for the proposal.



   (C)   The permittee may request a hearing, as provided herein, to
review the proposed revocation or modification.  If such a request for
hearing is not timely received, the police chief shall mail to the permittee
a notice that the proposed revocation or modification is in effect.  Such
notice shall constitute an exhaustion of the administrative remedies
available to the permittee.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16.1-13)  (Ord. No. 2411)



SEC. 11-224.  REQUEST FOR HEARING.



   A request for hearing shall be filed with the city clerk within 14 days
of the date of the subject notice or receipt of a conditioned permit.  The
request shall include payment of an appropriate hearing fee established by
resolution of the city council.  The request shall include a copy of the
notice or conditioned permit and shall state the relief sought by the person
requesting the hearing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16.1-14)  (Ord. No. 2411)



SEC. 11-225.  HEARINGS; NOTICE.



   On receiving a request for hearing, the city clerk shall send the
request to the hearing officer.  The hearing officer shall promptly set the
matter for hearing.  At least ten days before the hearing, the hearing
officer shall mail written notice of the date, time and place of hearing to
the person requesting the hearing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16.1-15)  (Ord. No. 2411)



SEC. 11-226.  CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.



   (A)   All hearings shall be open to the public.



   (B)   The person requesting the hearing shall first present
evidence.  Thereafter, a representative of the city may present evidence.



   (C)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
fashion and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16.1-16)  (Ord. No. 2411)



SEC. 11-227.  DECISION.



   Within 14 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
shall issue and mail to all parties a written decision containing a statement
of the reasons on which the decision is based.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16.1-17)  (Ord. No. 2411)



SEC. 11-228.  JUDICIAL ACTION.



   Judicial review of a final decision of the hearing officer or police
chief may be sought in accordance with Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, Sections
1094.5 and 1094.6.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16.1-17.1)  (Ord. No. 2411, 2493)



ARTICLE IX.  MASSAGE



SEC. 11-232.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   APPLICANT - A person who is required to file an application
for a massage business or establishment permit or a massage technician permit.



   (B)   APPROVED SCHOOL - A facility that teaches the theory, ethics,
practice, profession, and work of massage therapy and that is approved by any
of the following:



      (1)   The Bureau for Private Postsecondary and Vocational
Education pursuant to former Cal. Education Code, Section 94739 prior to July
1, 2007, and as of the date on which an applicant successfully completed a
minimum of 250 hours of supervised, in-class instruction;



      (2)   The Department of Consumer Affairs;



      (3)   An institution accredited by the Accrediting Commission
for Senior Colleges and Universities or the Accrediting Commission for
Community and Junior Colleges of the Western Association of Schools and
Colleges and that is one of the following:



         (a)   A public institution;



         (b)   An institution incorporated and lawfully operating
as a nonprofit public benefit corporation pursuant to Cal. Corporations Code,
Title 1, Division 2, Part 2 (commencing with Section 5110) and that is not
managed by any entity for profit;



         (c)   A for-profit institution.



      (4)   A college or university of the state higher education
system, as defined in Cal. Education Code, Section 100850;



      (5)   A school of equal or greater training that is approved
by the corresponding agency in another state or territory of the United
States or accredited by an agency recognized by the United States Department
of Education.



The term APPROVED SCHOOL shall not include a school or institution of
learning offering or allowing correspondence courses not requiring actual
attendance at classes.



   (C)   COMPENSATION - The payment, loan, advance, donation,
contribution, deposit, exchange, or gift of money or anything of value.



   (D)   LICENSE COLLECTOR - The city treasurer or designee.



   (E)   MASSAGE or MASSAGE THERAPY - The application of various
techniques to the muscular structure and soft tissues of the human body,
including but not limited to any method of pressure or friction against, or
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, compression, pounding, vibrating,
rocking or stimulating of the external surfaces of the body with hands or
with any object or appliance.



   (F)   MASSAGE BUSINESS or ESTABLISHMENT - Any business or
establishment which offers massage or massage therapy in exchange for
compensation at a fixed place of business, including any business or
establishment which offers any combination of massage or massage therapy and
bath facilities, including but not limited to showers, baths, wet and dry
heat rooms, steam rooms, pools, and hot tubs.



   (G)   MASSAGE PRACTITIONER - Any person to whom a massage therapy
certificate has been issued pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code,
Section 4601, subdivision (b), paragraph (1) and who is engaged in the
practice of massage therapy for compensation.



   (H)   MASSAGE TECHNICIAN - A person to whom a massage technician
permit has been issued by the city's license collector.



   (I)   MASSAGE THERAPIST - Any person to whom a massage therapy
certificate has been issued pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code,
Section 4601, subdivision (c) and who is engaged in the practice of massage
therapy for compensation.



   (J)   MASSAGE THERAPY CERTIFICATE - A certificate issued by the
California Massage Therapy Council pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions
Code, Section 4601, subsection (a).



   (K)   PERMITTEE - A person to whom a massage business or
establishment permit or a massage technician permit has been issued by the
city's license collector.



(Ord. No. 2811, 2823, 2851)



SEC. 11-233.  MASSAGE THERAPY CERTIFICATE REQUIRED; RENEWAL OF MASSAGE
ESTABLISHMENT AND TECHNICIAN PERMITS; TECHNICIAN IDENTIFICATION BADGES
REQUIRED; FEES.



   (A)   No person shall perform massage or massage therapy without a
valid massage therapy certificate issued pursuant to Cal. Business and
Professions Code, Section 4601.



   (B)   No person shall operate a massage business or establishment or
allow a massage business or establishment to operate unless each person who
performs massage or massage therapy at that business or establishment has a
valid massage therapy certificate issued pursuant to Cal. Business and
Professions Code, Section 4601.



      (1)   Any owner or operator of a massage business or
establishment who owns 5% or more of the massage business or establishment
and who does not hold a valid massage therapy certificate issued pursuant to
Cal. Business and Professions Code, Section 4601, shall submit an application
for a background check to the license collector. Fees for background checks
shall be established by resolution of the city council.



      (2)   An application for a background check pursuant to
paragraph (1) of subdivision (B) of this section shall contain the following
information:



         (a)   The applicant's full legal name and any name used
by the applicant at any other time;



         (b)   The applicant's date of birth;



         (c)   The name and telephone number of the massage
business or establishment and the street address where the massage business
or establishment is to be conducted;



         (d)   The applicant's occupation;



         (e)   The employment history, with dates of employment,
of the applicant for the five years preceding the date of the application;



         (f)   The name and address of any massage business or
establishment or other similar establishment owned or operated by the
applicant; and



         (g)   The applicant's fingerprints.



   (C)   Notwithstanding subdivision (A) of this section, any person
who holds a valid massage technician permit as of January 1, 2012, may
operate as a massage technician until such permit expires. If such permit
expires before December 31, 2012, the permittee may file an application with
the license collector to renew the permit, which shall expire on December 31,
2012. Fees to renew such permits shall be established by resolution of the
city council.



   (D)   Notwithstanding subdivision (B) of this section, any person
who holds a valid massage establishment permit as of January 1, 2012, may
operate a massage business until such permit expires. If such permit expires
before December 31, 2012, the permittee may file an application with the
license collector to renew the permit, which shall expire on December 31,
2012. Fees to renew such permits shall be established by resolution of the
city council.



   (E)   If a permittee holds a valid massage technician permit for
more than one location as of January 1, 2012, the permittee must renew any
permit that expires before December 31, 2012, pursuant to subdivision (C) of
this section for any location where the permittee intends to provide massage
therapy until such renewed permit expires.



   (F)   While providing any massage therapy, all massage technicians
shall display in a visible location in an area between the shoulder and the
waist on the front of outer clothing worn by the massage technician an
identification badge issued by the license collector.



(Ord. No. 2811, 2851)



SEC. 11-234.  EXEMPTIONS.



   Section 11-233 of this code shall not apply to the following:



   (A)   Persons holding a valid certificate to practice the healing
arts under the laws of the State of California, including, but not limited
to, holders of medical degrees such as physicians, surgeons, chiropractors,
osteopaths, naturopaths, podiatrists, acupuncturists, physical therapists,
registered nurses and licensed vocational nurses.



   (B)   Barbers and cosmetologists who are licensed under the laws of
the State of California while providing massage therapy within the scope of
their licenses, provided that such massage therapy is limited solely to the
neck, face, scalp, feet, lower limbs up to the knees, hands, and arms of
their patrons.



(Ord. No. 2811, 2823, 2851)



SEC. 11-235.  [RESERVED].



SEC. 11-236.  [RESERVED].



Editor’s note:



   Sections 11-235 and 11-236 were repealed by pt. 9 and 10 of Ord. No.
2851, adopted 12-13-2011.



    The sections related to qualifications for massage technician and
establishment permits and were both derived from Ord. No. 2811 and 2823.



SEC. 11-237.  BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATE REQUIRED; DENIAL, REVOCATION,
RESTRICTION, OR SUSPENSION OF BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   The owner and/or operator of any massage business or
establishment described in Cal. Business and Professions Code, Section 4612,
subdivision (b), paragraph (1) and the permittee of any massage business or
establishment shall obtain a city business tax certificate pursuant to
Article I of Chapter 11 of this code.



   (B)   Any massage technician who provides massage therapy at a
location away from a massage business or establishment shall obtain a city
business tax certificate pursuant to Article I of Chapter 11 of this code
when such massage therapy is not provided at the direction of and on behalf
of a massage business or establishment that has been issued a business tax
certificate as set forth is subdivision (A) above.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any provision set forth in Article I of
Chapter 11 of this code, the city may:



      (1)   In the application for a business tax certificate or for
the renewal of a business tax certificate, require the massage business or
establishment or any permittee to provide relevant information of the
activities of the business or establishment regulated by this article;



      (2)   Make reasonable investigations into the information so
provided;



      (3)   Charge a business tax certificate fee sufficient to
cover the costs of the business tax activities regulated by this article; and



      (4)   Deny, revoke, restrict, or suspend a business tax
certificate  for any of the following causes:



         (a)   An employee, agent, independent contractor, or
other representative of the business or establishment or of the permittee has
committed a violation of this article;



         (b)   An employee, agent, independent contractor, or
other representative of the business or establishment has committed a
violation of Cal. Business and Professions Code, Chapter 10.5, Division 2
(commencing with Section 4600); or



         (c)   The business or establishment or the permittee has
provided materially false information in the application for a business tax
certificate.



(Ord. No. 2811, 2838)



SEC. 11-238.  REGISTRATION AND NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every massage business or establishment as defined in Cal.
Business and Professions Code, Section 4612,  subdivision (b), paragraph (1)
shall provide to the license collector a copy or other evidence of the
massage therapy certificate of every person who provides massage therapy at
the business or establishment prior to the commencement of massage therapy
services by such person and shall maintain at the business or establishment a
copy or other evidence of each such massage therapy certificate for review by
local authorities.



   (B)   Every massage business or establishment as defined in Cal.
Business and Professions Code, Section 4612, subdivision (b), paragraph (1)
and every permittee of a massage business or establishment shall notify the
license collector of any intention to rename, change management, or convey
the business or establishment to another person within 15 days of such change.



   (C)   Every permittee of a massage business or establishment shall
comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   Notify the license collector when the owner of the
business or establishment sells or transfers the entire business or
establishment to another person or when the owner of the business or
establishment sells or transfers a portion of the business or establishment
to another person.



      (2)   Provide to the license collector the names of all
persons who will act as manager of the massage business or establishment
prior to the commencement of massage therapy services at said massage
business or establishment.



   (D)   Every massage technician shall notify the license collector of
a change in the permittee's home address or the address of the massage
business or establishment where the permittee regularly provides massage
therapy services within ten days of such change.



(Ord. No. 2811, 2823)



SEC. 11-239.  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Any massage technician whose permit is issued on or after the
effective date of this article, and any massage business or establishment
owned and/or operated by a permittee whose permit is issued on or after the
effective date of this article, shall only provide massage therapy between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.



   (B)   Upon renewal of a massage technician permit or upon renewal of
a massage establishment permit, massage therapy shall only be provided
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.



(Ord. No. 2811, 2823)



SEC. 11-240.  PROHIBITED ADVERTISING PRACTICES.



   (A)   No massage business or establishment owned and/or operated by
a permittee shall state, advertise, put out any sign, card, or other device,
or represent to the public through any print or electronic media that a
person who provides massage therapy at that business or establishment is
certified, registered, or licensed as a "massage therapist" or "massage
practitioner" if that person does not possess a valid massage therapy
certificate.



   (B)   No massage business or establishment owned and/or operated by
a permittee and no massage technician shall advertise through any print or
electronic media that appears to be for adults only based on its
classification, other advertising contained therein, words used within, or
title.



(Ord. No. 2811)



SEC. 11-241.  MINORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any massage business or establishment owned
and/or operated by a permittee to employ any persons under 18 years of age or
to provide massage therapy to any person under 18 years of age, except at the
special instance and request of a parent, guardian, or other person in lawful
custody of said minor.



(Ord. No. 2811, 2851)



SEC. 11-242.  PHYSICAL FACILITY AND BUILDING CODE REQUIREMENTS - STATE
CERTIFIED MASSAGE BUSINESSES OR ESTABLISHMENTS.



   The following facility requirements shall be applicable to all massage
businesses and establishments described in Cal. Business and Professions
Code, Section 4612, subdivision (b), paragraph (1):



   (A)   Separate, enclosed rooms or cubicles to provide individual
space and privacy shall be provided to each customer while massage therapy is
administered. Each massage room or cubicle shall contain a wash basin with
hot and cold running water, soap or detergent, and a sanitary towel dispenser
for use by the massage practitioner, massage therapist, or massage technician.



   (B)   Except where there is no staff available to assure security
for massage therapy customers and massage staff who are behind closed doors,
no massage therapy may be administered behind locked, closed doors.



   (C)   Minimum lighting in accordance with the city building code and
at least one additional artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be
provided in each enclosed massage therapy room or cubicle.



   (D)   Massage tables with a minimum height of 18 inches shall be
used for all massage therapy and shall be used only in massage therapy
treatment rooms or cubicles. Beds and floor mattresses are not permitted on
the premises of the business or establishment.



   (E)   All locker facilities that are provided for the use of
customers shall be fully secured for the protection of the customer's
valuables, and the customer shall be given control of the key or other means
of access.



   (F)   Ventilation shall be in accordance with the city building code.



   (G)   Hot and cold running water and potable drinking water shall be
accessible to customers and to staff of the massage business or establishment.



   (H)   Public toilet facilities shall be provided in accordance with
the city building code.



   (I)   In each enclosed room or cubicle where massage therapy is
administered and in the designated reception or payment area, a sign easily
visible to customers shall be posted stating: “THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT
AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO
INSPECTION BY CITY, COUNTY, AND/OR HEALTH OFFICIALS WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE.”
Such signs shall be printed with letters that contrast against the background
material and measure not less than one-half inch in height.



(Ord. No. 2811, 2823, 2851)



SEC. 11-243.  PHYSICAL FACILITY AND BUILDING CODE REQUIREMENTS - CITY
LICENSED MASSAGE BUSINESSES OR ESTABLISHMENTS.



   The following facility requirements shall be applicable to all massage
businesses and establishments owned and/or operated by permittees:



   (A)   All requirements set forth in Sec. 11-242 above, with the
exception of subdivision (B).



   (B)   A readable sign which complies with all applicable code
requirements shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the
establishment as a massage business or establishment.



   (C)   A sign identifying the operating hours of the massage business
or establishment shall be posted in an open and conspicuous public place at
the business or establishment. Customers shall be allowed inside massage
businesses or establishments only during posted operating hours.



   (D)   No person may be inside any massage business or establishment
from two hours after the posted closing time until one hour prior to the
posted opening time.



   (E)   A list of available services and the duration and cost of such
services shall be posted in an open and conspicuous public place at the
business or establishment. No services shall be offered or performed at the
business or establishment unless so posted, and no sums shall be charged for
services other than those posted.



   (F)   (1)   All arrangements for services to be performed shall
be made in a room in the massage business or establishment that is not used
for the administration of any available service. No massage technician shall,
after the commencement of any service for any customer, advise, suggest, or
otherwise indicate to such customer that additional services could be
performed. No massage technician shall perform any service for any customer
which was not requested by such customer when the initial arrangements for
services were made.



      (2)   After arrangements for services to be performed have
been made with any customer as set forth in paragraph (1) of this subdivision
and prior to the commencement of any service for said customer, a written
record shall be made containing the following information:



         (a)   The date and hour of each treatment or service;



         (b)   The name and address of the customer;



         (c)   The name of the massage practitioner, massage
technician, or massage therapist who administered such treatment or services;



         (d)   A description of the services requested by the
customer when the initial arrangements for services were made.



      (3)   The written records described in paragraph (2) of this
subdivision shall be open to inspection upon demand only by officials charged
with enforcement of this article to ensure compliance with this subdivision
or any other applicable state or federal laws and shall remain confidential.



   (G)   If male and female customers are to be served simultaneously
at the massage business or establishment, separate bathing, separate massage
rooms or cubicles, separate dressing facilities, and separate toilet
facilities shall be provided for male and for female customers.



   (H)   A massage business or establishment shall not be located
within 1,000 feet of another massage business or establishment, an adult book
store, or an adult movie theater, measured in a straight line from the
nearest wall of the massage business or establishment to the nearest wall of
the other business. The foregoing sentence does not apply to:



      (1)   An adult massage business or establishment, which is
subject to the locational requirements of Sec. 16-337 of this code.



      (2)   A massage business or establishment that is operated on
the same premises as another type of business, other than an adult business,
and by the same persons who operate the other business; that occupies less
than 30% of the square footage occupied by both businesses; and that is the
source of less than 30% of the annual revenue derived from both businesses.



   (I)   A manager and/or permittee shall be present at the massage
business or establishment at all times during operating hours. The manager
and/or permittee shall be familiar with the requirements of this article and
be capable of communicating the provisions of this article to employees and
customers of the business or establishment.



   (J)   No massage therapy may be administered within any massage room
or cubicle which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. The front
door of the massage business or establishment and doors separating the
waiting or reception area from the remainder of the premises shall remain
unlocked during operating hours and shall not be fitted with electronic
locking devices.



   (K)   No massage business or establishment shall be equipped with
any electronic videotaping or audio recording device for monitoring the
activities, conversations, or other sounds in said massage business or
establishment.



(Ord. No. 2811, 2823)



SEC. 11-244.  HEALTH AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following health and safety requirements shall be
applicable to all massage businesses and establishments described in Cal.
Business and Professions Code, Section 4612, subdivision (b), paragraph (1):



      (1)   An adequate supply of clean sanitary towels, coverings,
and linens shall be available at all times, and all massage tables shall be
covered with a clean sheet or other clean covering for each customer. After a
towel, covering, or linen has been used for one customer, it shall be
deposited in a closed receptacle and not used until properly laundered and
sanitized. Clean towels, coverings, and linens shall be stored in closed,
clean, cabinets when not in use.



      (2)   All massage therapy rooms or cubicles, wet and dry heat
rooms, steam rooms, toilet facilities, shower compartments, hot tubs, and
pools shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected as needed and each day the
business or establishment is in operation. All bathtubs shall be thoroughly
cleaned and disinfected after each use.



      (3)   All liquids, creams, or other preparations used on or
made available to customers shall be kept in clean and closed containers.
Powders may be kept in clean shakers. All bottles and containers shall be
distinctly and correctly labeled to disclose their contents. When only a
portion of a liquid, cream, or other preparation is to be used on or made
available to a customer, it shall be removed from the container in such a way
as not to contaminate the remaining portion.



      (4)   All bathrobes or other garments that are provided for
the use of customers shall be either fully disposable and shall not be used
by more than one customer or shall be laundered and sanitized after each use.



      (5)   All footwear such as sandals or flip-flops that are
provided for the use of customers shall be either fully disposable and shall
not be used by more than one customer or shall be fully disinfected after
each use.



      (6)   All combs, brushes, and/or other personal items of
grooming or hygiene that are provided for the use of customers shall be
either fully disposable and shall not be used by more than one customer or
shall be fully disinfected after each use.



      (7)   The customer's genitals, pubic area, anus, and female
patron's breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola must
be fully draped at all times while any employee of the business or
establishment is in the massage therapy room or cubicle with the customer. No
massage therapy shall be provided to a customer that results in intentional
contact or occasional and repetitive contact with the genitals, anus, or
areola of a customer.



   (B)   The following health and safety requirements shall be
applicable to all massage businesses and establishments owned and/or operated
by permittees:



      (1)   All requirements set forth in subdivision (A) of this
section.



      (2)   Only one customer and only one massage technician shall
be present in the massage room or cubicle from the time the customer enters
the massage room or cubicle until the customer exits the massage room or
cubicle.



      (3)   Notwithstanding any provision set forth in this article,
only customers, managers, employees, massage technicians, and permittees
shall be permitted in any massage room or cubicle or any break room or rest
area during operating hours.



(Ord. No. 2811, 2823, 2851)



SEC. 11-245.  ATTIRE AND PHYSICAL HYGIENE REQUIREMENTS.



   The following attire and physical hygiene requirements shall be
applicable to all permittees, massage practitioners, and massage therapists
who are employed or retained by or who provide massage therapy at a massage
business or establishment described in Cal. Business and Professions Code,
Section 4612,  subdivision (b), paragraph (1) or at a massage business or
establishment owned and/or operated by a permittee:



   (A)   All persons shall be clean and wear clean and sanitary outer
garments at all times. All outer garments shall be of a fully opaque,
nontransparent material and provide complete covering from at least the mid
thigh to two inches below the collarbone. The midriff may not be exposed.



   (B)   All persons shall thoroughly wash their hands with soap and
water or any equally effective cleansing agent immediately before providing
massage therapy to a customer. No massage therapy shall be provided upon a
surface of the skin or scalp of a customer where such skin is inflamed,
broken (i.e. abraded, cut), or where a skin infection or eruption is present.



   (C)   No person afflicted with an infection or parasitic infection
capable of being transmitted to a customer shall knowingly provide massage
therapy to a customer or remain at a massage business or establishment while
so infected or infested.



(Ord. No. 2811)



SEC. 11-246.  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   All massage businesses and establishments described in Cal.
Business and Professions Code, Section 4612, subdivision (b), paragraph (1)
and all massage businesses and establishments owned and/or operated by
permittees shall permit representatives of the health department, police
department, fire department, license collector, and/or other city or county
departments or agencies to conduct reasonable inspections of the massage
business or establishment, from time to time, during regular business hours,
to ensure compliance with state and local laws, including but not limited to
Cal. Business and Professions Code, Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section
4600) where applicable, the requirements of this article, and/or other
applicable fire, health, and safety requirements. 



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the above
described government officials from pursuing any and all available legal
remedies to secure entry into and inspection of the business or establishment
if such entry is refused or for any other reason allowed by law.



   (C)   It is a violation of this article for the business or
establishment to prohibit or interfere with such lawful inspection of the
business or establishment at any time it is open for business.



(Ord. No. 2811, 2823, 2851)



SEC. 11-247.  OWNER AND/OR OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITY.



   The permittee of any massage business or establishment shall be
responsible for the conduct of all employees, agents, independent
contractors, or other representatives of the business or establishment while
such persons are on the premises of the business or establishment.



(Ord. No. 2811, 2851)



SEC. 11-248.  PERSONS USING ALCOHOL OR DRUGS PROHIBITED.



   A person shall not enter, be or remain in any part of a massage
business or establishment owned and/or operated by a permittee while in the
possession of, consuming, or using any alcoholic beverage or drug.  The
permittee and/or manager shall not permit any such person to enter or remain
upon such premises.



(Ord. No. 2823)



ARTICLE X.  POOL HALLS



SEC. 11-250.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   POOL - Any of several games, including billiards, played on a
table with cushioned edges using one or more balls, a cue ball, and a cue
stick.



   (B)   POOL HALL - A commercial establishment that contains three or
more pool tables and that charges a fee to enter the establishment or to play
pool.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-5.1)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-251.  POOL HALL PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.



   No person is required to obtain a pool hall permit in order to operate
a pool hall.  This section does not exempt a person who operates a pool hall
from compliance with any other requirements, including the requirement for
another permit, certificate or clearance, imposed by the code or by any
ordinance, statute, rule or regulation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-5.2)  (Ord. No. 2386, 2838)



SEC. 11-252.  CONDITIONS.



   Persons operating pool halls shall provide adequate supervision of
persons in the pool hall; shall not permit persons under the age of 18 to
loiter in or around the pool hall; and shall not permit gambling to occur in
the pool hall.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-5.3)  (Ord. No. 2386)



SEC. 11-253.  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Every pool hall shall remain closed between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of
every day.



(`64 Code, Sec. 12-5.4)  (Ord. No. 2386)



ARTICLE XI.  TAXICABS



SEC. 11-260.  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this article is to protect the public health,
safety and welfare in regard to taxicab transportation service.



   (B)   The purpose of this article is to regulate taxicabs and other
vehicles for hire with the objective of modernizing the regulation of taxicab
transportation services. The requirements set forth in this article are
intended to protect the public's health, safety, and welfare by ensuring that
taxicabs and other vehicles for hire charge reasonable rates, are adequately
insured, provide safe vehicles for transport of the general public, and
employ persons that do not pose a threat to passengers, pedestrians, or other
drivers.



(`64 Code, Sec. 30-1)  (Ord. No. 2468, 2954)



SEC. 11-261.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION - A written statement from an
automotive repair establishment registered with the State Department of
Consumer Affairs, dated no more than 15 days before the date the application
is submitted to the license collector, that a certain vehicle, including its
brakes and lights, was thoroughly inspected and either found to be in good
operating condition or repaired to be in good operating condition.



   (B)   COUNTY - County of Ventura.



   (C)   DRIVE A TAXICAB - To drive a taxicab that picks up passengers
within the city, but not including driving a taxicab that only discharges
within the city passengers picked up outside the city or that travels through
the city without picking up or discharging passengers, if the taxicab
operator's principal place of business is not within the city.



   (D)   LICENSE COLLECTOR - The city's treasurer or designee.



   (E)   POLICE CHIEF - The department director of the Oxnard Police
Department and the head officer.



   (F)   PREARRANGED TRIP - A trip using an online enabled application,
dispatch, or internet website.



   (G)   SUBSTANTIALLY LOCATED - A taxicab operator meets either of the
following:



      (1)   Has its primary business address within the city. A new
taxicab operator or taxicab driver shall use this method of determination
only for its first year of operation and may use either test for subsequent
years; or



      (2)   The total number of prearranged and non-prearranged
trips that originate in the city account for the largest share of taxicab
operator's total number of trips within the county over the past fiscal year
as determined annually.



   (H)   TAXICAB - A motor driven vehicle designed for carrying not
more than eight persons, not including the driver, having a meter that
calculates amounts due from passengers, and used to carry passengers for hire.



   (I)   TAXICAB BUSINESS - The business of providing taxicab
transportation services.



   (J)   TAXICAB DRIVER - A person who drives a taxicab, whether as an
employee, an independent contractor, or a self-employed person.



   (K)   TAXICAB OPERATOR - A person or entity that employs a taxicab
driver to drive a taxicab, whether as an independent contractor or as an
employee. A taxicab operator shall include a taxicab driver if a taxicab
operator consists of only one driver.



   (L)   TRIP DATA DOCUMENTATION - Documentation as determined by the
license collector that substantiates that the total number of prearranged and
non-prearranged trips that originate within the city account for the largest
share of the taxicab operator's total number of trips in the county over the
previous fiscal year.



(`64 Code, Sec. 30-2)  (Ord. No. 2468, 2804, 2954)



SEC. 11-262.  TAXICAB PERMITS REQUIRED; FEES.



   (A)   No person shall drive a taxicab that is substantially located
in the city without first obtaining a valid taxicab driver permit pursuant to
this article.



   (B)   No person shall be a taxicab operator that is substantially
located in the city without first obtaining a valid taxicab operator permit
pursuant to this article.



   (C)   No person shall both drive a taxicab that is substantially
located in the city and employ another person to drive a taxicab that is
substantially located in the city without first obtaining a valid taxicab
driver permit and a valid taxicab operator permit pursuant to this article.



   (D)   A taxicab operator that is not substantially located in the
city shall possess a permit from the county or at least one city within the
county.



   (E)   A taxicab driver that is not substantially located in the city
shall possess a permit from the county or at least one city within the county.



   (F)   A taxicab operator who is also a taxicab driver that is not
substantially located in the city shall possess an applicable permit from the
county or at least one city within the county.



   (G)   Fees for such permits shall be established by resolution of
the city council.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful to operate a taxicab that is
substantially located in the city without a valid, city-issued permit. The
city may impose a penalty for violation pursuant to subsection 11-22(A).



   (I)   A taxicab operator shall notify the city no less than six
months prior to changing its substantial location from another jurisdiction
to the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 30-3)  (Ord. No. 2468, 2954)



SEC. 11-263.  APPLICATION FOR TAXICAB PERMIT.



   (A)   The applicant for a taxicab driver permit or a taxicab
operator permit shall submit to the license collector a completed application
form obtained from the license collector, together with fees for the permit,
and such licenses, certificates, documents, and other material as is required
by the application form or the license collector, including an application
form and fees for a business tax certificate if applicable. The applicant for
a taxicab driver permit shall also submit a fee for a fingerprint report from
the State Department of Justice.



   (B)   The application form for a taxicab driver permit shall require
the following information, licenses, certificates, documents, and such other
material as the license collector deems necessary:



      (1)   A letter from a prospective employer offering employment
to the applicant as a taxicab driver substantially located in the city,
whether as an independent contractor or as an employee; or a letter from an
employer stating that the applicant is employed as a taxicab driver
substantially located in the city, whether as an independent contractor or as
an employee; or a written statement from the applicant that he/she wishes to
be a self-employed taxicab driver substantially located in the city, not
employed by another person, whether as an independent contractor or as an
employee;



      (2)   Proof of compliance with the requirements of the city's
mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program;



      (3)   Proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;



      (4)   The applicant's name, residence, phone number, and
business address, and if the applicant is self-employed, the name and address
of the taxicab business for which the applicant drives;



      (5)   A document issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles,
dated no more than ten days before the application is submitted, showing that
the applicant holds a valid, current California driver's license;



      (6)   If the applicant is self-employed, the make, type,
vehicle identification number, and license number of each taxicab owned or
leased by the applicant, the address from which the taxicabs will be
operated, and a certificate of inspection for each such taxicab;



      (7)   The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram, or
insignia by which each taxicab will be marked; and



      (8)   If the applicant is self-employed, proof of insurance
required by subsections (F) and (G) of section 11-268.



   (C)   An application form for a taxicab operator permit shall
require the following information and such other material as the license
collector deems necessary:



      (1)   The applicant's name, residence, and business addresses;



      (2)   The name of each owner of the taxicab business,
including the owners, partners, or officers of a firm, partnership,
corporation, or other entity, and their residence and business addresses;



      (3)   The name and address of the taxicab business;



      (4)   The make, type, vehicle identification number, and
license number of each taxicab owned or leased by the taxicab business, and a
certificate of inspection for each such taxicab;



      (5)   The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram, or
insignia by which each taxicab will be marked;



      (6)   The name and address of each taxicab driver employed by
the taxicab operator, whether as an independent contractor or as an employee;



      (7)   The address from which the taxicabs will be operated;



      (8)   Proof of the insurance required by subsections (F) and
(G) of section 11-268;



      (9)   Trip data documentation. For a new taxicab operator, a
primary business address in the city shall satisfy the trip data
documentation requirement. A taxicab operator shall begin collection of trip
data during its first year of operation; and



      (10)   Registration of rates of fare to be charged.



(`64 Code, Sec. 30-4)  (Ord. No. 2468, 2838, 2954)



SEC. 11-264.  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE AND ALCOHOL TESTING PROGRAM.



   As a condition of permit issuance and renewal, taxicab drivers shall
test negative for controlled substances and for alcohol. Procedures,
standards, and regulations concerning such testing shall be adopted by
resolution of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 30-5)  (Ord. No. 2468, 2954)



SEC. 11-265.  GRANT OR DENIAL OF TAXICAB APPLICATION.



   (A)   The license collector shall refer to the police chief a
completed application for a taxicab driver permit or a taxicab operator
permit.



   (B)   The police chief shall take a photograph and obtain the
fingerprints of the applicant for a taxicab driver permit and shall send the
fingerprints to the State Department of Justice for a report.



   (C)   After receipt of a report from the Department of Justice, the
police chief shall direct the license collector to grant or deny the
application for a taxicab driver permit. The police chief shall direct the
license collector to deny the application on any of the following grounds:



      (1)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;



      (2)   The applicant does not hold a valid, current California
driver's license;



      (3)   The applicant did not submit one or more of the items
required by the application form;



      (4)   The applicant did not test negative for controlled
substances and alcohol, as required by the city's controlled substance and
alcohol testing program;



      (5)   Within seven years of the date the application was
filed, the applicant was convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol
or drugs or of reckless driving; and/or



      (6)   Within seven years of the date the application was
filed, the applicant was convicted of any of the following crimes, or of an
attempt or conspiracy to commit any of the following crimes, as defined in
the California Penal Code, and such conviction indicates that the applicant
may pose a danger to the public if granted a taxicab driver permit: murder,
mayhem, kidnapping, robbery, assault with intent to commit a felony, assault,
battery, rape, arson, burglary, possession of burglarious instruments or
deadly weapons, or any crime for which the applicant is required to register
as a sex offender pursuant to Cal. Penal Code, Section 290.



(`64 Code, Sec. 30-6)  (Ord. No. 2468, 2493, 2954)



SEC. 11-266.  NOTICE TO APPLICANT.



   (A)   The license collector shall give written notice to the
applicant for a taxicab driver permit or a taxicab operator permit that the
application is granted or denied. If the application is granted, the license
collector shall enclose with such notice a taxicab driver permit or a taxicab
operator permit issued to the applicant.



   (B)   A taxicab driver permit shall include the name of the
permittee, the name of the employer, a statement that the permit is subject
to the conditions imposed by section 11-269, and the requirement that the
permittee return the permit to the license collector upon termination of the
permittee's employment. A photograph of the applicant shall be attached to
the permit.



   (C)   A taxicab operator permit shall include the name of the
permittee and a statement that the permit is subject to the conditions
imposed by section 11-268.



   (D)   If the application is denied, the license collector shall
include in such notice a statement of the grounds on which the application is
denied.



(`64 Code, Sec. 30-7)  (Ord. No. 2468, 2954)



SEC. 11-267.  REQUEST FOR HEARING BY APPLICANT.



   (A)   (1)   The applicant for a taxicab driver permit or a
taxicab operator permit may request a hearing if the applicant receives
written notice that the application is denied.



      (2)   The request for hearing must be received by the license
collector within 14 days after the license collector mailed the notice of
denial to the applicant.



   (B)   An applicant's request for hearing shall be in writing, shall
attach a copy of the notice of denial, and shall state the reasons that the
applicant alleges the notice to be incorrect.



   (C)   An applicant's request for hearing shall be accompanied by the
hearing fee set by resolution of the city council.



   (D)   Procedures to set and hold the hearing, issue the decision and
seek judicial review of the decision shall be as set out in sections 11-150
through 11-153 of this code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 30-8)  (Ord. No. 2468, 2954)



SEC. 11-268.  CONDITIONS OF TAXICAB OPERATOR PERMIT.



   Every person or entity issued a taxicab operator permit shall:



   (A)   Display on the exterior of each taxicab the name or trademark
of the person under whose authority the taxicab is being operated or the name
of the lessor or lessee thereof;



   (B)   Display in the interior of each taxicab the sign required by
Cal. Vehicle Code, Section 27908;



   (C)   Display the schedule of rates and charges in a conspicuous
place in each taxicab. visible to all passengers, together with the name,
business address, and telephone number of the taxicab operator;



   (D)   Calculate taxicab fares on an accurate meter approved and
inspected by the county weights and measures officer;



   (E)   Collect from taxicab passengers only the amounts displayed on
the schedule of rates and charges, plus any tip that the passenger offers;



   (F)   Obtain for each taxicab and keep in force during the term of
the permit, public liability and bodily injury insurance, issued by a
California admitted insurance carrier or an insurance carrier with an A.M.
Best rating of A-VII or better. The insurance policy shall be endorsed to
state that coverage may not be suspended, voided, canceled, or reduced in
coverage or limits without 15 days' prior written notice to the license
collector. The insurance policy shall insure the operator and shall name the
city as an additional insured of such taxicab against loss by reason of
injury or damage that may result to persons or property from the negligent
operation or defective construction of such taxicab, or from violation of
this article or of any other law of the state or the United States. The
insurance policy shall be in the sum of not less than $500,000 combined
single limit for personal injury and property damage for each taxicab in any
one accident. The risk manager may authorize the license collector to accept
insurance that does not meet the foregoing criteria or require insurance that
exceeds the foregoing criteria if the risk manager determines that such
insurance will provide adequate protection, based on, but not limited to,
factors such as whether the applicant belongs to a risk retention group
satisfactory to the risk manager; whether the applicant's operating risks are
less than or more than standard risks; and whether the required insurance is
reasonably available to a qualified applicant;



   (G)   Obtain and keep in force during the term of the permit,
workers' compensation insurance covering all employees of the permittee;



   (H)   Maintain each taxicab in good repair and in a clean and
sanitary condition;



   (I)   Notify the license collector immediately when any vehicle not
described in the application for the permit is placed in service as a taxicab
and submit the information about the vehicle and the certificate of
inspection required by the application form;



   (J)   Notify the license collector immediately on termination of a
taxicab driver's employment;



   (K)   Require that each taxicab driver have a valid California
driver's license and a valid city taxicab driver permit;



   (L)   Comply with any other reasonable conditions imposed by the
license collector or the police chief;



   (M)   A taxicab operator shall participate in the pull-notice
program pursuant to Cal. Vehicle Code, Section 1808.1 to regularly check the
driving records of all taxicab drivers;



   (N)   A taxicab operator shall maintain a safety education and
training program in effect for all taxicab drivers, whether employees or
independent contractors; and



   (O)   A taxicab operator shall maintain a disabled access education
and training program to instruct its taxicab drivers on compliance with the
federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, and amendments thereto, and
state disability rights laws, including making clear that it is illegal to
decline to serve a person with a disability or who has a service animal.



(`64 Code, Sec. 30-9)  (Ord. No. 2468, 2628, 2954)



SEC. 11-269.  CONDITIONS OF TAXICAB DRIVER PERMIT.



   Every person to whom a taxicab driver permit is issued shall:



   (A)   Display the permit in the taxicab in a place conspicuous from
the passenger area;



   (B)   If the taxicab driver is self-employed, comply with all the
conditions of a taxicab operator's permit set forth in subsections (A)
through (F), (H), and (I) of section 11-268;



   (C)   Return the permit to the license collector immediately on
termination of employment or self-employment as a taxicab driver; and



   (D)   Comply with any other reasonable condition imposed by the
license collector or the police chief.



(`64 Code, Sec. 30-10)  (Ord. No. 2468, 2954)



SEC. 11-270.  ANNUAL PERMIT RENEWAL.



   (A)   Taxicab driver permits and taxicab operator permits shall
continue in effect for the remainder of the fiscal year in which they are
issued, unless revoked or modified as provided in section 11-271; provided,
however, that taxicab driver permits shall automatically become void on
termination of employment or self-employment as a taxicab driver. A taxicab
driver permit or taxicab operator permit issued in the last quarter of a
fiscal year shall continue in effect for the remainder of the fiscal year in
which it is issued, and for the next fiscal year, subject to the foregoing
provisions regarding revocation, modification, and automatically becoming
void.



   (B)   Permittees shall submit to the license collector applications
to renew taxicab driver permits and operator's permits for following fiscal
years, together with fees for the renewal and any changes in the information
provided in the initial application or a previous renewal application;
evidence that required insurance will be in effect for the new fiscal year;
and a new certificate of vehicle inspection for each taxicab. In addition, an
applicant for renewal of a taxicab driver permit shall submit proof of a
negative test for controlled substances and alcohol as required by the city's
controlled substance and alcohol testing program, have a new photograph taken
by the police chief, and provide a document issued by the Department of Motor
Vehicles, dated no more than ten days before the application is submitted,
showing that the applicant holds a valid, current California driver's license.



   (C)   The license collector shall refer to the police chief
completed applications for renewal of taxicab driver permits and taxicab
operator permits. The police chief and the license collector shall process,
grant, and deny the applications for renewal as provided in sections 11-265
and 11-266. An applicant for renewal whose application is denied may request
a hearing as provided in section 11-267. Conditions on renewal permits shall
be as provided in sections 11-268 and 11-269.



   (D)   Applications for renewal of taxicab permits and taxicab
operator permits should be submitted by June 15 of each year to allow
sufficient time for processing before the current permit expires on June 30.



(`64 Code, Sec. 30-11)  (Ord. No. 2468, 2954)



SEC. 11-271.  REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR MODIFICATION OF TAXICAB PERMIT.



   (A)   A taxicab operator permit or a taxicab driver permit may be
revoked or suspended, or additional conditions imposed thereon, for failure
of the permittee to comply with applicable laws, regulations, and conditions,
based on matters occurring after the permit is issued or on matters not
considered at the time of issuance of the permit, that would have authorized
denial of the permit or the imposition of conditions on the permit.



   (B)   The police chief may file with the license collector a written
request for revocation, suspension, or modification of a taxicab operator
permit or a taxicab driver permit, stating facts showing that the permittee
has not complied with applicable laws, regulations, or permit conditions and
recommending that the permit be revoked or suspended or in what respect the
permit should be conditioned.



   (C)   On receiving the request, the license collector shall mail to
the permittee a notice that the permit is recommended for revocation,
suspension, or conditioning in a specific manner and stating the reasons for
that recommendation. The notice shall inform the permittee that the
recommendation will be adopted and the permittee will be deemed to concur
with the recommendation if the permittee does not make a written request for
a hearing in the manner provided in subsection (D) of this section.



   (D)   On receiving the notice, the permittee may make a written
request for a hearing. The request must be received by the license collector
within 14 days after the license collector mailed the notice of recommended
revocation, suspension, or conditioning to the permittee and shall be
accompanied by the hearing fee set by resolution of the city council. The
request for hearing shall state the reasons that the permittee alleges the
notice of recommended revocation, suspension, or conditioning to be incorrect.



   (E)   The procedures for holding a hearing, rendering a decision,
and seeking judicial review of the decision shall be as provided in
subsections (H) through (N) of section 11-154 of the code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 30-12)  (Ord. No. 2468, 2493, 2954)



ARTICLE XII.  JOLLY JUMPS



SEC. 11-280.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to regulate the placement and use of
jolly jumps in public parks so that the public peace and quiet is preserved.



(Ord. No. 2543)



SEC. 11-281.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   JOLLY JUMP - Inflatable recreational equipment containing
landing surfaces on which users may jump or bounce, which equipment is
intended for outdoor use.



   (B)   CITY STAFF - Persons employed in the parks and facilities
division of the public works department.



(Ord. No. 2543)



SEC. 11-282.  PERMIT REQUIRED; PENALTIES.



   (A)   No person shall place a jolly jump on public property,
including city parks, before obtaining a permit for such placement and use
from city staff.



   (B)   Any person placing a jolly jump on public property, including
city parks, without a permit shall, upon request by city staff or employees
of the city's code enforcement program, immediately remove the jolly jump. 
Such person shall also be subject to a warning and/or a fine of $100 for the
first offense; a fine of $100 for a second offense; a fine of $200 for a
third offense; and a fine of $500 for a fourth offense and any additional
offenses.



(Ord. No. 2543)



SEC. 11-283.  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   City staff shall prepare an application form for use by any
person wishing to apply for a permit to place a jolly jump in a city park. 
The application form shall require the applicant to provide proof that the
applicant has a current business tax certificate issued by the city for a
business that includes providing jolly jumps and that the applicant has the
insurance coverage required by city insurance form INS-M.  The application
form shall also require additional information to identify the applicant.



   (B)   Applications shall be filed at least five working days before
the date for which the jolly jump permit is applied.



   (C)   Each application shall be for one occasion on one day in one
park.



   (D)   City staff shall not process the application until the
applicant completes the application form, provides all required information
and proof of a business tax certificate and insurance, and pays a security
deposit and the jolly jump permit fee.  The amount of the security deposit
and the permit fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.



(Ord. No. 2543, 2838)



SEC. 11-284.  PERMIT CONDITIONS.



   Jolly jump permits shall be issued subject to the following conditions,
and any additional conditions necessary, in the opinion of city staff, to
enhance the safety of jolly jumps and preservation of the public peace and
quiet:



   (A)   Jolly jumps may be no larger than 17 feet by 17 feet.



   (B)   Jolly jumps shall not include water slides, slip-n-slides or
dunking cages.



   (C)   Jolly jumps shall not be set up on basketball courts,
volleyball courts or tennis courts, or certain other locations in the park
for which the permit is issued, as shown on a map of the park provided by
city staff to the permittee.



   (D)   The generator used in connection with a jolly jump shall not
exceed the applicable sound level set by chapter 7, article XI of the code.



   (E)   No person may take a vehicle onto city park turf in order to
load, unload, set up or take down a jolly jump.



   (F)   The permittee shall not place a jolly jump in a city park
earlier than 8 a.m. on the day for which the permit is issued.  The
permittee shall remove the jolly jump from the park no later than sunset on
the day for which the permit is issued.



(Ord. No. 2543)



SEC. 11-285.  PARKS AVAILABLE FOR JOLLY JUMPS; DAILY LIMIT.



   (A)   Jolly jump permits may be issued only for those city parks
designated by city staff.



   (B)   City staff shall determine how many jolly jump permits may be
issued per day for each park so designated; provided, however, that on any
given day, two is the maximum number of jolly jump permits that city staff
may issue for any neighborhood park so designated, and three is the maximum
number of jolly jump permits that city staff may issue for any community park
so designated.



(Ord. No. 2543)



ARTICLE XIII. CERTIFIED UNIFIED PROGRAM AGENCY



DIVISION 1. UNIFIED PROGRAM GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 11-300.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to implement the unified hazardous waste
and hazardous materials management regulatory program and to provide for fees
to defray the costs to the city of administering and implementing such
program in its capacity as a certified unified program agency ("CUPA").



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-301.  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions contained in Cal. Health and Safety Code Division 20,
Chapters 6.11, 6.67, 6.7. and 6.95, and the definitions contained in Cal.
Health and Safety Code Division 20, Chapter 6.5, Article 2 shall apply to
this article.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-302.  IMPLEMENTATION OF THE UNIFIED PROGRAM.



   (A)   The CUPA shall implement the unified program within the CUPA
jurisdiction. Except as so provided, the CUPA shall implement the Hazardous
Materials Business Plan, the California Accidental Release Prevention
Program, the Underground Storage Tank Program, the Aboveground Petroleum
Storage Act Requirements for Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasure
Plans, and the Hazardous Waste Generator and Onsite Hazardous Waste Treatment
Programs. The CUPA and the unified program manager may coordinate unified
program activities with all state and local agencies and officials.



   (B)   Any annual fee, permit fee, renewal fee, late fee, processing
fee or any other fee, surcharge or penalty required to be paid by this
article shall be established and authorized in a schedule of fees adopted by
resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-303.  UNIFIED PROGRAM FACILITY PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A unified program element, as set forth in section 11-302, shall not be
operated without a valid Unified Program Facility Permit ("UPFP") issued by
the CUPA.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-304.  SCOPE OF UNIFIED PROGRAM FACILITY PERMIT.



   (A)   The UPFP shall identify the specific activity licensed, the
specific location or locations in the CUPA jurisdiction where such activity
may be conducted or operated, and the person or persons to whom the UPFP is
issued.



   (B)   The UPFP shall be valid only for the identified activities
conducted or operated at the identified locations in the CUPA jurisdiction
and only by the person or persons identified in the UPFP.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-305.  UNIFIED PROGRAM FACILITY PERMIT FEES.



   The owner or operator of a facility which is required to have a UPFP
shall, at the time of application or renewal, pay an annual fee for such
permit.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-306.  TERMS OF UNIFIED PROGRAM FACILITY PERMIT.



   A UPFP is valid on July 1 and expires on June 30 of the following year.
A UPFP shall be renewed annually on or before August 1 of the year in which
the permit expires. A permittee's failure to pay the annual fee shall
automatically revoke the permit to operate.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-307.  LATE PAYMENT SURCHARGES.



   (A)   If a permittee fails to pay the fee within 30 calendar days
after the due date, the city shall add a late payment surcharge to the base
fee.



   (B)   If the city issues a delinquent notice, the city shall assess
a late fee charge for each month the delinquency amount is not paid.



   (C)   The imposition or payment of the fees imposed by this section
shall not prevent the imposition of any other fees prescribed by this Code.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-308.  ONE-TIME PROCESSING FEE.



   The city shall collect a processing fee to reimburse the CUPA for the
costs of administrating and implementing the unified hazardous waste and
hazardous materials management regulatory program. The permittee shall pay
the fee with the submittal of the first business plan for the permitted
facility.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-309.  DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF UNIFIED PROGRAM FACILITY
PERMIT OR PERMIT ELEMENT.



   (A)   The CUPA coordinator or his or her designee may deny, suspend,
or revoke a UPFP or a permit element if a complaint or investigation, reveals
that a permittee, a permittee's employee, or any person acting with the
permittee's consent or under the permittee's authority, has or may have
violated any provision of this article or any requirement established by law.



   (B)   Suspension or revocation of a permit shall not affect the
CUPA's authority to institute or continue a disciplinary proceeding against a
permittee upon any ground or otherwise take an action against a permittee on
these grounds.



(Ord. No. 2775)



DIVISION 2. HAZARDOUS WASTE CONTROL



SEC. 11-315.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this division is to establish a system of permitting
business activities that generate hazardous waste, to provide for fees to
defray the costs to the CUPA of issuing such permits, and to enforce minimum
standards and regulations concerning such waste.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-316.  HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Any activity that produces hazardous waste is prohibited unless:



   (A)   Such activity is one for which the State of California
requires a hazardous waste facility permit ("HWFP"); or



   (B)   Such activity is one for which a current UPFP has been issued
by the CUPA.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-317.  HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY PERMIT FEES.



   The owner or operator of a facility which is required to have a HWFP
shall pay an annual fee for such permit.  The fee shall be due and payable
upon demand by the city.



(Ord. No. 2775)



DIVISION 3. HAZARDOUS WASTE ON-SITE TREATMENT



SEC. 11-325.  HAZARDOUS WASTE ON-SITE TREATMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.



   One or more of the following permits are required for hazardous waste
on-site treatment:



   (A)   Permit-by-rule;



   (B)   Conditional authorization; or



   (C)   Conditional exemption.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-326.  HAZARDOUS WASTE ON-SITE TREATMENT PERMIT FEES.



   The owner or operator of a facility which is required to have a
hazardous waste on-site treatment permit (HWO-STP) shall pay an annual fee
for such permit. The fee shall be due and payable upon demand by the city.



(Ord. No. 2775)



DIVISION 4. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RELEASE RESPONSE PLANS AND INVENTORY



SEC. 11-335.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this division is to establish reporting, disclosure and
monitoring requirements for the release and inventory of hazardous materials
and to defray the costs to the CUPA of such monitoring.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-336.  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS BUSINESS PLAN FEES.



   The owner or operator of a facility which is required to submit a
hazardous materials business plan ("HMBP") shall pay an initial fee when such
plan is submitted and an annual fee thereafter. The annual fee shall be due
and payable upon demand by the city.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-337.  REPORTING OF CARBON DIOXIDE COMPRESSED GAS.



   Any business where carbon dioxide is stored in an amount greater than
or equal to 200 cubic feet or greater than or equal to 22.3 pounds shall file
a HMBP as required by state law.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-338.  COMPRESSED GAS CYLINDER EXEMPTION.



   Compressed gas cylinders and tanks containing the following hazardous
materials for the following purposes and stored in the following quantities
are exempt from the inventory provisions of the HMBP if an inventory and
processing fee are submitted to the CUPA with the first HMBP for the facility:



   (A)   Non-refrigerated or non-cryogenic helium compressed gas of not
more than 400 cubic feet at standard temperature and pressure for the purpose
of filling party balloons; or



   (B)   Non-refrigerated or non-cryogenic carbon dioxide compressed
gas of not more than 873 cubic feet or not more than 100 pounds at standard
temperature and pressure for carbonation of beverages.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-339.  COMPRESSED AIR AND OXYGEN EXEMPTION.



   Compressed air and oxygen in cylinders, bottles, and tanks used by fire
departments and other government emergency response agencies for the purposes
of emergency response and safety are exempt from the inventory provisions of
the HMBP.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-340.  RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN FEES.



   The owner or operator of a facility which is required to submit a risk
management plan shall pay an initial fee when such plan is submitted and an
annual fee thereafter. The annual fee shall be due and payable upon demand by
the city.



(Ord. No. 2775)



DIVISION 5. UNDERGROUND STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES



SEC. 11-345.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this division is to prevent and control the unauthorized
discharge of hazardous substances stored underground and to provide for fees
to defray the costs to the CUPA of enforcing this division.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-346.  UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK PERMIT FEES.



   The owner or operator of a facility that operates an underground
storage tank shall pay an annual fee for an underground storage tank permit
("USTP").  The fee shall be due and payable upon demand by the city.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-347.  RE-INSPECTION FEE.



   A re-inspection fee shall be paid prior to the re-inspection of an
underground storage tank in the following instances:



   (A)   If the USTP is denied for failure to pay appropriate fees;



   (B)   If the underground storage tank fails to comply with
requirements set forth in this Code or by state law; or



   (C)   If an inspection or re-inspection is cancelled by the owner or
operator of the facility or tank to be inspected less than 24 hours prior to
the scheduled inspection.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-348.  INSTALLATION, REPAIR, REPLACEMENT, MODIFICATION, OR CLOSURE
PERMIT REQUIRED.



   An underground storage tank or its components shall not be installed,
repaired, replaced, modified, or closed unless an installation, repair,
replacement, modification, or closure permit is issued to the owner or
operator of the underground storage tank.



(Ord. No. 2775)



DIVISION 6. ABOVEGROUND STORAGE OF PETROLEUM



SEC. 11-355.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this division is to establish a permitting system for
facilities where petroleum is stored aboveground and to provide for fees to
defray the costs to the CUPA to issue such permits.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-356.  ABOVEGROUND STORAGE TANK PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Petroleum shall not be stored in an aboveground storage tank unless an
aboveground storage tank permit ("ASTP") is issued to the owner or operator.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-357.  ABOVEGROUND STORAGE TANK FEES.



   The owner or operator of a facility that operates an aboveground
storage tank shall pay an annual fee for an ASTP. The fee shall be due and
payable upon demand by the city.



(Ord. No. 2775)



SEC. 11-358.  ABOVEGROUND STORAGE TANK CLOSURE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   An aboveground storage tank shall not be demolished, removed, or closed
unless an aboveground storage tank closure permit ("ASTCP") is issued to the
owner or operator.



(Ord. No. 2775)



ARTICLE XIV.  TOBACCO RETAILERS



SEC. 11-370.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   ARM'S LENGTH TRANSACTION - A sale in good faith and for
valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market
between two informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any
compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives,
related companies or partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is
avoiding the effect of the violations of the article is not an arm's length
transaction.



   (B)   COLLECTOR - The city treasurer or designee.



   (C)   PERSON - Any natural person, partnership, cooperative
association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee,
assignee, or any other legal entity.



   (D)   PROPRIETOR - A person with an ownership or managerial interest
in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person
has a 10% or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business
other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest
shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share ultimate
control over the day-to-day operations of a business.



   (E)   SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY - The open display or storage of tobacco
products or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible
in any way to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or
employee of the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the
purchaser and the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is
a form of self-service display.



   (F)   SMOKING - Possessing a lighted tobacco product, lighted
tobacco paraphernalia, or any other lighted weed or plant (including a
lighted pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind) and the lighting
of a tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or any other weed or plant
(including a pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind).



   (G)   TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA - Cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes,
holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and
any other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption
of tobacco products.



   (H)   TOBACCO PRODUCT - Any substance containing tobacco leaf,
including but not limited to cigarettes, e-cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco,
hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis, or any
other preparation of tobacco; and any product or formulation of matter
containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured,
sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that
the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not
include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food
and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence.



   (I)   TOBACCO RETAILER - Any person who sells, offers for sale, or
does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco paraphernalia.



   (J)   TOBACCO RETAILING - Selling, offering for sale, or exchanging
or offering to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco paraphernalia without regard to the quantity of tobacco,
tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged,
or offered for exchange.



(Ord. No. 2854)



SEC. 11-371.  TOBACCO RETAILER PERMIT REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.



   (A)   No person shall act as a tobacco retailer without first
obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer's permit pursuant to this
article for each location at which such activity is to occur.



   (B)   Each tobacco retailer permit shall be posted in a conspicuous
public location at the place of business for which the permit has been issued.



   (C)   A business tax certificate shall be obtained pursuant to
section 11-4 of this code before any permit is issued pursuant to this
section. The issuance of a permit shall not eliminate compliance with any
other requirements, including the requirement for another permit, certificate
or clearance, imposed by any other local, State, or federal rule, regulation,
or law.



(Ord. No. 2854)



SEC. 11-372.  TERM; FEES.



   (A)   A tobacco retailer permit shall be valid for 12 months from
the date of issuance or as indicated on the permit and shall specify the
location where tobacco retailing may be held.



   (B)   Fees for such permits shall be established by resolution of
the city council.



(Ord. No. 2854)



SEC. 11-373.  RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No person engaged in tobacco retailing shall sell or transfer
a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia to another person who appears to
be under the age of 27 years without first examining the identification of
the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under
state law to purchase and possess the tobacco product or tobacco
paraphernalia.



   (B)   No person who is younger than the minimum age established by
state law for the purchase or possession of tobacco products shall engage in
tobacco retailing.



   (C)   Tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display is
prohibited.



   (D)   A tobacco retailer or proprietor without a valid tobacco
retailer permit shall comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   All tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia shall be
kept out of public view.



      (2)   Advertisements relating to tobacco products or tobacco
paraphernalia that promote the sale or distribution of such products from the
tobacco retailer's location or that could lead a reasonable consumer to
believe that such products can be obtained at that location shall not be
displayed.



   (E)   Tobacco retailing at other than a fixed location is prohibited.



(Ord. No. 2854)



SEC. 11-374.  PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   An application for a tobacco retailer permit shall be
submitted on a form supplied by the collector, signed by each proprietor or
an authorized agent thereof, and shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name, title, address, and telephone number of each
proprietor of the business seeking a permit.



      (2)   The business name, address, and telephone number of the
single fixed location for which a permit is sought.



      (3)   A single name and mailing address authorized by each
proprietor to receive all communications and notices required by, authorized
by, or convenient to the enforcement of this article.



      (4)   Proof that the location for which a tobacco retailer
permit is sought has been issued a valid State tobacco retailer's license by
the California Board of Equalization, if applicable.



      (5)   The dates and locations of any admitted violations of
this article or of any tobacco permit requirement by any proprietor or any
agent of the proprietor and the dates and locations of any violations of this
article or of any tobacco permit requirement found to have been committed by
any proprietor or any agent of the proprietor within the previous five years.



      (6)   Such other information as the collector deems necessary
for the administration or enforcement of this article as specified on the
application form required by this section.



   (B)   A permitted tobacco retailer shall inform the collector in
writing of any change in the information submitted on an application for a
tobacco retailer permit within ten business days of such change.



(Ord. No. 2854)



SEC. 11-375.  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   Upon receipt of a completed application for a tobacco retailer permit
and the applicable permit fee, the collector shall issue a permit, after
receiving input from appropriate city departments, unless substantial
evidence demonstrates that one or more of the following bases for denial
exists:



   (A)   The information presented in the application is inaccurate or
false.



   (B)   The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a
location for which this article prohibits issuance of tobacco retailer
permits. This subsection shall not constitute a basis for denial of a permit
if the applicant provides to the collector documentation demonstrating by
clear and convincing evidence that the applicant has acquired or is acquiring
the location or business in an arm's length transaction.



   (C)   The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for
a proprietor to whom this article prohibits a permit to be issued.



   (D)   The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that
is prohibited pursuant to this article, that is unlawful pursuant to this
code, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other law.



(Ord. No. 2854)



SEC. 11-376.  PERMIT RENEWAL.



   (A)   An application for the renewal of a tobacco retailer permit
shall be submitted to the collector, along with the permit renewal fee as
established by resolution of the city council, no later than 30 days prior to
the expiration of the permit.



   (B)   A tobacco retailer permit that is not timely renewed shall
expire at the end of its term. To renew a permit not timely renewed pursuant
to subsection (A) of this section, the proprietor(s) must provide the
following:



      (1)   An application for a new tobacco retailer permit along
with the new application permit fee as established by resolution of the city
council; and



      (2)   A signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor has not
sold and will not sell any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia after the
permit expiration date and before a new permit is issued or has waited the
appropriate ineligibility period established for tobacco retailing without a
permit, as set forth in section 11-379 of this code, before seeking a new
permit.



(Ord. No. 2854)



SEC. 11-377.  PERMITS NONTRANSFERABLE.



   (A)   A tobacco retailer permit may not be transferred from one
person to another or from one location to another.



   (B)   A new tobacco retailer permit is required when a tobacco
retailing location has a change in proprietor.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, prior
violations at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and
permit ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless:



      (1)   The location has been fully transferred to a new
proprietor or fully transferred to entirely new proprietors; and



      (2)   The new proprietor or proprietors provide the collector
with clear and convincing evidence that the new proprietor or proprietors
have acquired or are acquiring the location in an arm's length transaction.



(Ord. No. 2854)



SEC. 11-378.  MODIFICATION, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco
retailer permit may be modified, suspended, or revoked by the collector,
after notice and an opportunity to be heard as set forth in article V of
chapter 1 of this code, for failure of the permittee, or any of the
permittee's agents or employees, to comply with applicable local, State, or
federal rules, regulations, or laws concerning tobacco retailing, based on
matters occurring after the permit is issued or on matters not considered at
the time of issuance of the permit that would have authorized denial of the
permit or the imposition of conditions on the permit.



   (B)   Any person, including a city officer or employee, may file
with the collector a written request for revocation, suspension, or
modification of a tobacco retailer permit, stating facts showing that the
permittee, or any of the permittee's agents or employees, failed to comply
with applicable rules, laws, regulations, or permit conditions.



   (C)   If the request is filed by a city officer or employee on
behalf of a city department, the request shall be accompanied by a written
report, stating wherein the permittee, or any of the permittee's agents or
employees, has not complied with applicable rules, laws, regulations, or
permit conditions and recommending that the tobacco retailer permit be
revoked, suspended, or in what respect the permit should be modified.



   (D)   After revocation, no new permit may issue for the same
location until the following time:



      (1)   Thirty days from the date of revocation for a first
violation at a location within any five year period.



      (2)   Sixty days from the date of revocation for a second
violation at a location within any five year period.



      (3)   Ninety days from the date of revocation for a third
violation at a location within any five year period.



      (4)   One year from the date of revocation for a fourth or any
subsequent violation at a location within any five year period.



   (E)   A tobacco retailer permit shall be revoked if the collector
finds, after the permittee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard
as set forth in article V of chapter 1 of this code, that one or more of the
bases for denial of a permit under section 11-375 of this code existed at the
time application was made or at any time before the permit issued. The
decision by the collector shall be final.



(Ord. No. 2854)



SEC. 11-379.  TOBACCO RETAILING WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if a court
of competent jurisdiction determines, or the collector finds based on a
preponderance of evidence, after notice and an opportunity to be heard as set
forth in article V of chapter 1 of this code, that any person has engaged in
tobacco retailing at a location without a valid tobacco retailer permit,
either directly or through the person's agents or employees, the person shall
be ineligible to apply for, or to be issued, a tobacco retailing permit as
follows:



      (1)   After a first violation of this section at a location
within any five year period, no new permit may issue for the person or the
location, unless ownership of the business at the location has been
transferred in an arm's length transaction, until 30 days have passed from
the date of the violation.



      (2)   After a second violation of this section at a location
within any five year period, no new permit may issue for the person or the
location, unless ownership of the business at the location has been
transferred in an arm's length transaction, until 90 days have passed from
the date of violation.



      (3)   After a third or subsequent violation of this section at
a location within any five year period, no new permit may issue for the
person or the location, unless ownership of the business at the location has
been transferred in an arm's length transaction, until one year has passed
from the date of the violation.



   (B)   Tobacco products and/or tobacco paraphernalia offered for sale
or exchange in violation of this section are subject to seizure by the
collector or any peace officer and shall be forfeited after the permittee and
any other owner of the tobacco products and/or tobacco paraphernalia seized
is given reasonable notice and an opportunity to demonstrate, as set forth in
article V of chapter 1 of this code, that the tobacco products and/or tobacco
paraphernalia were not offered for sale or exchange in violation of this
article. Forfeited tobacco products and/or tobacco paraphernalia shall be
destroyed after all internal appeals have been exhausted and the time in
which to seek judicial review pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure,
Section 1094.6 or other applicable law has expired without the filing of a
lawsuit, or if such a suit is final, after judgment in that suit becomes
final.



(Ord. No. 2854)



SEC. 11-380.  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The remedies provided by this article are cumulative and in
addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.



   (B)   Whenever evidence of a violation of this article is obtained
in any part through the participation of a person under the age of 18 years
old, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any
civil or administrative process brought to enforce this article and the
alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and
persuasiveness of the evidence presented.



   (C)   Violations of this article are hereby declared to be public
nuisances.



   (D)   In addition to other remedies provided by this article or by
other law, any violation of this article may be remedied by a civil action
brought by the city attorney, including, but not limited to, administrative
or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code
enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief.



(Ord. No. 2854)



ARTICLE XV.  MEDICAL CANNABIS DELIVERY



SEC. 11-390.  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   CANNABIS - All parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa Linnaeus,
Cannabis Indica, or Cannabis Ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds
thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the
plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the
separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis.
"Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced
from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or
the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the
purpose of this article, "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as
defined by Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 11018.5.



   (B)   COLLECTOR - The city manager or designee.



   (C)   DELIVERY DRIVER - Any person who drives or operates a delivery
vehicle for a delivery service by which medical cannabis is delivered.



   (D)   DELIVERY DRIVER PERMIT - A permit issued pursuant to this
article to a delivery driver who delivers medical cannabis and/or medical
cannabis product within the city from a licensed medical cannabis dispensary
that has a valid medical cannabis delivery permit.



   (E)   DELIVERY SERVICE - A person engaged in the business, whether
for profit or nonprofit, of owning, controlling and/or operating one or more
delivery vehicles which transport, carry, distribute, and/or deliver medical
cannabis anywhere in the city.



   (F)   DELIVERY VEHICLE - A motor vehicle, as that term is defined in
the California Vehicle Code, used for the transportation of medical cannabis.



   (G)   MEDICAL CANNABIS and MEDICAL CANNABIS PRODUCT - Cannabis or a
cannabis product intended to be sold for use pursuant to applicable state
regulations, including, but not limited, to Cal. Health and Safety Code
Section 11362.5, by a qualified patient.



   (H)   MEDICAL CANNABIS DELIVERY PERMIT and PERMIT - A permit issued
pursuant to this article authorizing a medical cannabis dispensary to deliver
medical cannabis and/or medical cannabis product within the city to a
qualified patient or primary caregiver.



   (I)   PERSON - Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business
trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a
unit, and the plural as well as the singular.



   (J)   PRIMARY CAREGIVER - This term shall have the same meaning as
set forth in Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 11362.7, as that section
now appears or may hereafter be amended or renumbered.



   (K)   QUALIFIED PATIENT - This term shall have the meaning set forth
in Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 11362.7, and also includes a person
with an identification card as defined in that section as it now appears or
may hereafter be amended or renumbered.



(Ord. No. 2937)



SEC. 11-391.  PERMITS REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.



   (A)   Deliveries of medical cannabis or medical cannabis product may
only occur within the city if all of the following conditions exist:



      (1)   The delivery originates from a licensed medical cannabis
dispensary that has a valid medical cannabis delivery permit issued by the
city;



      (2)   The delivery is conducted by a delivery driver who has a
valid delivery driver permit issued by the city; and



      (3)   The delivery is to a primary caregiver or qualified
patient.



   (B)   A business tax certificate shall be obtained pursuant to
section 11-4 of this code prior to issuance of a medical cannabis delivery
permit. The issuance of a permit shall not eliminate compliance with any
other requirements, including the requirement for another permit,
certificate, or clearance imposed by any other local, state, or federal rule,
regulation, or law.



   (C)   A medical cannabis delivery permit or delivery driver permit
issued under this article is non-transferrable.



   (D)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to allow a delivery
service to have a physical base of operation within the city.



(Ord. No. 2937)



SEC. 11-392.  PERMIT EXCEPTION.



   A qualified patient or primary caregiver engaged in the transportation
of medical cannabis for his or her own personal use is exempt from the
requirement of obtaining a medical cannabis delivery permit.



(Ord. No. 2937)



SEC. 11-393.  TERM; FEES.



   (A)   Every delivery service shall first apply to the collector for
a medical cannabis delivery permit and pay a permit application fee, an
annual renewal fee, and any associated incidental fees.



   (B)   Every proposed delivery driver shall first apply to the
collector for a delivery driver permit and pay a permit application fee, an
annual renewal fee, and any associated incidental fees.



   (C)   All permits issued to delivery services and delivery drivers
shall be valid for a term of one year.



   (D)   None of the fees established pursuant to this article may be
prorated or refunded by the city to an applicant.



   (E)   All fees applicable to this article shall be as established by
resolution of the city council.



(Ord. No. 2937)



SEC. 11-394.  APPLICATION FOR MEDICAL CANNABIS DELIVERY PERMIT AND RENEWAL.



   (A)   Every application for a medical cannabis delivery permit shall
be signed by the applicant and shall contain:



      (1)   Name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a
legal entity, such as a corporation, the application shall have names and
address for the business and shall have an "active" status with the Secretary
of State of California, if applicable. The application shall also identify
each person that owns 10% or more of the entity. Any applicant and recipient
of a medical cannabis delivery permit shall have an obligation to
continuously provide updated contact information.



      (2)   Valid driver's license(s) and driving record for all
delivery drivers, and current registration for any and all delivery
vehicle(s).



      (3)   The applicant shall present proof of their permit to
operate a medical cannabis dispensary from the city or county in which the
dispensary is located and shall present proof of required state license(s)
issued by the state licensing authority as defined in Cal. Business and
Professions Code, Section 26010, as that section now appears or may hereafter
be amended or renumbered.



      (4)   Whether the applicant has been cited or fined by any
other city or a county for a violation of that city's or county's municipal
code regulations concerning cannabis related uses or cannabis activities.



      (5)   All information required of applicants for a city
business tax certificate.



      (6)   Proof of liability insurance and approval of Risk
Management.



   (B)   All applicants shall submit to a background check as
determined by the police chief.



(Ord. No. 2937)



SEC. 11-395.  APPLICATION FOR DELIVERY DRIVER PERMIT AND RENEWAL.



   (A)   Every application for a delivery driver permit shall be signed
by the applicant and shall contain:



      (1)   Name and address of the applicant.



      (2)   Copy of a valid driver's license and driving record.



      (3)   Whether the applicant has any of the following:



         (a)   A felony conviction; any other conviction
involving theft, the manufacture, transportation, sale, or possession of a
controlled substance; or, within seven years prior to the application (or
renewal), any convictions involving driving under the influence of alcohol or
drugs.



         (b)   The requirement to register as a sex offender
under the provisions of Cal. Penal Code, Section 290; or has any convictions
involving elder abuse.



         (c)   Within three years immediately preceding the
application submittal date (or renewal), whether the applicant has been under
suspension, revocation, or probation by the California Department of Motor
Vehicles for a cause involving the safe operation of a motor vehicle, or has
been convicted of driving under the influence involving bodily injury or
reckless driving involving bodily injury.



         (d)   Within the past three years immediately preceding
the application submittal date (or renewal), whether the applicant has been
found responsible for a motor vehicle accident causing death or personal
injury.



         (e)   Within the past one year immediately preceding the
application submittal date (or renewal), whether the applicant has been
involved in three or more motor vehicle accidents unless evidence shows that
none of the accidents were caused by the applicant.



   (B)   All applicants shall submit to a background check as
determined by the police chief.



(Ord. No. 2937)



SEC. 11-396.  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION; DECISION AND NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   Each application shall be referred to the collector or
designated department in the city for review.



   (B)   The collector shall notify the applicant in writing of a
decision on an application. A decision on an application (or renewal) shall
be to issue a valid medical cannabis delivery service permit (or renewal) or
a valid delivery driver permit (or renewal) or deny the application and not
issue a permit.



   (C)   A decision for denial of an application shall include the
reasons therefor, and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal. No
permit shall be issued unless a successful appeal of the denial is made.



(Ord. No. 2937)



SEC. 11-397.  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The collector shall give notice of its intention to revoke a
medical cannabis delivery permit or a delivery driver permit. If there is an
apparent risk to the general public's health, safety, or welfare for the
delivery service and/or the delivery driver(s) to continue operations pending
a revocation hearing, the collector may immediately suspend the permit(s) and
all rights and privileges thereunder until the hearing on revocation.



   (B)   The notice shall specify the reasons for the proposed
revocation in sufficient detail so as to fully inform the delivery service
and/or the delivery driver of the reasons which have caused the notice to be
given, and if the permit has been suspended, the reasons for such suspension.



(Ord. No. 2937)



SEC. 11-398.  GROUNDS FOR DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF MEDICAL
CANNABIS DELIVERY PERMIT.



   (A)   A medical cannabis delivery permit (or renewal) may be denied,
and an existing license may be revoked or suspended, if a delivery driver,
permit holder, or applicant:



      (1)   Has knowingly made a false statement in a material
matter either in his or her application (or renewal) or in any reports or
other documents furnished by him or her to the city;



      (2)   Does not maintain and operate a delivery vehicle and
other equipment in the manner and in the condition required by law and
applicable state and city regulations;



      (3)   The applicant or any delivery driver has a felony
conviction; any other convictions involving theft; the manufacture,
transportation, sale or possession of a controlled substance; or, within
seven years prior to the application (or renewal), any convictions involving
driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs;



      (4)   The applicant, or any delivery driver, is or has been
required to register as a sex offender under the provisions of Cal. Penal
Code, Section 290, or has any convictions involving elder abuse;



      (5)   Within three years immediately preceding the application
submittal date (or renewal), has been under suspension, revocation or
probation by the California Department of Motor Vehicles for a cause
involving the safe operation of a motor vehicle, or has been convicted of
driving under the influence involving bodily injury or reckless driving
involving bodily injury;



      (6)   Within three years immediately preceding the application
submittal date (or renewal), has been found responsible for a motor vehicle
accident causing death or personal injury;



      (7)   Within one year immediately preceding the application
submittal date (or renewal), has been involved in three or more motor vehicle
accidents unless evidence shows that none of the accidents were caused by or
the fault of the delivery driver, license holder, or applicant;



      (8)   Has failed to pay the required permit fees or remit city
taxes; or



      (9)   Has violated any provision of this article, any other
provision of the city's code, or any state law concerning the regulation of
cannabis.



   (B)   The grounds for denial identified above are based on the
powers of the city under its general police power and obligation to protect
and promote the public health, safety, and welfare. Nothing in this section
shall preclude the police chief or other city or law enforcement official
from providing grounds for the denial of an application, or a revocation or
suspension of an existing permit, based on relevant facts and circumstances
that affect the ability of a delivery driver or delivery service to comply
with this article.



   (C)   The decision to permanently revoke or temporarily suspend a
permit shall be at the discretion of the collector based on the underlying
circumstances.



(Ord. No. 2937)



SEC. 11-399.  GROUNDS FOR DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF DELIVERY
DRIVER PERMIT.



   (A)   A delivery driver permit (or renewal) may be denied, and an
existing license may be revoked or suspended, if the permit holder or
applicant:



      (1)   Has knowingly made a false statement in a material
matter either in his or her application (or renewal) or in any reports or
other documents furnished by him or her to the city;



      (2)   The applicant or delivery driver has a felony
conviction; any other conviction involving theft; the manufacture,
transportation, sale or possession of a controlled substance; or within
seven  years prior to the application, any convictions involving driving
under the influence of alcohol or drugs;



      (3)   The applicant or delivery driver is or has been required
to register as a sex offender under the provisions of Cal. Penal Code,
Section 290, or has any convictions involving elder abuse;



      (4)   Within three years immediately preceding the application
submittal date (or renewal), the applicant or delivery driver has been under
suspension, revocation, or probation by the California Department of Motor
Vehicles for a cause involving the safe operation of a motor vehicle, or has
been convicted of driving under the influence involving bodily injury or
reckless driving involving bodily injury;



      (5)   Within three years immediately preceding the application
submittal date (or renewal), the applicant or delivery driver has been found
responsible for a motor vehicle accident causing death or personal injury;



      (6)   Within one year immediately preceding the application
submittal date (or renewal), the applicant or delivery driver has been
involved in three or more motor vehicle accidents unless evidence shows that
none of the accidents were caused by or the fault of the delivery driver,
license holder, or applicant; or



      (7)   The applicant or delivery driver has violated any
provision of this article, any other provision of the city's code, or any
state law concerning the regulation of cannabis.



   (B)   The grounds for denial identified above are based on the
powers of the city under its general police power and obligation to protect
and promote the public health, safety, and welfare. Nothing in this section
shall preclude the police chief or other city or law enforcement official
from providing grounds for the denial of an application, or a revocation or
suspension of an existing permit, based on relevant facts and circumstances
that affect the ability of a delivery driver to comply with this article.



   (C)   The decision to permanently revoke or temporarily suspend a
permit shall be at the discretion of the collector based on the underlying
circumstances.



(Ord. No. 2937)



SEC. 11-400.  APPEAL OF DENIAL OF APPLICATION, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF
MEDICAL CANNABIS DELIVERY PERMIT OR DELIVERY DRIVER PERMIT.



   (A)   An appeal of the decision to deny an application, or suspend
or revoke a permit, shall utilize the procedures and timelines set forth in
Chapter 1, Article V, of this code.



   (B)   Upon receiving a written appeal, a hearing shall be scheduled
pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 1-58 of this code. The
purpose of the hearing is for the applicant to state any reasons why the
permit should not be denied, suspended or revoked.



   (C)   The failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with
these provisions shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative
hearing and be deemed a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.



(Ord. No. 2937)



SEC. 11-401.  DELIVERY SERVICE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Each delivery service shall comply with all local and state
laws, including those specified in Cal. Business and Professions Code,
Section 26090, as that section now appears or may hereafter be amended or
renumbered.



   (B)   No delivery service or delivery driver shall deliver or
authorize the delivery of any cannabis other than medical cannabis to a
qualified patient or primary caregiver.



   (C)   Each delivery service shall maintain a written record of every
request for medical cannabis, including the name of the requestor, whether
they are a qualified patient or primary caregiver, the address for the
delivery, the quantity and type of cannabis requested, the date and time the
delivery request is received, the delivery vehicle that is assigned to make
the delivery, and the delivery driver who is assigned to make the delivery.



   (D)   All orders shall be securely packaged and labelled by name of
the qualified patient. Each delivery service shall assure that every delivery
driver shall have a copy of the record of the delivery request during the
delivery of any medical cannabis in the city.



   (E)   Whenever a delivery vehicle is making a delivery pursuant to
this article, no delivery service shall permit any person other than a
delivery driver with a permit issued in accordance with this article, to
operate its delivery vehicles in the city. All delivery drivers shall
maintain a copy of the current permits within the delivery vehicle.



   (F)   A delivery driver may possess no more than eight ounces of
dried cannabis. These limits may be adjusted in accordance with division (Q)
of this section.



   (G)   Delivery drivers shall be at least 21 years of age and have a
delivery driver permit from the city.



   (H)   A list of the names and contact information of each delivery
driver shall be maintained by the delivery service and updates shall be
provided to the collector on a continual basis. The delivery service shall
immediately provide the names and contact information of delivery drivers to
the city upon request.



   (I)   Each delivery vehicle shall display a city business tax
certificate vehicle. A list of all delivery vehicles shall be maintained by
the delivery service and updates shall be provided to the collector on a
timely basis.



   (J)   Delivery drivers shall not have more than $2,500 in cash on
their person or in a delivery vehicle at any time.



   (K)   Cannabis shall be secured in a locked container in the
delivery vehicle and shall not be accessible while the delivery vehicle is
being driven.



   (L)   Each delivery service shall maintain accurate records of
cannabis activity as required by Cal. Business and Professions Code, Section
26160, as that section now appears or may hereafter be amended or renumbered.



   (M)   Each delivery service shall pay all applicable state and local
taxes for the delivery of medical cannabis within the city.



   (N)   Delivery vehicles shall not advertise any commercial cannabis
activity nor shall it advertise the name of the dispensary.



   (O)   Deliveries shall be directly to the residence or business
address of the qualified patient or that person's primary caregiver, and
shall not be delivered to any other location within the city. Deliveries made
pursuant to this article shall not include the delivery of any non-medical
cannabis product.



   (P)   Deliveries shall occur only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m.



   (Q)   The city manager is delegated authority to enact
administrative policies consistent with this article.



(Ord. No. 2937)



SEC. 11-402.  INSURANCE AND HOLD HARMLESS REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No medical cannabis delivery permit shall be issued until the
applicant first files with the city a certificate of insurance, on a form
acceptable by the city. The certificate shall provide evidence of insurance
in amounts, and with conditions, acceptable to the city.



   (B)   Each delivery service shall, and by acceptance of the permit
does agree to: indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city, its officers,
agents, and employees from any and all damages, claims, liabilities, costs
(including attorney's fees), suits, or other expenses resulting from, and
arising out of, the delivery service's operations.



(Ord. No. 2937)



SEC. 11-403.  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The remedies provided by this article are cumulative and in
addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.



   (B)   A violation of any section of this article and any use or
condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any provision of
this article shall be, and hereby is, declared to be a public nuisance and
may be abated by the city.



(Ord. No. 2937)



CHAPTER 12:  GAMBLING




   12-1.   Gambling house, room prohibited; exception



   12-2.   Premises as gambling house, room; exception



   12-3.   Gambling prohibited generally



   12-4.   Exception for occasional private games in homes; exception
as to “matching” for bill



   12-5.   Exception for fraternal, charitable organizations



   12-6.   Application for license; term; renewal



   12-7.   Denial, suspension or revocation of license; hearing and
notice



SEC. 12-1.  GAMBLING HOUSE, ROOM PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   No person shall keep, conduct or maintain any house, room, apartment or
place, used in whole or in part as a gambling house or place where any game
is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, dominos or other
devices, for money, checks, chips, credit or any representative of value, in
the result of which game chance is any determining factor, except as set
forth in section 12-4.



(`64 Code, Sec. 14-1)  (Ord. No. 517)



SEC. 12-2.  PREMISES AS GAMBLING HOUSE, ROOM; EXCEPTION.



   No person shall knowingly permit any house, room, apartment or place
owned by him/her or under his/her charge or control to be used in whole or in
part as a gambling house or place of playing, conducting, dealing or carrying
on any game, played with cards, dice, dominos or other device, for money,
checks, chips, credit or any representative of value, in the result of which
game chance is any determining factor, except as set forth in section 12-4.



(`64 Code, Sec. 14-2)  (Ord. No. 517)



SEC. 12-3.  GAMBLING PROHIBITED GENERALLY.



   No person shall deal, operate, attend, play or bet at or against any
game, in the result of which game chance is any determining factor, which
game is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, dominos, or
other device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any representative of
value, in any house, room, apartment or place, except as set forth in section
12-4.



(`64 Code, Sec. 14-3)  (Ord. No. 517)



SEC. 12-4.  EXCEPTION FOR OCCASIONAL PRIVATE GAMES IN HOMES; EXCEPTION AS TO
“MATCHING” FOR BILL.



   The three preceding sections shall not apply to occasional private
games, otherwise lawful, carried on for purely social purposes in a private
home.  Neither shall the provisions apply to otherwise lawful games, other
than card games, conducted by a private group of customers, for the sole
purpose of determining which member of the group shall pay for food,
refreshments or beverages for immediate consumption by the group.



(`64 Code, Sec. 14-4)  (Ord. No. 517)



SEC. 12-5.  EXCEPTION FOR FRATERNAL, CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.



   Any incorporated or chartered fraternal, labor, benevolent or
charitable organization or any religious association, which has been
continuously carrying on within the city the activities for which it was
organized for a period of not less than two years immediately preceding and
that limits access to its own membership and the invited guests of its
members shall be exempt from local gaming ordinances and gaming regulations.



(`64 Code, Sec. 14-5)  (Ord. No. 517, 2013, 2023)



SEC. 12-6.  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; TERM; RENEWAL.



   Application for the license pursuant to section 12-5 shall be made to
the city council in writing and shall set forth the facts which the applicant
contends entitle it to a license hereunder.  The application shall be
verified.  The license shall be valid only for the city fiscal year and
shall be renewed annually upon application to the license collector without
action by the city council unless a written objection to the issuance of the
license has been filed with the license collector.



(`64 Code, Sec. 14-7)  (Ord. 110, 517)



SEC. 12-7.  DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING AND NOTICE.



   (A)   The application or license pursuant to section 12-5 may be
denied, suspended or revoked by the city council upon proof to its
satisfaction of a violation of any law by the applicant or licensee, or upon
a determination by the city council that the applicant or licensee does not
meet the requirements of section 12-5, or upon a determination by the city
council that the conduct of the particular game room would be or is inimical
to the public health, morals, safety, peace or general welfare.  If a
license is revoked, no new license shall be issued to the licensee for a
period of one year subsequent to the revocation.



   (B)   No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked until after a
hearing has been held by the city council, notice of which shall be given in
writing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing by depositing the
notice in the mail, addressed to the applicant or licensee at the address
appearing on its application or license.



(`64 Code, Sec. 14-8)  (Ord. No. 517)



CHAPTER 13:  TAXATION



ARTICLE I.  ASSESSMENTS, FEES AND TAXES



   [Reserved]



ARTICLE II.  TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX



   13-15.   Definitions



   13-16.   Amount of tax



   13-17.   Payment to operator or tax collector



   13-18.   Exemption from tax



   13-19.   Collection of tax



   13-20.   Retention of records



   13-21.   Transient occupancy registration certificate



   13-22.   Posting of certificate



   13-23.   Reporting requirements



   13-24.   Remittance of tax



   13-25.   Taxes in trust for city



   13-26.   Failure to remit tax



   13-27.   Continued failure to remit tax



   13-28.   Fraudulent nonpayment of tax



   13-29.   Interest on tax



   13-30.   Merging with tax



   13-31.   Operator's failure to collect, report and remit tax



   13-32.   Notice to operator



   13-33.   Appeal by operator



   13-34.   Appeal hearing



   13-35.   Conduct of hearing



   13-36.   Decision



   13-37.   Judicial action



   13-38.   Filing claim for refund



   13-39.   Decision of tax collector



   13-40.   Appeal by operator



   13-41.   Credit against subsequent taxes



   13-42.   Refund to operator



   13-43.   Transient's claim for refund



   13-44.   Written records of refund



   13-45.   Tax deemed debt to city



   13-46.   Duty of successor of operator



   13-47.   Issuance of tax clearance certificate



   13-48.   Appeal by successor operator



   13-49.   Action by city to collect tax



   13-50.   Violations



ARTICLE III.  TAX FOR PURPOSE OF PARKS, MUSIC AND ADVERTISING



   13-60.   Levied



   13-61.   Annual tax; collection



   13-62.   Disposition of funds



ARTICLE IV.  PARK AND ACQUISITION AND DEVELOPMENT TAX



   13-70.   “Dwelling unit” defined




   13-71.   Tax levied; payment prerequisite to issuance of building
permit or mobile home park sewer encroachment permit




   13-72.   Refunds



   13-73.   Disposition of revenue; park acquisition and development
fund established



ARTICLE V.  WATER AND STREET FUNDS



   13-80.   “M.W.D. Water Fund” created; deposits and expenditures
from fund



   13-81.   Special gas tax improvement fund created



   13-82.   Source of funds



   13-83.   Expenditure of funds



ARTICLE VI.  SPECIAL TAXES



   13-90.   Community Facilities District No. 5 (RiverPark)



   13-91.   Community Facilities District No. 6 (Northshore at Mandalay
Bay)



ARTICLE I.  ASSESSMENTS, FEES AND TAXES



[Reserved]



ARTICLE II.  TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX



SEC. 13-15.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   CAMPING SITE - A space designed and promoted for the purpose
of locating a trailer, tent, tent trailer, pickup camper, or other similar
device used for camping.



   (B)   EXEMPT HOTEL - A hotel that charges room rents not exceeding
maximum rentals of $10 per day for single and $15 per day for double
occupancy on the effective date of this section.



   (C)   HOTEL - Any commercial establishment or any portion of any
commercial establishment that provides for the occupancy of transients for
dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, whether by the day, week or month,
and includes any hotel, inn, motel or commercial establishment of similar
nature.



   (D)   OCCUPANCY - The use or possession or the right to the use or
possession of a room or rooms or other living space, thereof in any hotel,
timeshare estate rental or other lodgings for dwelling, lodging or sleeping
purposes.



   (E)   OPERATOR - The proprietor or managing agent of a hotel,
timeshare estate rental or other lodgings whether in the capacity of owner,
lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity.



   (F)   OTHER LODGINGS - A camping site or a space at a campground or
recreational vehicle park not including any facilities operated by a local
government entity or any campsite owned and operated by the State.



   (G)   PERSON - Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or
any other group or combination acting as a unit.



   (H)   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK - A property that is designed and
promoted for the purpose of locating a recreational vehicle whether for a
day, week or month.



   (I)   RENT - The consideration charged, whether or not received, for
the occupancy of space in a hotel, timeshare rental or other lodgings valued
in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise,
including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind
or nature, without any deductions therefrom whatsoever.



   (J)   TAX COLLECTOR - The finance director of the city or designee.



   (K)   TIMESHARE ESTATE - A right of occupancy in a timeshare project
which is coupled with an estate in the real property.



   (L)   TIMESHARE ESTATE RENTAL - The renting of any timeshare estate
to transients, unaccompanied by the timeshare estate owner, for dwelling,
lodging or sleeping purposes, whether by day, week or month.



   (M)   TRANSIENT - A person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to
occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other
agreement for a period of 30 consecutive days or less, counting portions of
calendar days as full days unless there is an agreement in writing between
the operator and the occupant providing for a period of occupancy longer than
30 days.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-5)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-16.  AMOUNT OF TAX.



   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, timeshare estate rental or
other lodgings in the city, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax
in the amount of 10 % of the rent charged by the operator.  This tax
constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city that is extinguished by
payment to the operator.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-6)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-17.  PAYMENT TO OPERATOR OR TAX COLLECTOR.



   The transient shall pay the tax to the operator at the time the rent is
paid.  If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax
shall be paid with each installment.  The unpaid tax shall be due upon the
transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel, timeshare estate rental or
other lodgings.  If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator,
the tax collector may require the transient to pay such tax directly to the
tax collector.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-7)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-18.  EXEMPTION FROM TAX.



   (A)   The tax shall not apply to any transient occupying space in an
exempt hotel if the exempt hotel has a current certificate of eligibility on
file with the tax collector.



   (B)   The tax shall not apply to any person who is required to
obtain a shelter in a hotel by reason of circumstances such as fire, flood,
or other disaster which makes that person's usual residence uninhabitable. 
Such person shall prove that his/her residence is in an area that has been
officially declared a disaster area by local, State or federal authorities.



   (C)   An employee or officer of the United States government or an
employee or officer of the State government may be exempt from paying the
tax. To be exempt from paying the tax, the federal or State officer or
employee shall execute, under penalty of perjury, a standard form, as
approved by the city attorney and maintained in the city clerk's office,
claiming such exemption.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-8)  (Ord. No. 2469, 2736)



SEC. 13-19.  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   The operator shall collect the tax at the same time as the rent is
collected from the transient.  The amount of the tax shall be separately
stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive
a receipt for payment from the operator.  Operators shall not advertise or
state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that the tax will not
be added to the rent or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in
the manner provided herein.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-9)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-20.  RETENTION OF RECORDS.



   Every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of the
tax shall keep and preserve for not less than four years all records that may
be necessary to determine the reasonable request by the tax collector.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-10)  (Ord. No. 2469, 2736)



SEC. 13-21.  TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.



   Within 30 days of commencing business each operator renting occupancy
to transients shall register with the tax collector.  Upon such registration
the tax collector shall issue to such operator a transient occupancy
registration certificate (“certificate”).



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-11)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-22.  POSTING OF CERTIFICATE.



   The operator shall post and at all times keep posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises of the hotel, timeshare estate rental or other lodgings
the certificate.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-12)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-23.  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Each operator, on or before the last day of the month
following the last day of the previous month, or at the close of any other
reporting period established by the tax collector, shall provide a written
report to the tax collector, on forms approved by the tax collector, of the
total rents charged and received and the amount of the tax collected by the
operator.  The tax collector may require additional information from the
operator.



   (B)   Information in such reports about total rents charged and
received and the amount of tax collected by the operator is received in
confidence and shall not be disclosed to the public, except as required by
law.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-13)  (Ord. No. 2469, 2517)



SEC. 13-24.  REMITTANCE OF TAX.



   (A)   At the time the written report is filed, the operator shall
remit the full amount of the tax collected to the tax collector.



   (B)   A written report accompanied with payment of the full amount
of tax shall be provided to the tax collector within 15 days of cessation of
business by an operator.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-14)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-25.  TAXES IN TRUST FOR CITY.



   The operator shall hold all taxes collected in trust for the city until
payment is made to the tax collector.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-15)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-26.  FAILURE TO REMIT TAX.



   Any operator who fails to remit the tax within the time required shall
pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the
amount of the tax.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-16)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-27.  CONTINUED FAILURE TO REMIT TAX.



   Any operator who fails to remit the tax on or before a period of 30
days following the date on which the tax first became delinquent shall pay a
second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-17)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-28.  FRAUDULENT NONPAYMENT OF TAX.



   If the tax collector determines that the nonpayment of the tax is due
to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added to
the amount in addition to any penalties.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-18)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-29.  INTEREST ON TAX.



   In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator failing to timely
remit the tax shall pay interest at the rate of .05 percent per month or
fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the
date on which the tax first became delinquent until the tax is paid.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-19)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-30.  MERGING WITH TAX.



   Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues shall become a part
of the tax required to be paid.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-20)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-31.  OPERATOR'S FAILURE TO COLLECT, REPORT AND REMIT TAX.



   If an operator fails or refuses to collect the tax or to timely make
any report or timely remit the tax or any portion thereof, the tax collector
shall proceed to prepare an estimate of the tax due.  The tax collector
shall assess such estimated tax, interest and penalties against the operator.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-21)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-32.  NOTICE TO OPERATOR.



   The tax collector shall notify the operator of the amount of tax
assessed by serving a written notice personally or by depositing the notice
in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator at the
operator's last-known place of business.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-22)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-33.  APPEAL BY OPERATOR.



   Any operator objecting to the amount of tax assessed in the notice may
file with the city clerk a written request for an appeal hearing, accompanied
by the hearing fee, within 14 days of receiving the notice from the tax
collector.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-23)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-34.  APPEAL HEARING.



   Upon receiving a request for an appeal hearing, the city clerk shall
send the request to a hearing officer.  The hearing officer shall promptly
schedule the matter for hearing.  At least ten days before the hearing, the
hearing officer shall mail written notice of the date, time and location of
the hearing to the operator and tax collector.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-24)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-35.  CONDUCT OF HEARING.



   (A)   All hearings shall be open to the public.



   (B)   A representative of the tax collector shall first present
evidence to justify the amount assessed. Thereafter, the operator may present
evidence, the burden of proof to justify the assessment is on the tax
collector.



   (C)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
fashion and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-25)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-36.  DECISION.



   Within 14 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
shall issue and mail to the operator and the tax collector a written decision
containing a statement of the reasons for the decision.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-26)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-37.  JUDICIAL ACTION.



   The operator may seek judicial review of the hearing officer's decision
within the time and in the manner provided by Cal. Code of Civil Procedure,
Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-27)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-38.  FILING CLAIM FOR REFUND.



   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty may have been
overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the tax collector, the operator may be eligible for a refund of
the tax paid, if, within three years after the date of payment, the operator
files with the tax collector a written claim therefor.  The operator shall
set forth, under penalty of perjury, the specific grounds and facts upon
which the claim is founded.  The claim shall be made on a form provided by
the tax collector.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-28)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-39.  DECISION OF TAX COLLECTOR.



   The tax collector shall issue and mail to the operator a written
decision denying or approving the claim and a statement of the reasons for
the decision within 14 days of receipt of the claim for a refund.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-29)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-40.  APPEAL BY OPERATOR.



   Any operator objecting to the decision of the tax collector may appeal
the decision in accordance with the procedure set forth in sections 13-37
through 13-45.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-30)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-41.  CREDIT AGAINST SUBSEQUENT TAXES.



   The operator shall apply any amount determined to be owed to operator
by the city as a credit for subsequent taxes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-31)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-42.  REFUND TO OPERATOR.



   The operator may receive any amount determined to be owed to operator
by the city by direct payment to the operator if the operator provides
evidence to the tax collector that the operator is no longer operating in the
city or that the operator will cease such operation before the credit may be
applied to subsequent taxes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-32)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-43.  TRANSIENT'S CLAIM FOR REFUND.



   If the tax was paid directly by the transient to the tax collector or
if the transient has paid the tax to the operator and established to the tax
collector's satisfaction that the transient has been unable to obtain a
refund from the operator, the transient may apply for a refund from the tax
collector by filing a claim in accordance with the procedure set forth in
section 13-38.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-33)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-44.  WRITTEN RECORDS OF REFUND.



   The tax collector shall not pay any refund unless the claimant
establishes a right thereto by written records showing that he/she is
entitled thereto.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-34)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-45.  TAX DEEMED DEBT TO CITY.



   (A)   Any tax required to be paid by any transient shall be deemed a
debt owed by the transient to the city.



   (B)   Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid
to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-35)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-46.  DUTY OF SUCCESSOR OF OPERATOR.



   (A)   If an operator is liable for any tax, penalties or interest
and sells or otherwise disposes of the business, the successor operator shall
notify the tax collector of the date of purchase of the hotel, timeshare
rental or other lodging, at least 30 days before the date of purchase or if
the decision to sell was made less than 30 days prior to actual purchase,
then immediately, and shall withhold a sufficient portion of the purchase
price to equal the amount of any tax, penalties or interest due until the
operator produces a tax clearance certificate from the tax collector stating
that no tax, penalties or interest is due. The standard form of the tax
clearance certificate shall be as approved by the city attorney and
maintained in the city clerk's office.



   (B)   If the operator does not present a receipt or tax clearance
certificate within 90 days after the successor operator commences to conduct
business, the successor operator shall deposit the withheld amount with the
tax collector.



   (C)   If the successor operator fails to withhold a portion of the
purchase price as required, the successor operator shall be liable to the
city for the payment of the tax required to be withheld.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-36)  (Ord. No. 2469, 2736)



SEC. 13-47.  ISSUANCE OF TAX CLEARANCE CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   A successor operator attempting to obtain ownership of a
hotel, timeshare rental or other lodging, the operator of which is required
to collect the tax, may request the tax collector to issue a tax clearance
certificate.



   (B)   (1) Within 90 days after receiving a written request from the
successor operator for a tax clearance certificate stating that no tax,
penalties or interest is due, the tax collector shall either issue the tax
clearance certificate; or (2) request the current operator of the hotel,
timeshare rental or other lodging to make available that operator's transient
occupancy tax records for the purpose of conducting an audit regarding
transient occupancy taxes that may be due and owing from the operator and
complete the audit on or before 90 days after the date that the current or
former operator's records are made available to the tax collector and issue a
tax clearance certificate within 30 days of completing the audit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-37)  (Ord. No. 2469, 2736)



SEC. 13-48.  APPEAL BY SUCCESSOR OPERATOR.



   Any successor operator objecting to the amount of the tax, penalties
and interest set forth in the written notice may appeal the decision in
accordance with the procedure set forth in sections 13-37 through 13-41.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-38)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-49.  ACTION BY CITY TO COLLECT TAX.



   Any person owing taxes, penalties or interest to the city pursuant to
this article shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for
the recovery of such amounts.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-39)  (Ord. No. 2469)



SEC. 13-50.  VIOLATIONS.



   A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if that person:



   (A)   Fails or refuses to register as required by this article;



   (B)   Fails or refuses to furnish any report required to be made or
fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental report or other data required by
the tax collector;



   (C)   Renders a false or fraudulent report;



   (D)   Makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to
defeat or evade the determination of any tax due;



   (E)   Collects the tax from any transient and fails to pay the same
to the city; and



   (F)   Violates in any way other provisions of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-40)  (Ord. No. 2469)



ARTICLE III.  TAX FOR PURPOSE OF PARKS, MUSIC AND ADVERTISING



SEC. 13-60.  LEVIED.



   A tax of $0.15 on each $100 of assessed valuation of all taxable
property within the city is hereby levied.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-1)



SEC. 13-61.  ANNUAL TAX; COLLECTION.



   The tax levied by the preceding section shall be in addition to all
other taxes now authorized by law to be levied, and shall be levied for each
fiscal year.  The tax shall be collected at the time and in the manner other
city taxes are collected.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-2)



SEC. 13-62.  DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.



   The funds realized from the tax levied by this article may be used and
expended in any manner that may be deemed best by the city council; provided,
however, that the funds must be used for the purpose of parks, music and
advertising.



(`64 Code, Sec. 29-3)



ARTICLE IV.  PARK ACQUISITION AND DEVELOPMENT TAX



SEC. 13-70.  “DWELLING UNIT” DEFINED.



   (A)   As used in this article, “dwelling unit” means a separate
single-family habitation, structure or unit.  The term includes:



      (1)   A single-family dwelling;



      (2)   Each separate apartment or habitation unit comprising a
multiple-dwelling structure; and



      (3)   Each space or pad designed and allocated to accommodate
a mobile home within a mobile home park.



   (B)   The term does not include:



      (1)   Any habitation unit within a structure designed,
constructed and used exclusively for transient occupancies;



      (2)   Any habitation unit, intended and used exclusively to
house the elderly or handicapped, which is constructed for and operated by a
foundation, agency or entity which, pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Health
and Safety Code, Section 33396, qualifies for welfare exemption in accordance
with Article 13, Section lc of the California Constitution; or



      (3)   A single-family dwelling which replaces within six
months a dwelling unit removed from the same lot or parcel as the new
construction site.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-50)  (Ord. No. 1421)



SEC. 13-71.  TAX LEVIED; PAYMENT PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT
OR MOBILE HOME PARK SEWER ENCROACHMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   Every person constructing a new dwelling unit in the city is
taxed and shall pay to the city the following fee for each new dwelling unit:



      (1)   One or less bedrooms, $150;



      (2)   Two bedrooms, $200; and



      (3)   Three or more bedrooms, $250.



   (B)   (1)   Payment of the tax to the city shall be made at the
time of, and shall be a condition precedent to, the issuance of a building
permit authorizing construction of the dwelling unit.



      (2)   Payment of the tax to the city for any new dwelling unit
situated within a mobile home park, for which a city building permit is not
required, shall be made concurrently with payment of the mobile home park
sewer connection fee and shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of an
encroachment permit.



   (C)   If an extension of time is granted by the director of public
works for the construction under building permit of a new dwelling unit, the
building permit shall be deemed to have issued at the time the extension is
granted, and the payment of an additional tax due hereunder shall be a
condition precedent to the granting of such extension.



   (D)   If the use of a dwelling unit, which when constructed was
exempted from tax under this article, is changed to a use which, at the time
of construction, would have been taxable hereunder, the building permit
therefor shall be deemed to have issued at the time the use of the dwelling
unit was changed; and the tax imposed hereunder shall on that date be payable
and shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy therefor.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-51)  (Ord. No. 1421, 1448, 1696, 1949, 2031)



SEC. 13-72.  REFUNDS.



   (A)   The tax imposed and paid under this article for the
construction of a new dwelling unit which is not built shall be refunded.



   (B)   Refund shall be made upon application of the taxpayer to the
director of finance and upon a showing that the new dwelling unit has not
been constructed, or construction commenced, and that the building permit
issued therefor has been surrendered, canceled or otherwise does not
authorize the construction.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-52)  (Ord. No. 1421)



SEC. 13-73.  DISPOSITION OF REVENUE; PARK ACQUISITION AND DEVELOPMENT FUND
ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   All revenues collected from the imposition of the tax imposed
by this article shall be covered over into the park acquisition and
development fund, which is established hereby in the department of finance.



   (B)   Disbursement and encumbrance of money in the fund shall be
made solely for the refund of taxes imposed and paid hereunder and for the
acquisition, development and improvement of park and recreational facilities
to serve the municipal purposes of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 16-53)  (Ord. No. 1421)



ARTICLE V.  WATER AND STREET FUNDS



SEC. 13-80.  “M.W.D. WATER FUND” CREATED; DEPOSITS AND EXPENDITURES FROM
FUND.



   (A)   A fund to be known as the “M.W.D. Water Fund” is hereby
created and established.  Such monies as are collected as provided in this
code shall be deposited to this fund and once so deposited may be expended as
provided in this article V.



   (B)   (1)   As payment for the costs of initiating, supervising
and conducting, including legal expenses, the proceedings for annexation of
territory paying the surcharge into this fund or any part of such territory,
together with other territory not paying such surcharge, to the Metropolitan
Water District and to the Calleguas Municipal Water District as a payment for
any back taxes levied by either of such districts against the territory on
which the property or area having made such payment is included for
annexation proceedings.



      (2)   In the event the property or area so charged shall not
have annexed to the Metropolitan Water District within three years from the
date of its annexation to the city or the date of such payment, whichever
first occurs, the city may transfer to and expend such accumulated funds for
the water division for purposes of plant expansion, repairs and maintenance
and for water revenue bond interest and redemption requirements.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-140)  (Ord. No. 704, 915)



SEC. 13-81.  SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND CREATED.



   To comply with the provisions of Cal. Streets and Highways Code, there
shall be in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “Special
Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.”



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-141)



SEC. 13-82.  SOURCE OF FUNDS.



   All monies received by the city from the State under the provisions of
the Cal. Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or
interests therein or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of
streets or highways other than State highways shall be paid into the special
gas tax street improvement fund.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-142)



SEC. 13-83.  EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.



   All monies in special gas tax street improvement fund shall be expended
exclusively for the purpose authorized by, and shall be subject to all of the
provisions of Cal. Streets and Highways Code, Article 5, Chapter 1, Division
1.



(`64 Code, Sec. 2-143)



ARTICLE VI.  SPECIAL TAXES



SEC. 13-90.  COMMUNITY FACILITIES DISTRICT NO. 5 (RIVERPARK).



   (A)   The City Council hereby authorizes and levies special taxes
within the Community Facilities District No. 5 (RiverPark), pursuant to the
Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982, Cal. Gov't Code, Section 53311
et seq., as amended, at the rates and in accordance with the rate and method,
a copy of which is attached as Exhibit B to Ordinance 2701, which rate and
method is by this reference incorporated herein. The special taxes under the
rate and method are hereby levied commencing in the current fiscal year and
in each fiscal year thereafter until the time set forth in the rate and
method. Within the district, special taxes shall be levied pursuant to this
section only.



   (B)   The Financial Services Manager of the city is hereby
authorized and directed each fiscal year to determine the specific special
tax rate and amount to be levied for each parcel of real property within the
district in the manner and as provided in the rate and method and to file
with the Ventura County Auditor on or before the 10th day of August of each
tax year a certified copy of such ordinance or resolution accompanied by a
list of all parcels subject to the special tax levy with the tax to be levied
on each parcel during such fiscal year. All of the collections of the special
tax in the district shall be used as provided for in the Act, the resolution
of formation, and the rate and method, including the payment of the costs of
the city in administering the district, and the costs of collecting and
administering the special tax in the district.



   (C)   Properties or entities of the State, federal or local
governments shall be exempt from any levy of the special taxes, to the extent
set forth in the rate and method, but subject to the provisions of Cal. Gov't
Code, Section 53317.3 in effect as of the date of adoption of this section.
In no event shall the special taxes be levied on any parcel within the
district in excess of the maximum special tax specified in the rate and
method. In the event that a portion of the property within the district shall
become for any reason exempt, wholly or in part, from the levy of the special
tax pursuant to the rate and method, the City Council will, on behalf of the
district, increase the levy to the extent necessary upon the remaining
property within the district which is not exempt in order to yield the annual
expenses of the district, if any, subject to the maximum special tax
specified in the rate and method for the district.



   (D)   (1)   The special taxes shall be collected from time to
time as necessary to meet the financial obligations of the district on the
secured real property tax roll in the same manner as ordinary ad valorem
taxes are collected. The special taxes shall have the same lien priority, and
be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in cases of
delinquency as provided for ad valorem taxes. The Financial Services Manager
is hereby authorized and directed to provide all necessary information to the
Treasurer-Tax Collector of the County of Ventura and to otherwise take all
actions necessary in order to effect proper billing and collection of the
special tax, so that the special tax shall be levied and collected in
sufficient amounts and at the times necessary to satisfy the financial
obligations of the district in each fiscal year.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Financial Services
Manager may collect one or more installments of the special taxes on any one
or more parcels in the district by means of direct billing by the city of the
property owners within the district, if, in the judgment of the Financial
Services Manager, such means of collection will reduce the administrative
burden on the city in administering the district or is otherwise appropriate
in the circumstances. In such event, the special taxes shall become
delinquent if not paid when due as set forth in any such respective billing
to the applicable property owners.



      (3)   Whether the special taxes are levied in the manner
provided in subsection (1) or (2), the special taxes shall have the same lien
priority, and be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and
sale in cases of delinquency as provided for ad valorem taxes.



   (E)   If for any reason any portion of this section is found to be
invalid, or if the special tax is found inapplicable to any particular parcel
within the district, by a court of competent jurisdiction, the balance of
this section, and the application of the special tax to the remaining parcels
within the district shall not be affected.



   (F)   This section relating to the levy of the special taxes shall
take effect immediately upon its final passage in accordance with the
provisions of Cal. Gov't Code, Section 36937(a), and the specific
authorization for adoption is pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code,
Section 53340.



   (G)   The City Clerk is hereby directed to execute and cause to be
recorded in the office of the County Recorder of the County of Ventura a
notice of special tax lien in the form required by the Act and Division 4.5
of the California Streets and Highways Code, said recording to occur no later
than 15 days following final passage by the City Council of this section.



(Ord. No. 2701)



SEC. 13-91.  COMMUNITY FACILITIES DISTRICT NO. 6 (NORTHSHORE AT MANDALAY
BAY).



   (A)   The City Council authorizes the levy of a special tax at the
rates and in accordance with the method of apportionment set forth in
Attachment A to the resolution of formation and which, for reference
purposes, is attached to Ordinance No. 2717 as Attachment A  (the “rate
and method”) and incorporated by reference as if set out in full herein.



   (B)   The finance and management services director of the city, or
his/her designee (the “authorized officer”), shall be responsible for
annually preparing, or causing the preparation of, the current roll of
special tax levy obligations by assessor’s parcel number on non-exempt
property within the Community Facilities District. The City Council or, to
the maximum extent permitted by law, the Authorized Officer is authorized to
determine the specific special tax to be levied on each parcel of land in the
Community Facilities District, in the manner and as provided in the rate and
method. In connection with the foregoing, the authorized officer shall take
any and all steps necessary in order to deliver to the Ventura County tax
collector, on or before the date specified in Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
53340, a certified list of all parcels subject to the special tax levy,
including the amount of the tax to be levied on each parcel for the
applicable tax year. The special taxes to be levied shall not exceed the
maximum rates set forth in the Rate and Method, but the special tax may be
levied at lower rates.



   (C)   Properties of entities of the state, federal or other local
governments shall be exempt from the above-referenced special taxes only to
the extent set forth in the rate and method, and otherwise shall be subject
to tax consistent with the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 53317.3
in effect as of the date of adoption of this section.



   (D)   All of the collections of the special taxes shall be used only
as provided for in the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982 and the
resolution of formation. The special taxes shall be levied only so long as
needed to accomplish the purposes described in the resolution of formation.



   (E)   The special taxes shall be collected in the same manner as
ordinary ad valorem taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same
penalties and the same procedure and sale in cases of delinquency as provided
for ad valorem taxes as such collection procedure may be modified by law or
the City Council from time to time. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
authorized officer may collect, or cause to be collected, one or more
installments of the special taxes by means of direct billing of the property
owners within the Community Facilities District if, in the judgment of the
authorized officer, such means of collection will reduce the burden of
administering the Community Facilities District or is otherwise appropriate
in the circumstances. In such event, the special taxes shall become
delinquent if not paid when due as set forth in any such respective billing
to the property owners.



   (F)   This section relating to the levy of the special tax shall
take effect 30 days after its final passage in accordance with the provisions
of Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 36937, and the specific authorization for
adoption is found in Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 53340.



(Ord. No. 2717)



CHAPTER 14:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



ARTICLE I.  (RESERVED)



   14-1.   (Reserved)



ARTICLE II.  CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE



   14-2.   California Building Code adopted



   14-3.   Amendments to the CBC



ARTICLE III.  CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



   14-4.   California Residential Code adopted



   14-5.   Amendments to the CRC



ARTICLE IV.  CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE



   14-6.   California Green Building Standards Code adopted



ARTICLE V.  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND ABATEMENT CODES



   14-8.   International Property Maintenance Code and Uniform Code for
the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings adopted



ARTICLE VI.  CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE



   14-9.   California Historical Building Code adopted



ARTICLE VII.  CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE



   14-10.   California Electrical Code adopted



   14-11.   Amendment



ARTICLE VIII.  CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE



   14-12.   California Existing Building Code adopted



ARTICLE IX.  CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE



   14-13.   California Mechanical Code adopted



   14-14.   Amendment



ARTICLE X.  CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE



   14-15.   California Referenced Standards Code adopted



ARTICLE XI.  CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE



   14-16.   California Plumbing Code adopted



   14-17.   Amendment



ARTICLE XII.  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE XIII.  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE XIV.  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE XV.  FIRE CODES



   14-24.   California Fire Code adopted



   14-25.   Amendments



ARTICLE XVI.  FIRE SPRINKLERS



   14-26.   Automatic fire sprinkler system



ARTICLE XVII.  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE XVIII.  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE XIX.  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE XX.  REPORT OF BUILDING RECORDS



   14-45.   Intent



   14-46.   Definitions



   14-47.   Owner to obtain; period valid



   14-48.   Application; fee; content of report



   14-49.   Delivery of report prior to sale



   14-50.   Exceptions



   14-51.   Forms; time limit



ARTICLE XXI.  MOVING OF BUILDINGS



   14-55.   Permit required



   14-56.   Application



   14-57.   Fees



   14-58.   Completion bond required



   14-59.   Verification requirements



   14-60.   Conditions of permit



   14-61.   Notice of moving



   14-62.   Notice; exception



   14-63.   Request for hearing



   14-64.   Hearing officer



   14-65.   Setting hearings; notice



   14-66.   Conduct of hearings



   14-67.   Decision



   14-68.   Time limit for new application



ARTICLE XXII.  SWIMMING POOL PROVISIONS



   14-70.   Purpose



   14-71.   General requirements



ARTICLE XXIII.  BEACH CONSTRUCTION



   14-75.   Purpose



   14-76.   Construction requirements



ARTICLE XXIV.  SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS



   14-80.   Purpose and intent



   14-81.   Definitions



   14-82.   Applicability



   14-83.   Applications and documents



   14-84.   Duties of building official and development services
department; fees



   14-85.   Solar energy system requirements



   14-86.   Permit review and inspection requirements



ARTICLE XXV.  ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION PERMITTING



   14-90.   Purpose and intent



   14-91.   Expedited review process



   14-92.   Electronic submittals



   14-93.   Association approval



   14-94.   Permit application processing



   14-95.   Technical review



ARTICLE XXVI.  TENANT RELOCATION ASSISTANCE



   14-96.   Findings



   14-97.   Definitions



   14-98.   Eligibility for relocation benefits and appeal



   14-99.   Payment of relocation costs by city



   14-100.   Recovery of relocation costs by city; notice; hearing;
appeal



   14-101.   Remedies cumulative



ARTICLE XXVII.  SAFE HOMES SAFE FAMILIES REPEAT OFFENDER PROGRAM



   14-102.   Purpose



   14-103.   Definitions



   14-104.   Repeat offender registration



   14-105.   Appeal of registration



   14-106.   Inspections



   14-107.   Registration period



ARTICLE XXVIII.  SUBSTANDARD AND IMPROPER OCCUPANCY CONDITIONS



   14-110.   Substandard conditions



   14-111.   Improper occupancy



ARTICLE I.  (RESERVED)



SEC. 14-1.  (RESERVED).



ARTICLE II.  CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE



SEC. 14-2.  CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   The second part of twelve parts of the California Code of Regulations,
Title 24, known as the California Building Code ("CBC"), 2016 Edition,
including Appendices C, H, and J, as published by the Building Standards
Commission, 2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento CA 95833-2936, is
hereby adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions, and
deletions hereinafter set forth. One true copy of this code is on file in the
office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection as required
by law.



(Ord. 2915)



SEC. 14-3.  AMENDMENTS TO THE CBC.



   (A)   Chapter 1 Division II, Section [A]101.4.4: Amend Section
[A]101.4.4 to read as follows:



      [A]101.4.4. Property Maintenance. The provisions of the Oxnard
City Code shall apply to existing structures and premises; equipment and
facilities; light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire
safety hazards; responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; and
occupancy of existing premises and structures.



   (B)   Chapter 1 Division II, Section [A]103.1: Amend Section
[A]103.1 to read as follows:



      [A]103.1. Creation of enforcement agency. The Building and
Engineering Division of the Development Services Department is hereby created
and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official.



   (C)   Chapter 1 Division II, Section [A]105.2: Amend Section
[A]105.2, items 2 and 4, to read as follows:



      Building:



         2.   Fences not over 6 feet high and concrete or masonry
walls not over 3'-6" high as measured from the lowest finished grade to the
top of the wall.



         4.   Retaining walls that are not over 3 feet in height
measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II, or Il-A liquids.



   (D)   Chapter 1 Division II, Section [A]105.3.2: Amend Section
[A]105.3.2, to read as follows:



      [A]105.3.2. Time limitation of application. An application for a
permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days
after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good
faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is
authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not
exceeding 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and
justifiable cause demonstrated.



   (E)   Section 903.2: Amend Section 903.2 to read as follows:



      Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and
structures shall be provided in the location described in Sections 903.2.1
through 903.2.12 and as required in accordance with Chapter 14 of the Oxnard
City Code, Article XVI.



   (F)   Section 1403.1: Amend Section 1403.1 to read as follows:



      1403.1. General. The provisions of this section shall apply to
exterior walls, wall coverings and components thereof. Additionally,
balconies, landings, exterior stairways, occupied roofs and similar surfaces
exposed to the weather and sealed underneath shall be waterproofed and sloped
a minimum 1/4 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2% slope) for drainage.
The weather-exposed areas with ceilings or horizontal projections not
required to be sealed for fire resistive construction shall be provided with
ventilation devices so as to provide adequate air movement to dry out any
moisture infiltrating within the horizontal areas. Details and notes on
ventilation devices shall be provided in the submittal drawings.



   (G)   Section 1505.1: Amend the first paragraph of Section 1505.1 to
read as follows:



      1505.1. General. The roof covering on any structure regulated by
this code shall be a Class A or B roof covering. The roof covering assembly
includes the roof deck, underlayment, interlayment. insulation, and covering
which is assigned a roof covering classification. Roof coverings required to
be listed by this section shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E 108 or UL
790. In addition, fire-retardant-treated wood roof coverings shall be tested
in accordance with ASTM D 2928.



   (H)   Section 1511.1: Amend the first paragraph of Section 1511.1 to
read as follows:



      1511.1 General. All reroofing shall be constructed with Class A
or B roofing and shall conform to the applicable provisions of Chapter 15 of
this Code, or as approved by the building official.



   (I)   Section 1613.5.2: Add Section 1615.2 to read as follows:



      1615.2 Modification to ASCE 7 Section 12.12.3. ASCE 7 Section
12.12.3 , Equation 12.12-1 is modified to read as follows:



         (Eq. 12-12.1)



   (J)   Section 1613.5.3: Add Section 1615.3 to read as follows:



      1615.3 Modification to ASCE 7 Section 12.11.2.2.3. ASCE 7 Section
12.11.2.2.3 is modified to read as follows:



         12.11.2.2.3 Wood Diaphragms. In wood diaphragms, the
continuous ties shall be in addition to the diaphragm sheathing. Anchorage
shall not be accomplished by use of toe nails or nails subject to withdrawal
nor shall wood ledgers or framing be used in cross-grain bending or
cross-grain tension. The diaphragm sheathing shall not be considered
effective as providing ties or struts required by this section.



         For wood diaphragms supporting concrete or masonry walls,
wood diaphragms shall comply with the following:



         1.   The spacing of continuous ties shall not exceed 40
feet. Added chords of diaphragms may be used to form sub-diaphragms to
transmit the anchorage forces to the main continuous crossties.



         2.   The maximum diaphragm shear used to determine the
depth of the sub-diaphragm shall not exceed 75% of the maximum diaphragm
shear.



   (K)   Section 1704.6: Amend Section 1704.6 to read as follows:



      1704.6 General. Where required by the provisions of Section
1704.5.1 or 1704.5.2, the owner shall employ a structural observer to perform
structural observations as defined in Section 1702. The structural observer
shall be one of the following individuals:



         1.   The registered design professional responsible for
the structural design, or



         2.   A registered design professional designated by the
registered design professional responsible for the structural design.



      Prior to the commencement of observations, the structural
observer shall submit to the building official a written statement
identifying the frequency and extent of structural observations.



      At the conclusion of the work included in the permit, the
structural observer shall submit a final report which states that all
observed deficiencies have been resolved, prior to acceptance of the work by
the building official.



   (L)   Section 1705.3: Amend Section 1705.3 to read as follows:



      1705.3 Concrete Construction. The special inspections and
verifications for concrete construction shall be as required by this section
and Table 1705.3.



         EXCEPTIONS: Special inspection and test shall not be
required for:



         1.   Isolated spread concrete footings of buildings
three stories or less in height that are fully supported on earth or rock,
where the structural design of the footing is based on a specified
compressive strength, f'c, no greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi)
(17.2 Mpa).



         2.   Continuous concrete footings supporting walls of
buildings three stories or less in height that are fully supported on earth
or rock where:



            2.1.   The footings support walls of light-frame
construction;



            2.2.   The footings are designed in accordance
with Table 1805.4.2; or



            2.3.   The structural design of the footing is
based on a specified compressive strength, f'c, no greater than 2,500 pounds
per square inch (psi) (17.2 Mpa), regardless of the compressive strength
specified in the construction documents or used in the footing construction.



         3.   Nonstructural concrete slabs supported directly on
the ground, including concrete patios, driveways and sidewalks



   (M)   Section 1705.12.2: Amend Section 1705.12.2, Exception, to read
as follows:



      Exception: Special inspections are not required for wood shear
walls, shear panels and diaphragms, including nailing, bolting, anchoring and
other fastening to other elements of the seismic-force-resisting system,
where either (1) the fastener spacing of the sheathing is more than 4 inches
(102mm) on center (o.c), or (2) the tabular values for allowable shear design
values are reduced to seventy-five percent (75%).



   (N)   Section 1803.2: Amend the first paragraph of Section 1803.2 to
read as follows:



      1803.2. Investigations required. Geotechnical investigations
shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 1803.3 through 1803.5.
Whenever unusual soil conditions are found which justify a special site
investigation to determine soil stability or questionable adequacy of the
overall building site, the building official may require that the owner
obtain a special geological, hydrological, soil gas profile, soil chemical
analysis, soils contamination, or other report as may be deemed appropriate.
The investigation shall be conducted by trained and experienced professionals
licensed by the State of California to prepare such evaluations,
recommendations, and reports.



   (O)   Section 1804.4: Amend Section 1804.4 to read as follows:



      1804.4. General Site Grading and Drainage. Provisions shall be
made for the control and drainage of surface water around buildings.
Concentrated drainage such as rainwater from gutters and downspouts,
scuppers, and roof valleys shall be diverted away from building foundations
by means of concrete splash blocks or other approved non-erosive devices.
Unless an alternate design is approved by the building official, under floor
access crawl holes shall be provided with curbs extending not less than six
(6) inches above adjacent grade to prevent surface water from entering the
under floor area.



      Gutters and Downspouts - when buildings are located on expansive
soil having an expansion index greater than 50, gutters, downspouts, piping,
and/or other non-erosive devices shall be provided to collect and conduct
rainwater to a street, storm drain, or other approved watercourse or disposal
area.



      Lot Drainage - All lots shall be graded so that they drain to the
street or public way on which they abut or shall be provided with approved
drainage devices. Minimum gradient of all lots shall comply with the
following:



 

 

Longitudinal

 

Cross Slope



1. Pervious surfaces —
 

1 percent slope

 

2 percent slope



2. Asphalt surfaces —
 

1/2 percent slope

 

1 percent slope



3. Concrete surfaces —
 

1/4 percent slope

 

1/2 percent slope



(2 percent = 1/4 inch per foot; 1 percent = 1/8" per foot; 1/2 percent =
1/16" per foot; and 1/4 percent = 1/32 inch per foot.)



 



      In rural areas where curbs or gutters have not been installed,
drainage design plans shall be submitted for approval by the building
official.



   (P)   Section 1808.7.4 : Amend Section 1808.7.4 to read as follows:



      1808.7.4. Foundation and Slab Elevation. The top of any exterior
foundation or finished floor slab, shall extend 25 inches above the elevation
of the lowest adjacent street gutter. Beginning at an elevation eight (8)
inches below the top of foundation or floor slab, a minimum 2 percent (2%)
slope away from the foundation or floor slab shall be maintained around its
perimeter for a minimum distance of four (4) feet for side yards and ten (10)
feet for front and rear yards. The building official may approve alternate
elevations, provided it can be demonstrated that required drainage to a safe
point of discharge and away from the foundation is provided at all locations
on the site.



   (Q)   Section 1905.1: Amend Section 1905.1 to read as follows:



      1905.1. General. The text of ACI 318 shall be modified as
indicated in Sections 1905.1.1 through 1905.1.11.



   (R)   Section 1905.1.7: Amend Section 1905.1.7 to read as follows:



      1905.1.7. Section 14.1.4 of ACI 318 is not adopted. It is
replaced with the following:



         14.1.4 - Plain concrete in structures assigned to Seismic
Design Category C. D. E. or F.



            14.1.4.1 Structures assigned to Seismic Design
Category C, D, E, or F shall not have elements of structural plan concrete,
except as follows.



               (a)   Concrete used for fill with a minimum
cement content of two (2) sacks of Portland cement per cubic yard.



               (b)   Isolated footings of plain concrete
supporting pedestals or columns are permitted, provided the projection of the
footing beyond the face of the supported member does not exceed the footing
thickness.



               (c)   In detached one- and two-family
dwellings three stories or less in height and constructed with stud-bearing
walls, plain concrete footings having a total area of longitudinal
reinforcing steel of not less than 0.002 times the gross cross-sectional area
of the footing, with at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars
not smaller than No. 4 are permitted. In addition, where the foundation
system consists of a plain concrete footing and a plain concrete stemwall, an
additional longitudinal reinforcing bar not smaller than No. 4 shall be
provided at the top of the stemwall, and vertical bars not less than No.4
shall be placed in the stemwall at 24" on center, with a standard 90 degree
hook into the footing.



   (S)   Section 1905.1.9: Add Section 1905.1.9 to read as follows:



      1905.1.9. Modify ACI 318 Section 18.7.5, by adding Section
18.7.5.7 and 18.7.5.8 to read as follows:



         18.7.5.7 - Where the calculated point of contraflexure is
not within the middle half of the member clear height, provide transverse
reinforcement as specified in ACI 318 Sections 18.7.5.1, items (a) through
(c), over the full height of the member.



         18.7.5.8 - At any section where the design strength, Pn, of
the column is less than the sum of the shears Ve computed in accordance with
ACI 318 Sections 18.7.6.1 and 18.6.5.1 for all the beams framing into the
column above the level under consideration, transverse reinforcement as
specified in ACI 318 Sections 18.7.5.1 through 18.7.5.3 shall be provided.
For beams framing into opposite sides of the column, the moment components
may be assumed to be of opposite sign. For the determination of the design
strength, Pn, of the column, these moments are permitted to be assumed to
result from the deformation of the frame in any one principal axis.



   (T)   Section 1905.1.10: Add Section 1905.1.10 to read as follows:



      1905.1.10. Modify ACI 318 Section 18.10.4, by adding Section
18.10.4.6 to read as follows:



         18.10.4.6 - Walls and portions of walls with Pu > 0.35Po
shall not be considered to contribute to the calculated shear strength of the
structure for resisting earthquake-induced forces. Such walls shall conform
to the requirements of ACI 318 Section 18.14.



   (U)   Section 1905.1.11: Add Section 1905.1.11 to read as follows:



      1905.1.11. Modify ACI 318, by adding section 18.12.6.2 as follows:



         18.12.6.2 - Collector and boundary elements in topping
slabs placed over precast floor and roof elements shall not be less than 3
inches (76mm) or 6 db thick, where db is the diameter of the largest
reinforcement in the topping slab.



   (V)   Section 2304.10.1: Amend Section 2304.10.1 to read as follows:



      2304.10.1 Fastener requirements. Connections for wood members
shall be designed in accordance with the appropriate methodology in Section
2301.2. The number and size of fasteners connecting wood members shall not be
less than that set forth in Table 2304.9.1. Staple fasteners in Table
2304.10.1 shall not be used to resist or transfer seismic forces in
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F.



         Exception: Staples may be used to resist or transfer
seismic forces when the allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic
testing and approved by the building official.



   (W)   Section 2305.4: Add Section 2305.4 to read as follows:



      2305.5 Hold-down connectors. In Seismic Design Category D, E, or
F, hold-down connectors shall be designed to resist shear wall overturning
moments using approved cyclic load values or 75 percent of the allowable
seismic load values that do not consider cyclic loading of the product.
Connector bolts into wood framing shall require steel plate washers on the
post on the opposite side of the anchorage device. Plate size shall be a
minimum of 0.229 inch by 3 inches by 3 inches (5.82 mm by 76 mm by 76mm) in
size. Hold-down connectors shall be tightened to finger tight plus one half
(1/2) wrench turn just prior to covering the wall framing.



   (X)   Section 2306.2: Amend Section 2306.2 to read as follows:



      2306.2 Wood-frame diaphragms. Wood-frame diaphragms shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS. Where panels are
fastened to framing members with staples, requirements and limitations of AWC
SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear values set forth in Table
2306.2(1) or 2306.2(2) shall only be permitted for structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category A, B, or C.



         Exception: Allowable shear values where panels are fastened
to framing members with staples may be used if such values are substantiated
by cyclic testing and approved by the building official.



      The allowable shear values in Tables 2306.2(1) and 2306.2(2) are
permitted to be increased 40 percent for wind design.



         Exception: [DSA-SS, DSA-SS/CC and OSHPD 1,2, & 4] Wood
structural panel diaphragms using staples as fasteners are not permitted by
DSA and OSHPD.



      Wood structural panel diaphragms used to resist seismic forces in
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F shall be applied
directly to the framing members.



         Exception: Wood structural panel diaphragms are permitted
to be fastened over solid lumber planking or laminated decking, provided the
panel joints and lumber planking or laminated decking joints do not coincide.



   (Y)   Section 2306.3: Amend Section 2306.3 to read as follows:



      2306.3 Wood-frame shear walls. Wood-frame shearwalls shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS. For structures
assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F, application of Tables 4.3A
and 4.3B of AWC SDPWS shall include the following:



         1.   Wood structural panel thickness for shear walls
shall not be less than 3/8 inch thick and studs shall not be spaced at more
than 16 inches on center.



         2.   The maximum nominal unit shear capacities for 3/8
inch wood structural panels resisting seismic forces in structures assigned
to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F is 400 pounds per linear foot (plf),
and shall not exceed 200 pounds per linear foot (plf) for plywood structural
panels containing three or fewer laminated layers.



               Exception: Other nominal unit shear capacities
may be permitted if such values are substantiated by cyclic testing and
approved by the building official.



         3.   Where shear design values using allowable stress
design (ASD) exceed 350 plf or load and resistance factor design (LRFD)
exceed 500 plf, all framing members receiving edge nailing from abutting
panels shall not be less than a single 3-inch nominal member or two 2-inch
nominal members fastened together in accordance with Section 2306.1 to
transfer the design shear value between framing members. Wood structural
panel joint and sill plate nailing shall be staggered at all panel edges. See
Section 4.3.6.1 and 4.3.6.4.3 of AWC SDPWS for sill plate size and anchorage
requirements.



         4.   Nails shall be placed not less than 1/2 inch in
from the panel edges and not less than 3/8 inch from the edge of the
connecting members for shear greater than 350 plf using ASD or 500 plf using
LRFD. Nails shall be placed not less than 3/8 inch from panel edges and not
less than 1/4 inch from the edge of the connecting member for shears of 350
plf or less using ASD or 500 plf or less using LRFD.



         5.   Table 4.3B application is not allowed for
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F.



      For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, application
of Table 4.3C of AWC SDPWS shall not be used below the top level in a
multi-level building, and the allowable seismic shear values shall not exceed
90 plf for Portland cement plaster and 30 plf for gypsum. Table 4.3C shall
not be allowed for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category E, or F.



      Where panels are fastened to framing members with staples,
requirements and limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable
shear values set forth in Table 2306.3(1), 2306.3(2) or 2306.3(3) shall only
be permitted for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B, or C.



         Exception: Allowable shear values where panels are fastened
to framing members with staples may be used if such values are substantiated
by cyclic testing and approved by the building official.



      The allowable shear values in Table 2306.3(1), 2306.3(2) are
permitted to be increased 40 percent for wind design. Panels complying with
ANSI/APA PRP-210 shall be permitted to use design values for Plywood Siding
in the AWC SDPWS.



         Exception: [DSA-SS DSA-SS/CC and OSHPD 1,2,&4] Wood
structural panel shear walls using staples as fasteners are not permitted by
DSA and OSHPD.



   (Z)   Section 2307.2: Add Section 2307.2 to read as follows:



      2307.2 Wood-frame shear walls. Wood-frame shear walls shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with Section 2306.3 as applicable.



   (AA)   Table 2308.6.1: Amend Table 2308.6.1 by modifying footnote
"b" to read as follows:



      b.   See section 2308.6.3 for full description of bracing
methods. Bracing methods DWB, SFB, PBS, HPS, and GB are not permitted in
Seismic Design Categories D or E.



   (BB)   Section 2308.6.1: Amend Section 2308.6.1, first Exception, to
read as follows:



      Exception: For structures in Seismic Design Category A, B, or C,
with a maximum plan dimension not more than 50 feet (15 240mm), continuous
foundations are required at exterior walls only.



   (CC)   Section 2308.6.9: Amend Section 2308.6.9 to read as follows:



      2308.6.9 Attachment of Sheathing. Fastening of braced wall panel
sheathing shall not be les than that prescribed in Table 2308.6.1 or Table
2304.10.1. Wall sheathing shall not be attached to framing members by
adhesives. Staple fasteners in table 2304.10.1 shall not be used to resist or
transfer seismic forces in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D,
E, or F.



         Exception: Staples may be used to resist or transfer
seismic forces when the allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic
testing and approved by the building official.



   (DD)   Appendix Chapter J, Section J103.2, Exception 1: Amend
Appendix Chapter J, Section J103.2, Exception 1, to read as follows:



      1.   Grading in an isolated, self-contained area, provided
there is no danger to the public, the total quantity of graded soil does not
exceed 150 cubic yards, and that such grading will not adversely affect
adjoining properties.



   (EE)   Appendix Chapter J, Section J104.1: Amend Appendix Chapter J,
Section J 104.1 to read as follows:



      J104.1. Submittal Requirements. Application for a grading permit
shall be accompanied by four sets of plans and specifications, and supporting
data consisting of a soils engineering report and an engineering geology
report where required by the Building Official. The sets of plans submitted
for final approval shall be submitted on mylar. The plans and specifications
shall be prepared and signed by an individual licensed by the state to
prepare such plans or specifications when required by the building official.
The dates of the soils engineering and any engineering geology reports, along
with the names, addresses, and phone numbers of the firms or individuals who
prepared the reports, shall appear on the grading plans. In addition to the
provisions of Section 105.3, Appendix Chapter 1, the applicant shall state
the estimated quantities of excavation and fill.



(Ord. No. 2915)



ARTICLE III.  CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



SEC. 14-4.  CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED.



   The part 2.5 of twelve parts of the California Code of Regulations,
Title 24, known as the California Residential Code ("CRC"), 2016 Edition,
including Appendix H, as published by the Building Standards Commission, 2525
Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento CA 95833-2936, is hereby adopted by
reference, subject to the amendments, additions, and deletions hereinafter
set forth. One true copy of this code is on file in the office of the City
Clerk and is available for public inspection as required by law.



(Ord. No. 2915)



SEC. 14-5.  AMENDMENTS TO THE CRC.



   (A)   Chapter 1 Division II, Section R102.7: Amend Section R102.7 to
read as follows:



      R102.7. Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure
existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue
without change, except as is specifically covered in this code, the
provisions of the Oxnard City Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building
official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public.



   (B)   Chapter 1 Division II, Section R103.1: Amend Section R103.1 to
read as follows:



      R103.1. Creation of enforcement agency. The Building and
Engineering Division of the Development Services Department is hereby created
and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official.



   (C)   Chapter 1 Division II, Section R105.2: Amend Section R105.2,
items 2 and 3, to read as follows:



      Building:



         2.   Fences not over 6 feet high and masonry walls not
over 3'-6" high as measured from the lowest finished grade to the top of the
wall.



         3.   Retaining walls that are not over 3 feet in height
measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II, or II-A liquids.



   (D)   Section R313: Amend Section R313 to read as follows:



      R313. General. Approved automatic fire extinguishing systems
shall be installed and maintained in accordance with Chapter 14 of the Oxnard
City Code, Article XVI.



   (E)   Section R401.1: Amend the Exception to Section R401.1 to read
as follows:



      Exception: Wood foundations in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1,
and D2 shall not be permitted. The provisions of this chapter shall be
permitted to be used for wood foundations only in the following situations:



         1.   In non-occupied, single-story, detached storage
sheds and similar uses other than carport or garage, provided the gross floor
area does not exceed 200 square feet, the plate height does not exceed 12
feet in height above the grade plane at any point, and the maximum roof
projection does not exceed 24 inches.



   (F)   Section R403.1.2: Amend Section R403.1.2 to read as follows:



         R403.1.2. Continuous footing in Seismic Design Categories
D0, D1, and D2. The braced wall panels at exterior walls of buildings located
in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, and D2 shall be supported by continuous
footings. All required interior braced wall panels in buildings shall be
supported by continuous footings.



   (G)   Section R403.1.3.6: Section R403.1.3.6 is deleted in its
entirety.



   (H)   Section R404.2: Amend Section R404.2 to read as follows:



      R404.2. Wood foundation walls. Wood foundation walls shall be
constructed in accordance with the provisions of Sections R404.2.1 through
R404.2.6 and with details shown in Figures R403.1(2) and R403.1(3). Wood
foundation walls shall not be used for structures located in Seismic Design
Category D0, D1, and D2.



   (I)   Table R602.3(l): Amend Table R602.3(l) by adding footnote "j"
to be applicable to the entire table and to read as follows:



      j. Use of staples in braced wall panels shall be prohibited in
Seismic Design Category D0, D1, and D2.



   (J)   Table R602.3(2): Amend Table R602.3(2) by revising footnote
"b" to read as follows:



      b. Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/16-inch diameter
except as noted. Use of staples in roof, floor, subfloor, and braced wall
panels shall be prohibited in Seismic Design Category D0, D1, and D2.



   (K)   Table R602.10.3(3): Amend Table R602.10.3(3) to read as
follows:




TABLE R602.10.3(3)
BRACING REQUIREMENTS BASED ON SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY




 


SOIL CLASS Da
WALL HEIGHT = 10 FT
10 PSF FLOOR DEAD LOAD
15 PSF ROOF/CEILING DEAD LOAD
BRACED W

 

MINIMUM TOTAL LENGTH (feet) OF BRACED WALL PANELS REQUIRED ALONG EACH BRACED
WALL LINEb




Seismic Design Category (SDC)

 

Story Location

 
Braced Wall Line Length
 
Method LIB, DWB, SFB, PBS, and HPS
 
Methodsc GB and PCP
 
Method WSPd
 
Continuous Sheathingd




SCD D2
 



 

10

 

NP

 

8.0

 

2.5

 

2.1




20

 

NP

 

16.0

 

5.0

 

4.3




30

 

NP

 

24.0

 

7.5

 

6.4




40

 

NP

 

32.0

 

10.0

 

8.5




50

 

NP

 

40.0

 

12.5

 

10.6






 

10

 

NP

 

NP

 

5.5

 

4.7




20

 

NP

 

NP

 

11.0

 

9.4




30

 

NP

 

NP

 

16.5

 

14.0




40

 

NP

 

NP

 

22.0

 

18.7




50

 

NP

 

NP

 

27.5

 

23.5





 

a.   Wall bracing lengths are based on a soil site class "D."
Interpolation of bracing length between the Sd.. values associated with the
seismic design categories shall be permitted when a site-specific Sds value
is determined in accordance with Section 16

b.   Foundation cripple wall panels shall be braced in accordance with
Section R602.10.9

c.   Methods GB and PCP braced wall panel h/w ratio shall not exceed 1:1.

d.   Wood Structural Panel shall have a minimum thickness in SDC D2 of
15/32", and shall not be attached using staples.



 



   (L)   Table R602.10.4: Amend Table R602.10.4 by adding footnote "f"
to be applicable to the entire table and to read as follows:



      f.   Use of staples in braced wall panels shall be prohibited
in Seismic Design Category D0, D1, and D2.



   (M)   Section R602.10.9.1: Section R602.10.9.1 is deleted in its
entirety.



   (N)   Section R703.1: Amend Section R703.1 to read as follows:



      R703.1. General. Exterior walls shall provide the building with a
weather-resistant exterior wall envelope. The exterior wall envelope shall
included flashing as describe in Section R703.4. Additionally, balconies,
landings, exterior stairways, occupied roofs and similar surfaces exposed to
the weather and sealed underneath shall be waterproofed and sloped a minimum
1/4 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2% slope) for drainage. The
weather-exposed areas with ceilings or horizontal projections not required to
be sealed for fire resistive construction shall be provided with ventilation
devices so as to provide adequate air movement to dry out any moisture
infiltrating within the horizontal areas. Details and notes on ventilation
devices shall be provided in the submittal drawings.



   (O)   Section R902.1: Amend the first paragraph of Section R902.1 to
read as follows:



      R902.1. Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with
materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. A minimum Class A or B
roofing shall be installed in areas designated by this section or where the
edge of the roof is less than 3 feet from a lot line. Class A or B roofing
required by this section shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM
E108.



   (P)   Section R902.1.3: Amend Section R902.1.3 to read as follows:



      R902.1.3. Roof coverings in all other areas. All reroofing shall
be constructed with Class A or B roofing and shall conform to the applicable
provisions of this Chapter, or as approved by the building official.



   (Q)   Section R902.2: Amend the first paragraph of Section R902.2 to
read as follows:



      R902.2: Fire-retardant treated shingles and shakes.
Fire-retardant treated wood shakes and shingles are wood shakes and shingles
complying with UBC Standard 15-3 or 15-4 which are impregnated by the
full-cell vacuum-pressure process with fire-retardant chemicals, and which
have been qualified by UBC Standard 15-2 for use on Class A or B roofs.



   (R)   Appendix Chapter H, Section AH 103.2: Amend Appendix Chapter
H, Section AH 103.2 to read as follows:



      AH 103.2. Light, ventilation and emergency egress. Exterior
openings required for light and ventilation shall be permitted to open into a
patio structure conforming to Section AH101. Where such exterior openings
serve as an exit from the dwelling unit, the patio structure, unless
unenclosed, shall be provided with exits conforming to the provisions of
Section R311 of this code. Emergency egress or rescue openings from sleeping
rooms shall not open into a patio structure.



(Ord. No. 2915)



ARTICLE IV. CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE



SEC. 14-6.  CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE ADOPTED.



   The part eleven of twelve parts of the California Code of Regulations,
Title 24, known as the California Green Building Standards Code ("CALGreen"),
2016 Edition, as published by the California Building Standards Commission,
2524 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 95833-2936, is hereby
adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions, and deletions
hereinafter set forth. One true copy of this code is on file in the office of
the City Clerk and is available for public inspection as required by law.



(Ord. No. 2915)



ARTICLE V.  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND ABATEMENT CODES



SEC. 14-8.  INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE AND UNIFORM CODE FOR THE
ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS ADOPTED.



   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, and the
Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, as published
respectively by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW,
6th Floor, Washington, D.C. 20001, and the International Conference of
Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California 90601,
are hereby adopted by reference. One true copy of these codes is on file in
the office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection as
required by law.



(Ord. No. 2915)



ARTICLE VI.  CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE



SEC. 14-9.  CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   The eighth part of twelve parts of the California Code of Regulations.
Title 24, known as the California Historical Building Code ("CHBC"), 2016
Edition, including Appendix A, as published by the Building Standards
Commission, 2525 Natomas Park Drive. Suite 130, Sacramento CA 95833-2936, is
hereby adopted by reference. One true copy of this code is on file in the
office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection as required
by law.



(Ord. No. 2915)



ARTICLE VII.  CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE



SEC. 14-10.  CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   The third part of twelve parts of the California Code of Regulations,
Title 24, known as the California Electrical Code ("CEC"), 2016 Edition,
which incorporates by reference the National Electrical Code ("NEC"), 2014
Edition, published by the Building Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas Park
Drive. Suite 130, Sacramento CA 95833-2936, is hereby adopted by reference,
subject to the amendments hereinafter set forth. One true copy of this code
is on file in the office of the City Clerk and is available for public
inspection as required by law.



(Ord. No. 2915)



SEC. 14-11.  AMENDMENT.



   Article 90-10: Add Article 90-10 to read as follows:



      Article 90-10. Administration. The legal jurisdiction and
administration of this electrical code is regulated by the administrative
sections as adopted in Chapter 14, Article II of the Oxnard City Code.



(Ord. No. 2915)



ARTICLE VIII.  CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE



SEC. 14-12.  CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   The tenth part of eleven parts of the California Code of Regulations,
Title 24, known as the California Existing Buildings Code ("CEBC"), 2016
Edition, as published by the Building Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas Park
Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento CA 95833-2936, is hereby adopted by reference.
One true copy of this code is on file in the office of the City Clerk and is
available for public inspection as required by law.



(Ord. No. 2915)



ARTICLE IX.  CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE



SEC. 14-13.  CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   The fourth part of eleven parts of the California Code of Regulations,
Title 24, known as the California Mechanical Code ("CMC"), 2016 Edition, and
Appendices B and C thereof, and Standards contained therein, published by the
Building Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento
CA 95833-2936, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the amendment
hereinafter set forth. One true copy of this code is on file in the office of
the City Clerk and is available for public inspection as required by law.



(Ord. No. 2915)



SEC. 14-14.  AMENDMENT.



   Chapter One - California General Code Provisions. Except for Sections
101.1, 101.2, and 101.3, entitled "Title," "Purpose," and "Scope," Chapter
One, entitled "California General Code Provisions" is hereby deleted from the
CMC. The Administrative Code as adopted in the Oxnard City Code, Chapter 14,
Article II, shall apply to this article.



(Ord. No. 2915)



ARTICLE X.  CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE



SEC. 14-15.  CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE ADOPTED.



   The twelfth part of twelve parts of the California Code of Regulations,
Title 24, known as the California Referenced Standards Code ("CRSC"), 2016
Edition, as published by the Building Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas Park
Drive. Suite 130. Sacramento CA 95833-2936, is hereby adopted by reference.
One true copy of this code is on file in the office of the City Clerk and is
available for public inspection as required by law.



(Ord. No. 2915)



ARTICLE XI.  CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE



SEC. 14-16.  CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.



   The fifth part of eleven parts of the California Code of Regulations,
Title 24, known as the California Plumbing Code ("CPC"), 2016 Edition,
including Appendices A, B, D, I, and K thereof, and standards contained
therein, published by the Building Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas Park
Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento CA 95833-2936, is hereby adopted by reference,
subject to the amendment hereinafter set forth. One copy of this code is on
file in the office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection
as required by law.



(Ord. No. 2915)



SEC. 14-17.  AMENDMENT.



   Chapter One - California General Code Provisions. Except for Sections
101.1, 101.2, and 101.3, entitled "Title," "Purpose," and "Scope," Chapter
One, entitled "California General Code Provisions" is hereby deleted from the
CPC. The Administrative Code as adopted in the Oxnard City Code, Chapter 14,
Article II, shall apply to this article.



(Ord. No. 2915)



ARTICLE XII.  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE XIII.  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE XIV.  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE XV.  FIRE CODES



SEC. 14-24.  CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE ADOPTED.



   The California Fire Code ("CFC") 2016 Edition, including Appendix
Chapter 4. Appendix B, Appendix C, Appendix D, and Appendix F, published by
the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th floor.
Washington, D.C. 20001, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the
amendments, additions, and deletions hereinafter set forth. One copy of such
code is on file in the office of the City Clerk and is available for public
inspection as required by law.



(Ord. No. 2915)



SEC. 14-25.  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Chapter 1, Section 101.1. Amend Section 101.1 to read:



      Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the
Fire Code of the City of Oxnard, hereinafter referred to as "this code".



   (B)   Chapter 1, Section 104.12. Add Section 104.12 to read:



      Section 104.12. General. When the chief finds in any building, on
any premises, or on any lot or parcel combustible, hazardous or explosive
materials or dangerous accumulations of rubbish; or finds unnecessary
accumulations of wastepaper, boxes, shavings, or any highly flammable
materials which are so situated as to endanger life or property; or finds
obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors, or windows
that reasonably tend to interfere with the operations of the Fire Department
or the egress of the occupants of such building or premises; or finds that
this code is being violated, the chief is authorized to issue orders as
necessary for the enforcement of the fire prevention laws and ordinances
governing the same and for the safeguarding of life and property from fire.



   (C)   Chapter 1, Section 104.13. Add Section 104.13 to read:



      Section 104.13. Stopping uses, evacuation. The chief is
authorized to order an operation or use stopped, or the evacuation of any
premises building or vehicle or portion thereof which has or is a fire
hazard, hazardous condition or situation which presents a hazard to life or
property.



   (D)   Section 109.4. Amend Section 109.4 to read:



      Section 109.4. Violation Penalties. Persons who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair, or do work in violation
of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code
official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code,
shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.



   (E)   Section 503.2.1. Amend Section 503.2.1 to read:



      Section 503.2.1. Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall
have an unobstructed width of not less than 26 feet (7,925 mm) and an
unobstructed height of not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4,115 mm).



         Exceptions:



         1.   Alleys without fire hydrants must have an
unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet (6,096 mm).



         2.   Approved security gates in accordance with Section
503.6.



   (F)   Section 503.7. Add Section 503.7 to read:



      Section 503.7. Electronic and Electric Access Gates. When access
to or within a structure or area is impeded by an electronically or
electrically secured opening or gate, such electronically or electrically
secured opening or gate shall be constructed and maintained in accordance
with plans approved by the Fire Code Official or Oxnard Police Department.
The Fire Code Official or Oxnard Police Department shall not approve such
plans unless the plans allow emergency vehicles and emergency personnel to
open such electronically or electrically secured openings or gates by City
approved radio equipment used by such emergency vehicles or personnel.



      On or before August 1, 2006, all existing electronically or
electrically secured openings or gates that impede access to a structure or
area shall either be (a) removed, or (b) constructed and maintained in
accordance with plans approved by the Fire Code Official or Oxnard Police
Department.



      For the purposes of this section 503.7, "opening" shall be
limited to an exterior door for a commercial or industrial building or a door
on a commercial, industrial, or residential property that limits access to a
common area that is an accessway to more than one commercial, industrial, or
residential occupancy.



   (G)   Section 507.5. Amend Section 507.5 to read:



      Section 507.5. Fire Hydrant systems. Fire hydrant systems shall
comply with Sections 507.5.1 through 507.5.6 and Oxnard Fire Department
published Standards and Appendix C or by an approved method.



   (H)   Section 507.5.1.1. Amend Section 507.5.1.1 to read:



      Section 507.5.1.1 Hydrant for standpipe systems. Buildings
equipped with a standpipe system installed in accordance with Section 905
shall have a fire hydrant within 50 feet (15 m) of the fire department
connections.



         Exception: The distance shall be permitted to exceed 50
feet (15 m) where approved by the fire code official.



   (I)   Section 901.6.2.2. Add Section 901.6.2.2 to read:



      Section 901.6.2.2 System Records. All contractors who service,
test, install and/or maintain fire protection systems within the city are
required to enroll and utilize the designated and approved single-point
repository service to file records of all system inspections, tests, and
maintenance required by the referenced standards. This repository service
shall be maintained electronically and provided to the fire code official
through a third party inspection reporting system. Fees, as applicable, will
be paid directly from the contractor to the approved single-point repository
service vendor.



   (J)   Section 903.4.2.1. Add Section 903.4.2.1, to read:



      Section 903.4.2.1 Exterior Strobe. Provide an approved exterior
strobe, in an approved location, visible from the street or approach roadway
or drive aisle.



   (K)   Section 904.3.5. Amend Section 904.3.5, to read:



      Section 904.3.5 Monitoring. Where a building fire alarm system,
or a monitoring and alarm system complying with section 903.4, is installed,
automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall be monitored by the building fire
alarm system or the monitoring and alarm system in accordance with NFPA 72.



   (L)   Section 906.1, #10. Add Section 906.1, #10, to read:



      Section 906.1 #10 as required by the Fire Code Official.



   (M)   Section 907.3.5. Add Section 907.3.5 to read:



      Section 907.3.5. Fog or Smoke Emitting Systems. No system shall
be installed in any building/structure or portion thereof, which discharges
any gas, vapor, liquid or other product when the primary intent of system
discharge is to obscure the vision, cause disorientation, or otherwise
incapacitate any occupant of said building/structure or portion thereof.
Nothing in this section is intended to preclude the installation of an
approved fire suppression system.



   (N)   Section 907.5.2.3.5. Add Section 907.5.2.3.5, to read:



      Section 907.5.2.3.5. Exterior Strobe.  Provide an approved
exterior strobe, in an approved location, visible from the street or approach
roadway or drive aisle.



   (O)   Section B105. Amend Table B105.2 to read:



      Table B105.2. Column two - Minimum Fire-flow, Row two of three:
50% of the value in Table B105.1(2)a



      Table B105.2. Column two - Minimum Fire-flow, Row three of three:
50% of the value in Table B105.1(2)b



   (P)   Section D102.1. Amend Section D102.1, to read:



      Section D102.1 Access and loading. Facilities, buildings or
portions of buildings hereafter constructed shall be accessible to fire
department apparatus by way of an approved fire apparatus access road with an
asphalt, concrete of or approved driving surface capable of supporting the
imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least 76,000 pounds (34,550 kg).



   (Q)   Section Dl03.5 #1. Amend Section D 103.5 #1, to read:



      #1. Where a single gate is provided, the gate width shall be not
less than 20 feet (6,096 mm). Where a fire apparatus road consists of a
divided roadway, the gate width shall be not less than 15 feet (4,572 mm).



(Ord. No. 2915)



ARTICLE XVI.  FIRE SPRINKLERS



SEC. 14-26.  AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM.



   The California Fire Code ("CFC") 2016 Edition, Section 903, Automatic
Sprinkler Systems, is hereby amended.



   (A)   Section 903.2 through section 903.2.4. Amend Section 903.2
through 903.2.4 to read:



      903.2 Where required. Approved automatic fire sprinkler systems
shall be installed in all structures, occupancies, and locations as set forth
in this section. For the purposes of this section, fire walls shall not be
considered as creating separate buildings.



         903.2.1 Definitions.



         The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of
section 903, have the following meanings.



            Bathroom. A room or compartment containing one or
more of the following: a toilet, a tub, or a shower.



         903.2.2 New Construction.



         Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed,
maintained, and accessible for service in all new buildings, regardless of
location, floor area, construction type, or occupancy.



         Exceptions:



            1.   Spaces and areas in telecommunications
buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated
electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines,
provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic fire
alarm system and are separated from the remainder of the building by fire
barriers consisting of not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated walls and
2-hour fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling assemblies.



            2.   Automatic fire sprinkler protection for fixed
guideway transit systems shall be as per Section 903.2.17.



            3.   The Fire Code Official is authorized to make
exception for trash enclosures that are of non-combustible construction
including the roof or cover, and at least ten (10) feet from any adjacent
structure, and at least five (5) feet from the nearest property line.



            4.   The Fire Code Official is authorized to make
exception for carports, storage sheds, and similar structures having less
than 500 square feet of roof area including overhangs, if the structure is
least ten (10) feet from any adjacent structure, and at least five (5) feet
from the nearest property line.



            5.   The Fire Code Official is authorized to make
exception for structures of non-combustible construction that do not have
occupiable space, and that have no storage, insignificant fire load, and no
exposures.



         903.2.3 Existing Construction.



         Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed,
maintained, and accessible for service throughout existing structures and
additions in the following situations.



            1.   Whenever there is a change in occupancy in
the structure or change in use classification to a higher or more hazardous
occupancy or use classification based on the Building Code classifications or
as determined by the Fire Code Official.



            2.   Whenever permits for additions or alterations
result in an increase of cumulative area of more than 1,000 square feet of
total structure area, including mezzanines and additional stories. Additional
area determination shall be cumulative, from the effective date of this
ordinance: December 27, 2007. Sprinkler coverage shall include the entire
existing structure, garage(s), and adjacent accessory structures.



            3.   In rooms where nitrate film is stored or
handled.



            4.   In protected combustible fiber storage vaults
as defined in this code.



         Section 903.2.4 Ambulatory care facilities. An automatic
sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the entire structure
containing an ambulatory care facility where either of the following
conditions exist at any time:



            1.   Four or more care recipients are incapable of
self-preservation, whether rendered incapable by staff or staff has accepted
responsibility for care recipients already incapable.



            2.   One or more care recipients that are
incapable of self-preservation are located at other than the level of exit
discharge serving such a facility.



   (B)   Section 903.2.7 through section 903.2.10. Amend Section
903.2.7 through 903.2.10 to read:



      Section 903.2.7. Reserved.



      Section 903.2.8. Reserved.



      Section 903.2.9. Reserved.



      Section 903.2.10. Reserved.



   (C)   Section 903.2.18 Amend Section 903.2.18 to read:



      Section 903.2.18. Reserved.



   (D)   Section 903.3.1.2. Add the following sections.



      Section 903.3.1.2.3 Overhangs. Sprinkler protection is required
under exterior roofs, canopies, and overhangs over four (4) feet in width.



         Exceptions:



            1.   The Fire Code Official is authorized to make
exception where the construction is non-combustible or limited combustible,
and, where no combustibles are stored or handled, and, the area is at least
50 percent open.



      Section 903.3.1.2.4 Under stairs. Sprinkler protection is
required for usable spaces and compartments under stairs, including bathrooms
and closets.



      Section 903.3.1.2.5 Attics, crawl spaces, concealed spaces.
Attics, crawl spaces, and normally unoccupied concealed spaces that do not
contain fuel-fired appliances do not require sprinkler coverage. In attics,
crawl spaces, and normally unoccupied concealed spaces that contain
fuel-fired equipment, a sprinkler shall be installed above the equipment;
however, sprinklers shall not be required in the remainder of the space.



      Section 903.3.1.2.6 Ceiling obstructions. Pendant sprinklers
within 3 feet of the center of a ceiling fan, surface-mounted ceiling
luminaire or similar object shall be considered to be obstructed, and
additional sprinklers shall be installed. Sidewall sprinklers within 5 feet
of the center of a ceiling fan, surface-mounted ceiling luminaire or similar
object shall be considered to be obstructed, and additional sprinklers shall
be installed.



   (E)   Section 903.3.1.3. Add the following sections.



      Section 903.3.1.3.1 Overhangs. Sprinkler protection is required
under exterior roofs, canopies, and overhangs over four (4) feet in width.



         Exceptions:



            1.   The Fire Code Official is authorized to make
exception where the construction is non-combustible or limited combustible,
and, where no combustibles are stored or handled, and, the area is at least
50 percent open.



      Section 903.3.1.3.2. Under stairs. Sprinkler protection is
required for usable spaces and compartments under stairs, including bathrooms
and closets.



      Section 903.3.1.3.3. Attics, crawl spaces, concealed spaces.
Attics, crawl spaces, and normally unoccupied concealed spaces that do not
contain fuel-fired appliances do not require sprinkler coverage. In attics,
crawl spaces, and normally unoccupied concealed spaces that contain
fuel-fired equipment, a sprinkler shall be installed above the equipment;
however, sprinklers shall not be required in the remainder of the space.



      Section 903.3.1.3.4. Ceiling obstructions. Pendant sprinklers
within 3 feet of the center of a ceiling fan, surface-mounted ceiling
luminaire or similar object shall be considered to be obstructed, and
additional sprinklers shall be installed. Sidewall sprinklers within 5 feet
of the center of a ceiling fan, surface-mounted ceiling luminaire or similar
object shall be considered to be obstructed, and additional sprinklers shall
be installed.



(Ord. No. 2915)



ARTICLE XVII.  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE XVIII.  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE XIX.  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE XX.  REPORT OF BUILDING RECORDS



SEC. 14-45.  INTENT.



   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Article 6.5, commencing with Section
38780, Chapter 10, Part 2, Division 3 of Title 4, the city council intends to
assure that the buyer of a building within the city is furnished a report of
matters of city record pertaining to the authorized use, occupancy and zoning
classification of real property prior to sale or exchange.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-30)  (Ord. No. 2383, 2836)



SEC. 14-46.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   AGREEMENT OF SALE - Any agreement or written instrument which
provides that any ownership or interest in title to any real property is to
be transferred from one owner to another owner.



   (B)   BUILDING - Any improved real property designed, used or
permitted to be used for dwelling, commercial or industrial purposes,
situated in the city, and shall include the building or structures located on
such improved real property.



   (C)   OWNER - Any person, copartnership, association, corporation or
fiduciary having legal or equitable title or any interest in any real
property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-31)  (Ord. No. 2383, 2836)



SEC. 14-47.  OWNER TO OBTAIN; PERIOD VALID.



   At the time of entering into an agreement of sale or exchange of any
building, the owner or his/her authorized representative shall obtain from
the city a report of the building record showing the regularly authorized
use, occupancy and zoning classification of such property.  Such report
shall be valid for a period not to exceed six months from date of issue.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-32)  (Ord. No. 2383, 2836)



SEC. 14-48.  APPLICATION; FEE; CONTENT OF REPORT.



   (A)   Upon application of the owner, or his/her authorized agent,
and the payment to the city of a fee as established by city council
resolution, the building official shall review pertinent city records and
deliver to the applicant a report of building records which shall contain the
following information insofar as available:



      (1)   The street address and legal description of subject
property;



      (2)   The zone classification and authorized use, as set forth
in chapter 16;



      (3)   The occupancy as indicated and established by permits of
record;



      (4)   Variances, conditional use permits and other pertinent
legislative acts of record;



      (5)   Any special restrictions in use or development which may
apply to the subject property;and



      (6)   Any known nonconforming and/or violations of building
code or zoning regulations.



   (B)   Such fees collected as provided for in this section are
intended only to cover the cost to the city for researching, preparing, and
delivering the report of building records.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-33)  (Ord. No. 2383, 2836)



SEC. 14-49.  DELIVERY OF REPORT PRIOR TO SALE.



   The report of building records shall be delivered by the owner, or
his/her authorized representative to the buyer or transferee of the building
prior to the consummation of the sale or exchange.  The buyer or transferee
shall execute a receipt therefor as furnished by the city, and the receipt
shall be delivered to the development services division as evidence of
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-34)  (Ord. No. 2383, 2836)



SEC. 14-50.  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the first sale of
a building.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-35)  (Ord. No. 2383, 2836)



SEC. 14-51.  FORMS; TIME LIMIT.



   (A)   (1)   The building official shall prepare standardized
forms for the report of building records.  Such report shall be delivered to
the owner, or his/her authorized agent, within seven days of receipt of the
application and fee.



      (2)   Delivery shall be effected by certified mail or by the
means requested and provided by the owner or his/her authorized agent.



   (B)   If the city fails to deliver, or to attempt to deliver, such
report within the seven-day period, the sale, if consummated, shall not be
deemed in violation of this subchapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-36)  (Ord. No. 2383, 2836)



ARTICLE XXI.  MOVING OF BUILDINGS



SEC. 14-55.  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Prior to moving a building into, out of, or within the city every
person shall obtain a building moving permit (“permit”) issued by the
development services manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-17)  (Ord. No. 2447, 2836)



SEC. 14-56.  APPLICATION.



   The application for the permit shall be in writing on a form furnished
by the development servicesmanager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-18)  (Ord. No. 2447, 2836)



SEC. 14-57.  FEES.



   An applicant shall pay the following fees at the time of submitting the
application for the permit:



   (A)   An inspection fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted
by resolution of the city council;and



   (B)   A fee in the amount of 1% of the value of the building as
determined from “Building Valuation Data” published in the current
edition of “Building Standards,” a bimonthly publication of the
International Conference of Building Officials, Whittier, California.  The
value of the building as determined by the development services manager shall
be final and binding upon the applicant.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-19)  (Ord. No. 2447, 2836)



SEC. 14-58.  COMPLETION BOND REQUIRED.



   (A)   When any building is moved into, out of or within the city,
the development services manager shall not issue the permit until the owner
of the property to which the building is to be moved (“the property”)
posts a completion bond (“the bond”) with the city clerk.  The owner as
principal and a qualified surety company as surety shall execute the bond. 
The owner and surety shall be jointly and severally responsible for the bond
which shall name the city as obliged and which shall be in a principal amount
equal to the value of the building plus 10%.



   (B)   The bond shall be conditioned on the completion of the work
within 90 days from the date of issuance of the permit and upon such
additional reasonable terms and requirements as shall be imposed by the
development services manager.  In the case of any violation of the
conditions of the bond, the city shall have any remedy available under the
terms of the bond or usual and appropriate to the obligee of such bond under
such circumstances.



   (C)   When approved by the city attorney, and under the conditions
of the bond, the owner may provide other sureties in the form of cash,
letters of credit, or other approved sureties.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-20)  (Ord. No. 2447, 2836)



SEC. 14-59.  VERIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   Prior to issuing the permit, the development services manager shall
verify that:



   (A)   All sewers on the property have been capped at the property
line and that any septic tanks have been removed;



   (B)   All electrical services to the property have been disconnected
and removed;



   (C)   All gas services to the property have been removed and capped
at the property line;



   (D)   The moving contractor has a valid State contractors C-21
license and workers' compensation insurance;



   (E)   The moving contractor has obtained adequate insurance as
required by the risk manager to compensate the city for any damage to curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, streets, landscaping or other property occurring as a
result of the moving of the building;



   (F)   The traffic engineer, police chief, and fire chief have
approved the day, time and route of the move; and



   (G)   The Ventura County Air Pollution Control District has
evaluated the building for asbestos fiber removal.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-21)  (Ord. No. 2447, 2836)



SEC. 14-60.  CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.



   The development services manager may impose reasonable conditions on
the issuance of the permit to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
public, including but not limited to, requiring that the building comply with
the provisions of the Uniform Building Code, for new buildings, as well as
all other federal, State and local regulations.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-22)  (Ord. No. 2447, 2836)



SEC. 14-61.  NOTICE OF MOVING.



   (A)   Within 24 hours of issuance of a permit, the development
services manager shall post notice of the building move for seven consecutive
days in the following locations:



      (1)   In a conspicuous location on the front of the building
to be moved; and



      (2)   In a conspicuous location on the lot to which the
building is to be moved, approximately 15 feet back of the front property
line.  If the location is a corner lot, a second notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous location facing the secondary street.



   (B)   The notice shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Address, city block number, lot number, tract number,
and zone from which the building is to be moved;



      (2)   Address, city block number, lot number, tract number,
and zone to which the building is to be moved; and



      (3)   A statement that during the seven-day posting period,
any person residing within 300 feet of the existing building location or new
building location may request a hearing to protest the issuance of the permit
by filing a written request with the city clerk.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-23)  (Ord. No. 2447, 2836)



SEC. 14-62.  NOTICE; EXCEPTION.



   The development services manager is not required to post a notice in
connection with the moving of manufactured housing or permanently installed
mobile home units.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-24)  (Ord. No. 2447, 2836)



SEC. 14-63.  REQUEST FOR HEARING.



   A request for a hearing to protest the issuance of a permit shall be in
writing and signed by two or more persons residing within 300 feet of the
existing building location or the new building location. A request for
hearing shall be accompanied by the hearing fee set by resolution of the city
council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-25)  (Ord. No. 2447, 2836)



SEC. 14-64.  HEARING OFFICER.



   The city manager shall act as hearing officer.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-26)  (Ord. No. 2447, 2836)



SEC. 14-65.  SETTING HEARINGS; NOTICE.



   After receipt of a request for hearing, accompanied by the hearing fee,
the city clerk shall send the request to the hearing officer.  The hearing
officer shall promptly set the matter for hearing. At least ten days before
the hearing, the hearing officer shall mail written notice of the date, time
and location of hearing to the person requesting the hearing and to the
applicant.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-27)  (Ord. No. 2447, 2836)



SEC. 14-66.  CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.



   (A)   All hearings shall be open to the public.



   (B)   The person requesting the hearing shall first present evidence
to justify non-issuance of the permit.  Thereafter, the applicant may
present evidence.  The burden of proof to justify non-issuance of the permit
is on the person requesting the hearing.



   (C)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
fashion and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-28)  (Ord. No. 2447, 2836)



SEC. 14-67.  DECISION.



   Within 14 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
shall issue and mail to the person requesting the hearing and to the
applicant a written decision containing a statement of the reasons on which
the decision is based.  The hearing officer shall provide such decision to
the development services manager, to be maintained with the application for
the permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-29)  (Ord. No. 2447, 2836)



SEC. 14-68.  TIME LIMIT FOR NEW APPLICATION.



   If the hearing officer denies the permit application, the applicant
shall not apply to move the same building to the same location within a
period of six months from the date of the hearing officer's denial of the
permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-29.1)  (Ord. No. 2447, 2836)



ARTICLE XXII.  SWIMMING POOL PROVISIONS



SEC. 14-70.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this section is to provide minimum standards to protect
life, limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design and construction of swimming pools and spas.  The
building official is designated as the administrator of this section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-37)  (Ord. No. 2491, 2836)



SEC. 14-71.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Hydrostatic uplift - Any pool to be constructed shall have a
suitable under drain relief to which a pump can be properly attached,
sufficient mass weight to prevent flotation, or hydrostatic relief valves.



   (B)   Surface water - Surface water from pool decks shall be
collected and conducted through non-erosive devices to a street, storm drain,
or other approved disposal area.  When a pool deck extends to within three
feet of any adjacent property, means shall be provided to conduct splash
water to a satisfactory point of disposal.



   (C)   Grab bars - Whenever egress from a pool is restricted by a
vertical wall or other barrier which extends more than 12 inches above the
water surface at the pool's edge, permanent handrails, grab bars, or
equivalent devices, shall be installed within 12 inches of the water surface,
capable of being securely grasped and adequate to support the weight of a
user of the pool.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-38)  (Ord. No. 2491, 2836)



ARTICLE XXIII.  BEACH CONSTRUCTION



SEC. 14-75.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this section is to provide minimum standards to protect
life, limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials used in
construction at the beach.  The building official is designated as the
administrator of this section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-39)  (Ord. No. 2491, 2836)



SEC. 14-76.  CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Application - This section shall apply exclusively to building
sites between the ocean and the first public street inland from the beach.



   (B)   Disclaimer - The legal owner shall submit two letters, one to
the building official and one to the city planner, which states they are
aware the lot they propose to build or improve is subject to wave run-up and
sheet flow and they will hold the city harmless.



   (C)   Construction -



      (1)   All buildings and structures, except for planter boxes,
sidewalks, patio covers, and other minor structures, shall be supported on
pilings.



      (2)   Certified forms as required by chapter 18, shall be
completed and submitted to development services division.  This form is
required after the first floor is completed and before any floor above the
first story commences construction.



      (3)   Except for lots designated to be in the R-B-1 coastal
sub-zone, the minimum and maximum elevation of the bottom of the lowest
structural member for a beach house shall comply with section 17-25(D) of
this code.



      (4)   A minimum vertical clearance of two feet shall be
maintained under the first floor structural members to assure the free
passages of sheet water.



      (5)   This note shall be on each floor plan sheet: 
“Support equipment for the residence, such as water heaters, furnaces,
shall be located above so as not to impede sheet water.”



      (6)   All exposed structural material must be approved
corrosion resistant for marine environment.  The following shall be noted on
the first sheet of the structural submittal drawings:



         (a)   All exposed bolts, washers, nails or metal
connectors are to be specified as hot- dipgalvanized.



         (b)   Minimum thickness for structural steel is
3/8-inch.  This includes connector plates and beam/column webs and
flanges.  All welding shall be done by certified welder and all metal
protection burned, scraped, chipped, or removed shall be re-protected.



         (c)   Steel beams and columns must have adequate
corrosion protection.  Applicant must submit specifications on proposed
product and application procedure for review and approval.



      (7)   Plumbing, electrical, and mechanical:



         (a)   All pipe and conduit, where exposed to weather or
moisture or outside the building envelope shall be supported with
non-corrosive devices.  Gas piping must be approved for buried conditions
where exposed to moisture.



         (b)   Non-corrosive electrical conduit is recommended
where exposed to weather or moisture.



      (8)   Prior to final inspection a licensed surveyor shall
certify in a report that:



“I,                                                
                , certify that the building located at          
                                                   
          , complies with the requirements of the Oxnard City Code.”



         (a)   In the report the following shall be noted:



            (i)   The NGVD base elevation;



            (ii)   The highest and lowest garage floor
elevation, the floor elevations;



            (iii)   The average height of the roof; and



            (iv)   The lowest and highest spot of the building.



         (b)   A section plan shall accompany the report noting
major elevation points on the drawings.



   (D)   Garages - A garage floor may be at a lower elevation if it is
used only for vehicles and storage.  Refer to the code for the minimum
garage floor elevation and for walls below the lowest habitable floor
level.  Calculations by a registered architect or engineer for “breakaway
walls” shall be designed as noted in the “Coastal Construction Manual
FEMA 55/February, 1986,” as published by Federal Emergency Management
Agency and shall be included in the submittal drawings.



   (E)   Design criteria -



      (1)   Coastal engineering report required.  A civil engineer
specializing and/or familiar with coastal engineering shall submit a wet
signed and stamped report (two copies) establishing the minimum base flood
elevation, BFE, for each lot based on a 100-year storm.  The report shall
address horizontal water loads and shall include inertial and drag forces of
waves, current drag forces, and impact forces from waterborne storm debris. 
The report shall also address dynamic and buoyancy uplift loads.  The
coastal engineer shall review and wet sign and stamp the final submittal set.



      (2)   Geotechnical/soils report required.  A
geotechnical/soils report by a registered civil engineer is required for each
lot.  The geotechnical/soils engineer shall review and wet sign and stamp
the final grading or site plan.



      (3)   Pilings shall be designed for wind and seismic loads and
to withstand forces from flow water and wave action when located within the
V-Zone, and to withstand forces from flowing water within the A-Zone.  The
pile engineer shall use the design criteria recommended by the
geotechnical/soils engineer, coastal engineer, architect, and structural
engineer for the design of piles. Precast concrete pile analysis by a
registered structural engineer is required.  Submittal of wet signed and
stamp calculations shall note concrete design mix, concrete strength, and
reinforcing steel requirements.  Pile design shall take into account the
scouring of sand around the piles as noted in the geotechnical report and/or
coastal engineers report which ever notes the greater depth.  Submit pile
details noting all pile dimensions, cross-sectional plan, reinforcing steel,
and the pile cap attachment. No piles will be cut on site without the written
approval by the pile design engineer or unless the cutting of the pile is
clearly acknowledged in the calculations prepared by the pile engineer (it
should specify location, and maximum or minimum length of cut allowed).



      (4)   Minimum piling depth shall be 25 feet below the top of
street curb elevation, measured at the front property line.  Piling depth
greater than 25 feet specified by the geotechnical/soils engineer or coastal
engineer shall be used as the minimum pile depth.



      (5)   Note on the cover sheet of the submittal drawings the
number of stories for the proposed project.  The definition of “story”
used in the California Building Code will apply.  In some cases the garage
level and/or the area between the beach and first habitable finished floor
can be classified as a “story.”  Clearly note the distance between grade
and the first habitable finished floor each building elevation and each
building cross-section.



      (6)   Designs with zero lot line features shall be protected
per CBC Section 503 Vertical and Horizontal components of the structure
adjacent to openings required by chapter 18 shall be constructed to meet
one-hour fire resistive requirements.



(`64 Code, Sec. 9-40)  (Ord. No. 2491, 2691, 2836)



ARTICLE XXIV.  SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS



SEC. 14-80.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this article is to provide an expedited, streamlined
solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188
(Chapter 521, Statutes 2014, California Government Code section 65850.5) in
order to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential
rooftop solar energy systems. This article encourages the use of solar
systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property
owners and the city and expanding the ability of property owners to install
solar energy systems. This article allows the city to achieve these goals
while protecting the public health and safety.



(Ord. No. 2892)



SEC. 14-81.  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words and phrases as used in this section are defined as
follows:



   (A)   BUILDING OFFICIAL - As defined in the California Building Code.



   (B)   ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL - The utilization of one or more of the
following:



      (1)   E-mail;



      (2)   The Internet;



      (3)   Facsimile.



   (C)   SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM - All of the
following:



      (1)   A solar energy system that is no larger than ten
kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.



      (2)   A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable
state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or
amended by the city and Cal. Civil Code, Section 714(c)(3) as such section or
subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or re-designated from time to time.



      (3)   A solar energy system that is installed on a single or
duplex family dwelling.



      (4)   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the
maximum legal building height as defined by the city.



   (D)   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM - Has the same meaning set forth in Cal.
Civil Code, Section 801.5(a)(1) and (2) as such section or subdivision may be
amended, renumbered, or re-designated from time to time.



   (E)   SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT - A significant, quantifiable,
direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written
public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on
the date the application was deemed complete.



(Ord. No. 2892)



SEC. 14-82.  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   This article applies to the permitting of all small
residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city.



   (B)   Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally
established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this article are not subject to the requirements of this article
unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially
change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such
a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance and
cleaning shall not require a permit.



(Ord. No. 2892)



SEC. 14-83.  APPLICATIONS AND DOCUMENTS.



   (A)   The checklist and required permitting documentation for a
small residential rooftop solar energy system shall be made available on the
publicly accessible city website.



   (B)   Electronic submittal of the required permit application and
documents shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar
energy system permit applicants.



   (C)   In the case of electronic submittal, the electronic signature
of the applicant on all forms, applications and other documentation may be
used in lieu of a wet signature. This requirement notwithstanding, wet
signatures shall be required for engineering calculations and plans in
accordance with state law.



(Ord. No. 2892)



SEC. 14-84.  DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES
DEPARTMENT; FEES.



   (A)   The building official shall develop and adopt a checklist of
all requirements with which small rooftop solar energy systems shall comply
to be eligible for expedited review.



   (B)   The small residential rooftop solar system permit process,
standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to the
recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and
standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar
Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and
Research.



   (C)   All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential
rooftop solar energy systems shall comply with Cal. Government Code, Section
65850.55, Cal. Government Code, Section 66015, Cal. Government Code, Section
66016, and Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 17951, as such sections or
subdivisions may be amended, renumbered, or re-designated from time to time.



(Ord. No. 2892)



SEC. 14-85.  SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and
safety standards and requirements imposed by the state, the city and the
city's fire department.



   (B)   Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family
residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications
shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the
California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.



   (C)   Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all
applicable safety and performance standards established by the California
Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and
accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where
applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and
reliability.



(Ord. No. 2892)



SEC. 14-86.  PERMIT REVIEW AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The development services department shall adopt an
administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small
residential rooftop solar energy systems within 30 days of the adoption on
this ordinance. The building and engineering services division of the
development services department shall issue a building permit or other
nondiscretionary permit the same day for over-the-counter applications or
within five business days for electronic applications of receipt of a
complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist
and standard plan. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect
the small residential rooftop solar energy system to the local utility
provider's electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such
approval or permission from the local utility provider.



   (B)   The building official may require an applicant to apply for a
use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the
solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public
health and safety. Such decision may be appealed to the planning commission
within ten days after the date of the building official's decision.



   (C)   Review of the application shall be limited to the building
official's review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal
health and safety requirements.



   (D)   If a use permit is required, the building official may deny an
application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based
upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would
have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no
feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse
impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the
potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such
decisions may be appealed to the planning commission within ten days after
the date of the building official's decision.



   (E)   Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to
mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest
possible cost.



   (F)   "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the
specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective
method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly
situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city
shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or
mitigation meets the conditions of Cal. Civil Code, Section 714(d)(1)(A) and
(B) defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the
system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance.



   (G)   The city shall not condition approval of an application on the
approval of an association, as defined in Cal. Civil Code, Section 4080.



   (H)   If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction
notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional
information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit
issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.



   (I)   Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the
city.



   (J)   The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should
include consolidated inspections.



   (K)   If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails
inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the
requirements of this ordinance. City may charge a re-inspection fee. as
established by City Council resolution, if a subsequent inspection is
required.



(Ord. No. 2892)



ARTICLE XXV.  ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION PERMITTING



SEC. 14-90.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   Electric vehicle charging stations which qualify for expedited permit
processing, pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65850.7, shall be subject
to the administrative permitting procedures set forth in this article.



(Ord. No. 2909)



SEC. 14-91.  EXPEDITED REVIEW PROCESS.



   Consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65850.7, the Building
Official shall implement an expedited administrative permit review process
for electric vehicle charging stations, and adopt a checklist of all
requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply with
in order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited administrative
permit review process and checklist may refer to the recommendations in the
checklist prescribed by the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric
Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission
Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook” published by the
Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. The city’s adopted checklist
shall be published on the city’s website.



(Ord. No. 2909)



SEC. 14-92.  ELECTRONIC SUBMITTALS.



   Consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65850.7, the Building
Official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered
by this article and associated supporting documentations. In accepting such
permit applications, the Building Official shall also accept electronic
signatures on all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a
wet signature by the applicant.



(Ord. No. 2909)



SEC. 14-93.  ASSOCIATION APPROVAL.



   Consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65850.7, the Building
Official shall not condition the approval for any electric vehicle charging
station permit on the approval of such a system by an association, as that
term is defined by Cal. Civil Code, Section 4080.



(Ord. No. 2909)



SEC. 14-94.  PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESSING.



   A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the
city’s adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly
processed. Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the permit
application and supporting documents meets the requirements of the city’s
adopted checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws, the Building
Official shall, consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65850.7, approve
the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not
authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging
station until approval is granted by the city. If the Building Official
determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a
written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the
application and any additional information required to be eligible for
expedited permit issuance.



(Ord. No. 2909)



SEC. 14-95.  TECHNICAL REVIEW.



   It is the intent of this article to encourage the installation of
electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to permitting for
charging stations so long as the action does not supersede the Building
Official’s authority to address higher priority life-safety situations. If
the Building Official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the
electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon
the public health or safety, as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65850.7, the city may require the applicant to apply for a use permit, as
described in Chapter 16, Article VII, Division 3 of the City Code.



(Ord. No. 2909)



ARTICLE XXVI.  TENANT RELOCATION ASSISTANCE



SEC. 14-96.  FINDINGS.



   (A)   Some rental units in Oxnard have severe code violations that
threaten the health and safety of occupants, and require the units or rooms
to be vacated to allow for extensive repairs.



   (B)   Such code violations are often caused by deferred maintenance,
and may breach the landlord’s implied warranty of habitability and
sometimes constitute constructive eviction of the tenant household from its
residence.



   (C)   Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 17975 requires the
property owner to pay relocation payments to the tenant where the need to
relocate arises from violations so extensive and of such a nature that the
immediate health and safety of the residents is endangered.



   (D)   Financial hardship arises because the tenant generally needs a
large sum of money to relocate, often including first and last month’s
rent, deposits, moving expenses and utility deposits for a new residence. 
Low-income tenants are generally unable to obtain such sums and, as a result,
are at great risk of becoming homeless.



   (E)   Cal. Health and Safety Code, Sections 17975.1 and 17975.2
specify the timing and level of payments to be provided by the property
owner.  If a tenant is entitled to relocation benefits, the building
official or designee provides written notice to the tenant of his/her
entitlement to the benefits.  Written notice may be satisfied by posting
notice on the premises, stating that tenants may be entitled to relocation
benefits.



   (F)   Cal. Health and Safety Code Section 17975.5 authorizes the
city to adopt an ordinance that allows the city to advance relocation
payments to tenants where the landlord fails, neglects, or refuses to pay the
displaced tenant and to later collect the amount paid to the displaced
tenant, along with a penalty, from the property owner.



   (G)   This article is adopted pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety
Code, Sections 17975 et seq.



(Ord. No. 2946)



SEC. 14-97.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:



   (A)   DISPLACED - A tenant that is ordered to move out of a
residential unit or structure by an order to vacate issued by the city or by
another enforcement agency.



   (B)   ORDER TO VACATE - The first notice sent by an authorized city
official to the owner and posted on the affected property, declaring that,
due to failure to repair or maintain, the unit or structure shall be vacated.



   (C)   OWNER - The owner of the property at the time the order to
vacate is issued, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and any
successor in interest.



   (D)   RESIDENTIAL UNIT OR STRUCTURE - Any dwelling, apartment, room
or place that is the place of permanent or customary and usual abode of any
person or household.  Residential unit or structure shall include mobile
homes located in mobile home parks, provided that the city has assumed
enforcement authority over such parks from the State Department of Housing
and Community Development.



   (E)   TENANT - Any resident of the affected property who is a tenant
as that term is used in Chapter 2 of Title 5 of Part 4 of the California
Civil Code (Sections 1940 et seq.)



   (F)   VACATION DATE - The date by which a tenant is required to
vacate a unit or structure, pursuant to an order by an authorized city
official.



(Ord. No. 2946)



SEC. 14-98.  ELIGIBILITY FOR RELOCATION BENEFITS AND APPEAL.



   (A)   A tenant shall be eligible for relocation assistance and
payments, pursuant to this chapter and Cal. Health and Safety Code, Sections
17975 et seq., when the city determines that the condition of a building or
portion thereof is such that a residential unit cannot be safely occupied by
that tenant while the building or portion thereof is being brought into code
compliance.



   (B)   Exceptions.  A tenant shall not be eligible for relocation
assistance and payments under the following conditions:



      (1)   The property owner provides a replacement dwelling of
comparable size and appurtenances to the tenant; or



      (2)   The tenant has caused or substantially contributed to
the condition giving rise to the order to vacate, or unreasonably prevented
the property owner or designated agent from undertaking maintenance or
repairs that would have prevented or rectified the code violation.  Nor
shall any relocation benefits be payable to a tenant, if any guest or invitee
of the tenant has caused or substantially contributed to the condition giving
rise to the order to vacate, as determined by the building official or
designee.  The building official or designee shall make the determination
whether a tenant, tenant’s guest, or invitee caused or substantially
contributed to the condition, giving rise to the order to vacate; or



      (3)   If the residential unit or structure becomes unsafe or
hazardous as a result of a natural disaster or force majeure; or



      (4)   If the residential unit or structure is operated as an
emergency or temporary shelter for homeless persons (whether such persons
have assigned rooms or beds, and regardless of duration of stay by any
occupant) by a nonprofit organization or public agency owning, leasing, or
managing such dwelling unit; or



      (5)   If the tenant is in default in payment of rent, unless
rent is being lawfully withheld by the tenant.



   (C)   The building official shall have sole discretion to determine
the amount, type and duration of the relocation benefits pursuant to this
chapter and Cal. Health and Safety Code, Sections 17975 et seq.  The
property owner or designated agent and any displaced tenant or his/her
representative shall be entitled to meet with the building official to
present facts demonstrating that relocation benefits should or should not be
paid.  The building official or designee shall make a determination based on
the provisions of this chapter, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to
this chapter, and the factual information submitted by the parties or
otherwise readily available, and shall communicate his/her determination in
writing to the tenant and the property owner or designated agent.  When
notice to the property owner of the building official’s relocation benefits
determination is not reasonably possible because immediate vacation is
necessary, the property owner shall have only the appeal right set forth in
section 14-100.



   (D)   When the property owner or tenant wishes to contest a
determination regarding eligibility or relocation payment amounts made by the
building official, such party should file a written request for a hearing
with the city manager within ten days of the determination.  Any property
owner requesting an appeal must first deposit with the building official the
full unpaid amount in dispute, unless the property owner can demonstrate
significant hardship or other extraordinary circumstances to the building
official that would justify a waiver of such deposit.  The city manager or
designee shall hold a hearing and shall use reasonable efforts to render
his/her decision on any such appeal within 30 days of a timely hearing
request.  The city manager’s or designee’s decision shall be final, with
no appeal to the city council.



(Ord. No. 2946)



SEC. 14-99.  PAYMENT OF RELOCATION COSTS BY CITY.



   (A)   In the event the property owner or designated agent fails,
neglects or refuses to pay relocation benefits, as required by this chapter,
to a displaced tenant, the city may, within budgetary limitations, make
payment of such relocation benefits as the building official or designee
determines is necessary to assist the displaced tenant to relocate, up to the
amount payable by the property owner under this chapter and Cal. Health and
Safety Code, Section 17975.2.



   (B)   The city may recover from the property owner any amount paid
to a tenant pursuant to this chapter.  The city shall also be entitled to
recover from the property owner an additional amount, not to exceed $10,000,
equal to one-half the amount so paid as a penalty for failure to make timely
payment to the displaced tenant.



   (C)   Any amount paid by the city and any applicable penalties and
administrative costs shall be a personal obligation of the property owner and
may be recorded as a special assessment against the property with the county
recorder if the property owner fails to pay the city.



   (D)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall require the city to
pay any relocation benefits to any tenant, or to assume any obligation,
requirement, or duty of the property owner or designated agent pursuant to
this chapter.



   (E)   The damages that a displaced tenant may receive from the
property owner under Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 17975.2 shall be
reduced by the amount of any benefits received from the city.



(Ord. No. 2946)



SEC. 14-100. RECOVERY OF RELOCATION COSTS BY CITY; NOTICE; HEARING; APPEAL.



   (A)   Prior to instituting any action to collect relocation payments
from the property owner or to record a special assessment pursuant to this
chapter, the building official or designee shall send to the property owner
by first-class mail, postage prepaid, at the property owner’s address as
shown on the last equalized assessment roll, an itemized accounting of all
benefits paid by the city to the property owner’s tenants, and any
penalties or costs the city is seeking to recover.



   (B)   If the property owner contends that not all of the benefits
are chargeable to the property owner because the recipients were not
displaced tenants, or on other grounds, the property owner shall submit a
written appeal to the building official within 20 days after receipt of the
itemized accounting.  The building official, or designee, shall hold an
administrative hearing for the purpose of determining the amount of benefits
and any penalties or costs.



   (C)   The building official’s decision may be appealed to the city
manager within ten days of the date of the service of the building
official’s written decision.  The city manager may appoint a hearing
officer in his/her discretion.  The city managers or hearing officer’s
decision shall be final and conclusive, shall be served no later than five
calendar days after the decision is signed, and shall be sent first-class
mail, postage prepaid, to the property owner's address as shown on the last
equalized assessment roll.  The property owner shall pay the charge that was
the subject of the appeal within 30 days after the date an adverse decision
is mailed to the property owner.  The decision shall be appealed pursuant to
Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.6, and review of the decision
shall be in accordance with Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.5. 
The decision shall include reference to this section and Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure, Section 1094.6.



   (D)   If the property owner fails to obtain a more favorable
decision than that set forth in the itemized accounting, the property owner
or designated agent shall be liable to the city for the costs of the
administrative hearing and appeal, not to exceed $5,000.  The failure to
receive the itemized accounting shall not relieve the property owner of any
obligation to the city.



   (E)   Notwithstanding section 14-99(B) of this chapter, if there are
fewer than ten days between the first posting and mailing of the order to
vacate and the vacation date, and if the city advances relocation benefits to
any tenant, no penalty shall be payable by the property owner, if
reimbursement is made to the city within 30 days after the date an itemized
accounting from the city is mailed, as set forth in this section.



(Ord. No. 2946)



SEC. 14-101.  REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.



   The remedies hereunder are cumulative and in addition to any other
remedies available under law.



(Ord. No. 2946)



ARTICLE XXVII.  SAFE HOMES SAFE FAMILIES REPEAT OFFENDER PROGRAM



SEC. 14-102.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health and safety of all
residential property dwellers in the city by establishing the safe homes safe
families repeat offender program.



(Ord. No. 2945)



SEC. 14-103.  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   CODE OFFICIAL - The code compliance manager or his/her
designee.



   (B)   DANGEROUS - An imminent danger is present, or the conditions
are able or likely to cause physical harm or injury to someone in the
environment.



   (C)   DWELLING UNIT - A residential unit providing complete,
independent living facilities, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, and cooking.



   (D)   EMERGENCY CONDITIONS - Include, but are not limited to, fire,
natural disaster, flood, collapse, hazard, burst pipes, lack of working
utilities, or other condition that requires an immediate response to prevent
harm to the property, the tenants of the property, or the public.



   (E)   HABITABILITY - Conditions, including, but not limited to, hot
water, electric service, heating, electrical hazards and infestation, that
impair the quality of life for the tenant.



   (F)   NOTICE OF VIOLATION - A written notice that a violation of the
city code exists.



   (G)   PROGRAM - The safe homes safe families repeat offender program.



   (H)   REPEAT OFFENDER - A responsible person who has three or more
confirmed code enforcement violations within three years for conditions that
are dangerous or impair habitability at the same location; or at least three
separate confirmed code enforcement violations within three years at
different locations under common ownership; or unresolved violations pending
three years or more.



   (I)   RESPONSIBLE PERSON - A responsible person as defined in
section 7-51(J) of the city code.



(Ord. No. 2945)



SEC. 14-104.  REPEAT OFFENDER REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Registration into the program is required under this chapter
if any the following conditions are met:



      (1)   Three or more separate confirmed code enforcement
violations for conditions that are dangerous or impair habitability are
issued at the same property within a period of consecutive three years; or



      (2)   Three or more separate confirmed code enforcement
violations for conditions that are dangerous or impair habitability and are
issued at different properties owned by the same responsible person; or



      (3)   A confirmed code enforcement violation for any condition
that is dangerous or impairs habitability is issued at the property, and the
violation remains unresolved for at least three years.



   (B)   The code official shall notify the repeat offender by written
notice that the property is enrolled in the program.



   (C)   All units within a multi-unit complex that have addresses
registered in the program shall be subject to inclusion in the program.



(Ord. No. 2945)



SEC. 14-105.  APPEAL OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   A repeat offender having an objection to registration under
this chapter shall file with the city clerk a written request for an appeal
before a hearing officer within 15 days of receiving a notice from the code
official.



   (B)   On receiving a request for an appeal hearing, the city clerk
shall send the request to the hearing officer.  The hearing officer shall
promptly schedule and conduct the matter for hearing.  At least ten days
before the hearing, the hearing officer shall mail written notice to the
repeat offender of the date, time and place of hearing.



(Ord. No. 2945)



SEC. 14-106.  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Once a property has been identified by the code official for
enrollment in the program, the responsible person shall be required to attend
an initial meeting with the code official.



   (B)   Following the initial meeting, the code official shall
register the property into the program.



   (C)   Once a property is registered into the program, the code
official shall perform an initial inspection of the registered property.



   (D)   Following the initial inspection, the code official may issue
a notice of violation or citation to the responsible person.  The notice
shall provide a reasonable time, not to exceed an initial 30 days, to make
repairs or cure health and safety violations.  Extensions may be granted by
the code official or his/her designee for good cause.



   (E)   The registered property shall be subjected to mandatory yearly
inspections which shall include inspection fees established by city council
resolution.



   (F)   If one or more significant or dangerous violations are found
during an inspection of a registered property, the code official shall
investigate the status of other properties in the city held by the same
responsible person and determine if violations exist at the other
properties.  If the code official determines that violations exist at the
other properties, an action may be brought to collectively address multiple
properties of the same responsible person.



   (G)   Properties registered in the program are subject to double
civil citation fine amounts, not to exceed $1,000 per violation.



   (H)   After re-inspection and finding all repairs have not been
completed, or all health and safety violations have not been cured, the city
attorney shall decide the proper course of action, including obtaining a
court appointed receiver to take control of the property.



   (I)   If an inspected property is determined not be a candidate for
the program, it may be assigned to the code enforcement division to conduct
an inspection and pursue traditional code enforcement channels.



   (J)    A responsible person may refuse consent to an inspection
conducted by the code official.  If consent is refused, the code official
may seek an administrative search warrant pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure, Sections 1822.50 et seq.



(Ord. No. 2945)



SEC. 14-107.  REGISTRATION PERIOD.



   The property shall remain registered in the program until the property
has successfully undergone two consecutive inspections, no less than 12
months apart, without violations established by the code official. 



   If within 90 days following the sale of a registered property, the
property becomes compliant, the property shall be removed from the program.



(Ord. No. 2945)



ARTICLE XXVIII.  SUBSTANDARD AND IMPROPER OCCUPANCY CONDITIONS



SEC. 14-110.  SUBSTANDARD CONDITIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any responsible person, as defined in section
7-51(J) of the city code, to maintain, after having been issued a notice of
violation, any building or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit,
guestroom or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, in
which there exists substandard conditions as defined in Cal. Health and
Safety Code, Section 17920.3, or as defined in Cal. Civil Code, Sections 1941
et seq.



(Ord. No. 2947)



SEC. 14-111.  IMPROPER OCCUPANCY.



   It shall be unlawful for any responsible person, as defined in section
7-51(J) of the city code, to maintain any building or portion thereof,
including any dwelling unit, guestroom or suite of rooms, or the premises on
which the same is located, in which there exists improper occupancy or
improper occupancies.  Kitchens and non-habitable spaces shall not be used
for sleeping purposes.



(Ord. No. 2947)



CHAPTER 15:  SUBDIVISIONS



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   15-1.   Purpose and application of chapter; definitions



   15-2.   Advisory agency



   15-3.   Conformity to general plan; streets; report



   15-4.   Fees



ARTICLE II.  MAPS



DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY



   15-10.   Tentative subdivision map and final map required; exceptions



   15-11.   Tentative parcel maps and parcel maps required; exemptions;
waivers



   15-12.   Check list for developers



   15-13.   City-initiated merger of contiguous parcels



DIVISION 2.  SUBDIVISION AND PARCEL MAPS



   15-15.   Tentative subdivision maps



   15-16.   Final maps



   15-17.   Tentative parcel maps and parcel maps; owner's statement



   15-18.   Maps of condominium and community apartment projects



   15-19.   Regulations for vesting tentative maps



ARTICLE III.  PROCEDURES



DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY



   15-25.   Public hearings; appeals



   15-26.   Owners' consent required



   15-27.   Incomplete maps



   15-28.   Environmental review required



DIVISION 2.  TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAPS



   15-35.   Initiation of proposed division of land



   15-36.   Submission



   15-37.   Information to accompany tentative subdivision map



   15-38.   Review by staff advisory committee



   15-39.   Staff reports



   15-40.   Planning commission consideration and recommendation



   15-41.   City council action



   15-42.   Notice



   15-43.   Inaction of city council



   15-44.   Conditional approval by city council



   15-45.   Conditions imposed on tentative parcel map; limitations



   15-46.   Term of map; time extension



   15-47.   Expiration; effect



DIVISION 3.  FINAL MAPS AND PARCEL MAPS



   15-50.   Preparation of and application for final map or parcel map



   15-51.   Requirements for application



   15-52.   Improvement agreement and bonds



   15-53.   Submission for examination; rejection and approval



   15-54.   Subdivider's memorandum and required data



   15-55.   Director action



   15-56.   Dedications; acceptance



DIVISION 4.  REQUIREMENTS OF APPROVAL



   15-60.   Compliance with requirements and conditions; waiver of
technical errors



   15-61.   Consistency with general and specific plans



   15-62.   Denial on specific findings; exceptions



   15-63.   Access to public resources



   15-64.   Water quality requirements



   15-65.   Environmental impact



   15-66.   Grading and erosion control



   15-67.   Deferment of submission of documents or payment of fees



DIVISION 5.  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW



   15-75.   Purpose and intent



   15-76.   When required



   15-77.   Application



   15-78.   Review and approval of development plans



   15-79.   Conformance



   15-80.   Amendments to development plan



ARTICLE IV.  DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS



DIVISION 1.  PUBLIC EASEMENTS



   15-85.   Required generally



   15-86.   Waiver of direct access to streets



   15-87.   Dedication under parcel map



   15-88.   Bicycle paths; transit facilities



DIVISION 2.  CONTRIBUTION OF PARK SITES



   15-95.   Purpose



   15-96.   Requirements



   15-97.   Increased density; later residential development



   15-98.   Determination of density factor and dwelling units



   15-99.   Formula for dedication or fees



   15-100.   Amount of fee in lieu of land dedication



   15-101.   Determination of land dedication or fee



   15-102.   Time of payment of fee



   15-103.   Time of development; limitation on use of land or fee



DIVISION 3.  RESERVATION OF SITES



   15-105.   Requirements



   15-106.   Standards and formula



   15-107.   Procedure for acquisition of reserved land



   15-108.   Purchase price



   15-109.   Termination



DIVISION 4.  SCHOOL FACILITIES



   15-115.   Title



   15-116.   Authority



   15-117.   Purpose



   15-118.   Regulations



   15-119.   General plan



   15-120.   Definitions



   15-121.   Findings of school district



   15-122.   Content of findings



   15-123.   Concurrence by city council



   15-124.   School district schedule



   15-125.   Findings by city council



   15-126.   Findings by decision-making body



   15-127.   Facilities fee



   15-128.   Determination of student population density and dwelling
units



   15-129.   Dedication of land in lieu of fees



   15-130.   Application of fees



   15-131.   School district report; frequency thereof; contents



ARTICLE V.  IMPROVEMENTS AND STANDARDS



DIVISION 1.  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS



   15-135.   Land divisions of four lots or fewer



   15-136.   Land divisions of five lots or more; drainage fees; use of
sewer facilities



   15-137.   Supplemental capacity; reimbursement



DIVISION 2.  STANDARDS



   15-145.   Blocks



   15-146.   Lots



   15-147.   Streets



   15-148.   Alleys



   15-149.   Sidewalks, curbs



   15-150.   Sewers



   15-151.   Monuments required



   15-152.   Monument construction



   15-153.   Monument security



ARTICLE VI.  DEVELOPMENT FEE PROCEDURES



DIVISION 1.  IN GENERAL



   15-165.   Applicability



   15-166.   Exemptions



   15-167.   Definitions



   15-168.   Amount of fee; adoption of resolution



   15-169.   Purpose; use; relationship



   15-170.   Hearing required



   15-171.   Amendment procedures



   15-172.   Effective date



   15-173.   Imposition, calculation and collection of development fees



   15-174.   Development fee accounts



   15-175.   Use of development fee proceeds



   15-176.   Time limit on expenditures



   15-177.   Refunds



   15-178.   Credits



   15-179.   Appeals



   15-180.   Protests/judicial review



   15-181.   Effect of development fees on zoning and subdivision
regulations



   15-182.   Development fees as additional and supplemental
requirements



DIVISION 2.  PLANNED DRAINAGE FACILITIES FEES



   15-185.   Purpose



   15-186.   Master plan of drainage facilities



   15-187.   Imposition of fees



   15-188.   Use of fees



   15-189.   Reasonable relationship



DIVISION 3.  PLANNED WASTEWATER FACILITIES FEES



   15-195.   Purpose



   15-196.   Master plan of wastewater facilities



   15-197.   Imposition of fees



   15-198.   Use of fees



   15-199.   Reasonable relationship



   15-200.   Fees to be set by ordinance



DIVISION 4.  PLANNED WATER FACILITIES FEES



   15-205.   Purpose



   15-206.   Master plan of water facilities



   15-207.   Imposition of fees



   15-208.   Use of fees



   15-209.   Reasonable relationship



DIVISION 5.  PLANNED TRAFFIC CIRCULATION FACILITIES FEES



   15-215.   Purpose



   15-216.   Master plan of traffic circulation facilities



   15-217.   Imposition of fees



   15-218.   Use of fees



   15-219.   Reasonable relationship



DIVISION 6.  GROWTH REQUIREMENT CAPITAL FEES



   15-225.   Purpose



   15-226.   Capital improvement plan



   15-227.   Imposition of fees



   15-228.   Use



   15-229.   Reasonable relationship



DIVISION 7.  BRIDGE AND THOROUGHFARE FEES



   15-235.   Purpose



   15-236.   Definitions



   15-237.   Establishing an area benefit; public hearing



   15-238.   Requirement for payment of bridge and thoroughfare fees



   15-239.   Requirements for bridges and thoroughfares



   15-240.   Exemptions from fee



   15-241.   Consideration in lieu of payment of fees



ARTICLE VII.  SOIL REPORTS



   15-250.   Preliminary soil report



   15-251.   Investigation of critical soils



   15-252.   Approval of investigation



   15-253.   Limitation on fill



ARTICLE VIII.  REVERSION TO ACREAGE



   15-260.   In general



   15-261.   Initiation of proceedings



   15-262.   Contents of petition



   15-263.   Review by city engineer



   15-264.   City council approval



   15-265.   Conditions



   15-266.   Filing of final map



   15-267.   Merger without reversion to acreage of contiguous parcels
under common ownership



ARTICLE IX.  IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENTS



   15-275.   Generally



ARTICLE X.  SECURITY AND SECURITY RELEASE



   15-280.   Improvement security



   15-281.   Improvement security release



ARTICLE XI.  EFFECT OF APPROVALS



   15-285.   Approval of map not to authorize violation of other laws



   15-286.   Sales contrary to parcel map regulations to be voidable



   15-287.   Requirements of purchaser unaware of violation



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 15-1.  PURPOSE AND APPLICATION OF CHAPTER; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   This chapter is adopted to supplement and implement the
Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov't Code, Title 7, Division 2, commencing with
Section 66410, and shall apply to all divisions of land made after March 1,
1975.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to those
matters to which the Subdivision Map Act is expressly inapplicable under Cal.
Gov't Code, Sections 66412, 66412.1, 66412.2 and 66412.5 thereof.



   (C)   Terms used in this chapter which are defined in the
Subdivision Map Act shall have the same meaning as in that act.  In
addition, the following words shall have the following meanings:



      (1)   DEVELOPER - The same as subdivider.



      (2)   DEVELOPMENT - Any improvement of land for which a
subdivision map or a parcel map is required under this chapter.



      (3)   DIRECTOR - The development services director or designee.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-1)  (Ord. No. 1570, 1684)



SEC. 15-2.  ADVISORY AGENCY.



   The planning commission ("commission") is designated an "advisory
agency," as referred to in the Subdivision Map Act.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-2)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 15-3.  CONFORMITY TO GENERAL PLAN; STREETS; REPORT.



   (A)   A development plan shall conform to the city's general plan
and the elements thereof.  In the absence of a specific circulation plan,
the street system proposed by a development plan shall relate to the existing
streets in the area adjoining the proposed subdivision.



   (B)   A report as to conformity to the city's general plan, which is
required pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Section 6502 as the result of a
proposed division of land, may be included as part of and at the same time as
the action taken by the commission on the division of land.



   (C)   The report is not required for a proposed land division which
involves:



      (1)   The disposition of the remainder of a larger parcel
which was acquired and used in part for street purposes;



      (2)   An acquisition, disposition or abandonment for street
widening; or



      (3)   An alignment project, provided that the commission
expressly finds that the disposition for street purposes, acquisition,
disposition or abandonment for street widening, or an alignment project is of
a minor nature.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-3)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-4.  FEES.



   There may be established and imposed by city council resolution a
requirement for the payment for fees for the purposes of defraying the actual
or estimated costs of filing and processing subdivision maps and parcel maps
and of other procedures required or authorized by this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-4)  (Ord. No. 1570)



ARTICLE II.  MAPS



DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY



SEC. 15-10.  TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAP AND FINAL MAP REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   A tentative subdivision map and a final map shall be required for the
subdivisions described in Cal. Gov't Code, Section 66426, with the exceptions
stated therein.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-10)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-11.  TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS AND PARCEL MAPS REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS;
WAIVERS.



   (A)   A tentative parcel map and a parcel map shall be required for
each division of land creating four or fewer parcels and for each subdivision
that is subject to an exception stated in Cal. Gov't Code, Section 66426.



   (B)   Neither a tentative parcel map nor parcel map shall be
required in the situations described in Cal. Gov't Code, Section 66428,
Subdivisions (1) and (2); provided, however, that a parcel map shall be
required in a situation described in Cal. Gov't Code, Section 66428,
Subsection (a), Subdivision (2) and the decision-making body finds, based on
facts in the record, that public policy necessitates a parcel map.



   (C)   The commission may waive the requirement for a tentative
parcel map and a parcel map, provided that the commission finds at the time
of waiver that the proposed division of land complies with requirements
established by the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter, including but not
limited to requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater
drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal
facilities, water supply availability and environmental protection.



   (D)   A lot line adjustment between four or fewer existing adjoining
parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel
and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby
created, may be approved by the director without a tentative subdivision map,
final map, tentative parcel map or a parcel map, as follows:



      (1)   The director's review shall be limited to determining
whether the parcels resulting from the lot line adjustment will conform to
the city's general plan, the city's coastal plan (if applicable) and the
city's building and zoning ordinances, including whether the resulting
parcels comply with the area, width, frontage and yard requirements of the
applicable zone.  No nonconforming uses or structures may be created by a
line adjustment.



      (2)   The director shall not impose conditions or exactions on
approval of a lot line adjustment except to conform to the city's general
plan, the city's coastal plan (if applicable), and the city's building and
zoning ordinances, to require the prepayment of real property taxes or to
facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements.



      (3)   Prior to approval of the lot line adjustment, the
applicant shall submit to the city engineer for review a grant deed that
describes the proposed boundaries of the parcels.  If a lot line adjustment
is approved, the applicant shall record the deed.



      (4)   City staff shall not require a record of survey for a
lot line adjustment unless required by Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code, Section 8762.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-11)  (Ord. No. 1570, 1650, 1684, 1992, 2090, 2243, 2367,
2445)



SEC. 15-12.  CHECK LIST FOR DEVELOPERS.



   The secretary of the commission shall prepare and make available to
developers a check list which shall itemize the information to be submitted
by subdividers in connection with tentative parcel maps and tentative
subdivision maps.  The check list shall contain a column wherein a city
official can check off items as to which information has been furnished.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-12)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2367, 2554)



SEC. 15-13.  CITY-INITIATED MERGER OF CONTIGUOUS PARCELS.



   (A)   A parcel or unit of real property shall merge with a
contiguous parcel or unit held by the same owner if any one of the contiguous
parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to standards for
minimum parcel size under applicable zoning ordinances and if all of the
following requirements are satisfied:



      (1)   At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by
any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building
permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only
with one or more accessory structure, or is developed with a single
structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on
a contiguous parcel or unit.



      (2)   With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the
following conditions exists:



         (a)   Comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at
the time of the determination of merger;



         (b)   Was not created in compliance with applicable laws
and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation;



         (c)   Does not meet current standards for sewage
disposal and domestic water supply;



         (d)   Does not meet slope stability standards;



         (e)   Has no legal access which is adequate for
vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability;



         (f)   Its development would create health or safety
hazards; and/or



         (g)   Is inconsistent with the general plan and any
applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.



   (B)   For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are
held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that
notice of intention to determine status is recorded.  This section shall not
apply if one or more of the conditions exist as described in subparts (A)
through (E) of Cal. Gov't Code, Section 66451.11.



   (C)   A merger of parcels becomes effective when the director causes
to be filed with the Ventura County Recorder a notice of merger specifying
the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real
property.  Prior to filing the notice, the city engineer shall review the
property description.



   (D)   On or before filing a notice of merger, city staff shall cause
to be mailed by certified mail to the then current record owner of the
property a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that
the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to the standards specified in
this section, and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing
on determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the
property does not meet the criteria for merger.



   (E)   At any time within 30 days after of the notice of intention to
determine status is recorded, the owner of the affected property may file
with the city clerk a request for a hearing on determination of status.



   (F)   Upon receiving a request for such a hearing on determination
of status from the owner of the affected property, the city clerk shall fix a
time, date and place for a hearing to be conducted by the commission and
shall notify the property owner of that time, date and place for the hearing
by certified mail.  The hearing shall be conducted not more than 60 days
following receipt of the property owner's request for the hearing, but may be
postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the commission and the
property owner.



   (G)   At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the
opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet
the standards for merger specified in this section.  At the conclusion of
the hearing, the commission shall make a determination that the affected
parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall so notify the
owner of its determination.  A determination of merger shall be recorded
within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing.



   (H)   If the property owner does not file a request for a hearing
within 30 days after the notice of intention to determine status is recorded,
the commission may within 90 days of the expiration of such 30 days, make a
determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be
merged.  A determination of merger shall be recorded within said 90 days. 
If a determination is made that the subject property shall not be merged,
city staff shall file with the Ventura County recorder a release of the
notice of intention to determine status and shall mail a clearance letter to
the then current owner of record.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-13)  (Ord. No. 1684, 2243)



DIVISION 2.  SUBDIVISION AND PARCEL MAPS



SEC. 15-15.  TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAPS.



   Each tentative subdivision map shall meet the following requirements
and contain the following information:



   (A)   Scale, ratio is optional, except that it shall be not less
than 100 feet equals 1 inch;



   (B)   Name or number of subdivision;



   (C)   Name of developer, with address and telephone number, if any;



   (D)   Name of owner, with address and telephone number, if any;



   (E)   Name of person preparing tentative subdivision map, with
address and telephone number, if any;



   (F)   Acreage within proposed development;



   (G)   North arrow;



   (H)   Date of tentative subdivision map;



   (I)   Boundary lines, with legal description of total parcel;



   (J)   Location and width of proposed streets with approved access to
the subject property together with location of all recorded easements;



   (K)   Names of proposed streets;



   (L)   Names, width and location of adjacent streets;



   (M)   Sketch showing manner in which proposed subdivision will fit
into master plan;



   (N)   Width and location of alleys;



   (O)   Lot lines and dimensions, and lot and block numbers;



   (P)   Contour map including the location and width of watercourses;



   (Q)   Legal description of property comprising subdivision;



   (R)   Width and location of all easements and rights-of-way;



   (S)   Proposed land use classification of lots;



   (T)   Location of existing utilities;



   (U)   Location of existing water wells;



   (V)   Railroads;



   (W)   Radius and length of curves; and



   (X)   Location of underground irrigation and drainage lines.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-15)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-16.  FINAL MAPS.



   A final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered
civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, shall be based upon a survey, and
shall conform to all of the following requirements:



   (A)   A final map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a
process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or
polyester base film.  Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgements may be
legibly stamped or printed upon the final map with opaque ink.  If ink is
used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable
substance to assure permanent legibility.



   (B)   The size of each sheet shall be 18 by 28 inches.  A marginal
line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank
margin of one inch.  The scale of the final map shall be large enough to
show all details clearly and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this
end.  The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets
comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to
each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown.



   (C)   All survey and mathematical information and data necessary to
locate all monuments and to locate and retrace any and all interior and
exterior boundary lines appearing thereon shall be shown, including bearings
and distances of straight lines, and radii and arc length or chord bearings
and length for all curves, and such information as may be necessary to
determine the location of the centers of curves and ties to existing
monuments used to establish the subdivision boundaries.



   (D)   Each lot or parcel shall be numbered and each block may be
numbered or lettered. Each street shall be named.  The subdivision number
shall be shown together with the description of the real property being
subdivided.



   (E)   The exterior boundary of the land included within the
subdivision shall be indicated by distinctive symbols and clearly so
designated.  The final map shall show the definite location of the
subdivision, and particularly its relation to surrounding surveys.



   (F)   When a soils report has been prepared, this fact shall be
noted on the final map, together with the date of the report and the name of
the engineer making the report.



   (G)   Below the title shall be a subtitle consisting of a general
description of all the property being subdivided by reference to deeds,
subdivisions or sectional surveys.  References to tracts and subdivisions
shall be spelled out and worded identically with original records, with
complete reference to proper book and page of the record.  The title sheet
shall show in addition the basis of bearings.



   (H)   Final maps filed for the purpose of reverting subdivided land
to acreage shall be conspicuously marked by the title, "The purpose of this
map is a reversion to acreage."



   (I)   Sufficient data shall be shown to determine readily the
bearing and length of each line.  Dimensions of lots shall be the net
dimensions.  No ditto marks shall be used.  Lots shall show net acreage to
nearest hundredth.



   (J)   The final map shall show the center lines of all streets;
lengths, tangent, radius and central angle or radial bearings of all curves;
the bearing of radial lines to each lot corner of a curve; the total width of
each street, the width of the portion being dedicated and the width of
existing dedication; the width of portions of streets each side of the center
line, also the width of rights-of-way of railroads, flood control or drainage
channels and any other easements appearing on the map.  Surveys in
connection with the preparation of final maps shall be made in accordance
with standard practices and principles for land surveying.  A traverse of
the boundaries of the subdivision and all lots and blocks shall close within
a limit of error of 1 foot in 10,000 feet of perimeter.



   (K)   The final map shall show the center line data, width and side
lines of all easements to which the lots are subject.  If the easement is
not definitely located of record, a statement as to the easement shall appear
on the title sheet.  Easements for storm drains, sewers and other purposes
shall be denoted by broken lines.  Distances and bearings on the side lines
of the lots which are cut by an easement shall be shown as to indicate
clearly the actual lengths of the lot lines.  The width of the easement and
the lengths and bearings of the lines thereof and sufficient ties to locate
the easement definitely with respect to the subdivision shall be shown.  The
easement shall be clearly labeled and identified, and, if already of record,
proper reference to the records shall be given.  Easements being dedicated
shall be so indicated in the certificate of dedication.



   (L)   The final map shall show clearly what stakes, monuments or
other evidence were found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the
tract.  The corners of adjoining subdivisions or portions thereof shall be
identified and ties shown.  Monuments shall be those required by Cal. Gov't
Code, Section 66495.



   (M)   Wherever the engineer or county surveyor has established the
center line of a street or alley, such data shall be considered in making the
surveys and in preparing the final map, and all monuments found shall be
indicated and proper references made to field books or maps of public record,
relating to the monuments.  If the point were reset by ties, that fact shall
be stated.  The final map shall show city boundaries crossing or adjoining
the subdivision, clearly designated and tied in.



   (N)   The lots shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the
number 1, with no omissions or duplications.  If the subdivision is a
continuation of, or an addition to an existing subdivision, the lot numbers
may commence with the number immediately following the last or highest number
of the existing subdivision.  Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet.



   (O)   If more than three sheets are used, an index, showing the
entire subdivision, with lots numbered consecutively.



   (P)   Title, name or number of tract, date, north arrow and scale
shall be indicated.



   (Q)   Description of land shall be included.



   (R)   Location and names without abbreviation shall be shown of all:



      (1)   Proposed streets and alleys with approved access to the
subject property;



      (2)   Proposed public areas and easements; and



      (3)   Adjoining streets.



   (S)   Dimensions in feet and decimals of a foot shall be shown.



   (T)   Dimensions of all lots shall be indicated.



   (U)   Center line data including bearings and distances shall be
indicated.



   (V)   Radius, tangent, arc and central angle of curves shall be
indicated.



   (W)   Suitable primary survey control points shall be shown.



   (X)   Location of all permanent monuments shall be indicated.



   (Y)   Ties to and names of adjacent subdivisions shall be indicated.



   (Z)   Ties to any city or county boundary lines involved shall be
indicated.



   (AA)   Required certificates shall be included.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-16)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-17.  TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS AND PARCEL MAPS; OWNER'S STATEMENT.



   Each tentative parcel map may, and each parcel map shall, be prepared
by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land
surveyor; a tentative parcel map or parcel map shall show the location of
streets and property lines bounding the property, and shall conform to all of
the following requirements:



   (A)   A tentative parcel map or parcel map shall be legibly drawn,
printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black
on tracing cloth or polyester base film.  Certificates may be legibly
stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink.  If ink is used on
polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable
substance to assure permanent legibility.  The tentative parcel or parcel
map may be compiled from final map data, recorded parcel map data if based
upon a field survey, records of survey, and upon field surveys if the survey,
recording or filing of the source material is not more than 15 years old.



   (B)   Each tentative parcel map shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   The boundary lines of the entire parcel including the
area to be divided with dimensions, based on existing survey data or property
descriptions.  A legal description of the total parcel shall be attached to
the map.



      (2)   The proposed division lines with dimensions and area of
each parcel in square feet;



      (3)   Identification of each parcel with letter or number
designation in consecutive order;



      (4)   All existing buildings and structures located on the
land to be divided, together with their major exterior dimensions and
distance from the buildings and structures to the boundary lines of the
parcels which are to be created by the proposed land division;



      (5)   The location of existing wells, septic tanks, leaching
fields, sewer lines, water lines, underground irrigation and drainage lines,
culverts or other underground structures within each parcel and immediately
adjacent thereto, with sizes and grades indicated;



      (6)   The location and names of all abutting streets, alleys,
easements and the closest intersection as well as property lines bounding the
property;



      (7)   The location of all existing curb cuts or points of
ingress and egress on each parcel within the parcel map;



      (8)   The location and width of any streets, alleys, easements
or curb cuts proposed by the developer;



      (9)   The location of proposed sanitary sewers, storm water
drain, water lines, underground utilities and other public utilities;



      (10)   Sufficient elevation and contours to determine the
general slope of the land and the high and low points thereof;



      (11)   Approximate location of all areas subject to inundation
or storm water overflow and the location, width and directions of flow of all
water courses;



      (12)   Existing use or uses of the property and proposed use
of property; if property is proposed to be used for more than one purpose,
the area, lot or lots proposed for each type of use;



      (13)   Statement of the improvements and public utilities
proposed to be made or installed and of the time at which the improvements
are proposed to be completed;



      (14)   Tree planting proposal and location, including a
landscape plan and provision for maintenance when required by the city;



      (15)   Approximate location of each area covered by brush or
trees with a statement of the nature of such cover, and the kind and
approximate location of all trees standing within the proposed rights-of-way;



      (16)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the
property owners, the person filing the map, and the registered civil engineer
or licensed land surveyor who prepared the tentative parcel map;



      (17)   Source of data from which the tentative parcel map was
drawn;



      (18)   A vicinity map not to exceed four inches by four inches
on the upper right-hand corner;



      (19)   Any additional information necessitated by the
character of the particular development to facilitate consideration by the
commission and the city council; and



      (20)   Width and locations of all recorded easements and
rights-of-way.



   (C)   Each tentative parcel map and parcel map shall meet the
following requirements.



      (1)   The size of each sheet shall be 18 by 26 inches.  A
marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an
entirely blank margin of one inch.  The scale of the tentative parcel map
and parcel map shall be large enough to show all details clearly and enough
sheets shall be used to accomplish this end.  The particular number of the
sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the tentative parcel map and
parcel map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each
adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown.



      (2)   Each parcel shall be numbered or otherwise designated. 
The subdivision number shall be shown together with the description of the
real property being subdivided.



      (3)   The exterior boundary of the land included within the
development shall be indicated by distinctive symbols and clearly so
designated.



      (4)   The tentative parcel map and parcel map shall show the
location of each parcel and its relation to surrounding surveys.  The
location of any remainder of the original parcel shall be shown, but need not
be shown as a matter of survey but only by reference to the existing record
boundaries of such remainder if such remainder has a gross area of five acres
or more.



      (5)   Subject to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code, Section
66436, a certificate, signed and acknowledged by all parties having any
record title interest in the real property subdivided, consenting to the
preparation and recordation of the parcel map is required.



   (D)   If any information required by this section may not be shown
practically on a parcel map, that information shall be contained in a written
owner's statement which shall be attached to and accompany the map.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-17)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-18.  MAPS OF CONDOMINIUM AND COMMUNITY APARTMENT PROJECTS.



   Any map of a condominium or community apartment project is not required
to show the buildings or the manner in which the buildings or the airspaces
above the property shown on the map are to be divided.  Fees and lot design
requirements shall be computed and imposed with respect to such maps on the
basis of parcels or lots of the surface of the land shown thereon as included
in the project.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-18)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-19.  REGULATIONS FOR VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS.



   (A)   A “vesting tentative map” shall mean a “tentative map”
for a subdivision that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words
“Vesting Tentative Map” at the time such map is filed in accordance with
this chapter.  The purpose of a vesting tentative map is to confer certain
development rights not applicable to a tentative map. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-19.00) (Ord. No. 2765)



   (B)   Whenever an application for a tentative subdivision map or
tentative parcel map is required to be filed for a development, an
application for a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance
with the provisions herein. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-19.01) (Ord. No. 2765)



   (C)   An application for a vesting tentative map shall be filed in
the same form, have the same contents, and shall be processed in the same
manner as an application for a tentative map except that:



      (1)   At the time filed, an application for a vesting
tentative map shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words
“Vesting Tentative Map;” and



      (2)   At the time an application for a vesting tentative map
is filed, a subdivider shall also supply complete improvement plans for
sewer, water, drainage, street, grading and appurtenant improvements along
with supporting calculations in accordance with public works department
standards and criteria.  The development services department will review and
approve the improvement plans to verify they are in accordance with city
standards before the "Vesting Tentative Map" is heard by the commission. 
The application shall not be complete until such review and approval has been
made by the development services department.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-19.02) (Ord. No. 2765)



   (D)   Upon filing an application for a vesting tentative map, the
subdivider shall pay the fees required by the city council resolution for the
filing and processing of an application for a tentative map. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-19.03)



   (E)   The vesting tentative map shall expire when a tentative
subdivision map would expire and shall be subject to the same criteria for
extensions as established for a tentative subdivision map.  The duration of
the rights therein is governed by subsection (F) below. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-19.04)



   (F)   (1)   The approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer
a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with
applicable ordinances, policies, and standards as if a final map had been
then approved, subject to the provisions herein.



      (2)   Nothing in this section is intended to affect the
city’s ability to conditionally approve or deny maps.



      (3)   The rights referred to herein shall expire unless the
final map is approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map in
which case these rights shall last for the following periods oftime:



         (a)   An initial time period of one year.  Where
several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a
single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each
phase when the map for that phase is recorded.



         (b)   The initial time period set forth in subdivision
(3)(a) shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a
complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural
review, if such processing exceeds 30 days from the date a complete
application is filed.



         (c)   A subdivider may apply to the commission for a one
year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in
subdivision (3)(a) expires.  If the extension is denied, the  subdivider
may appeal that denial to the city council within 15 days.



         (d)   If the subdivider submits a complete application
for a building permit before the rights under the vesting tentative map have
expired, those rights shall automatically continue until the expiration or
extension of that permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-19.05)  (Ord. No. 2367, 2445)



   (G)   (1)   Whenever a subdivider files an application for a
vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is
inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in existence at that time, that
inconsistency shall be noticed on the vesting tentative map.  The city may
deny an application or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or designee,
obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the
inconsistency.  If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the
approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall confer a
vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with
the change in the zoning ordinance and the map as approved.



      (2)   The rights conferred by this section shall be for the
time periods set forth in subsection(F)(3).



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-19.06)  (Ord. No. 2077)



   (H)   Any fees associated with a vesting tentative map that would be
subject to the fee limitations set forth in Kaufman & Broad Central Valley,
Inc. v. City of Modesto, 25 Cal. App. 4th 1577, shall be calculated as
follows:



      (1)   Capital improvement fees shall include those fees set
forth in Article VI of Chapter 15 of the City Code at the time the
application is deemed complete.  Any such fee shall be adjusted by
multiplying the fee in effect at the time of application by the Engineering
News Record Construction Cost Index for Los Angeles at the time of payment of
the fee in question and dividing such product by the Engineering News Record
Construction Cost Index for Los Angeles at the time the application was
deemed complete.  However, if the resulting quotient is greater than the
actual fee applicable at that time to subdivisions that are proceeding
without a vested tentative map, the actual fee will be used.



      (2)   All other fees charged by the city at the time the
application is deemed complete shall be adjusted by multiplying the fee in
effect at the time of application by the Consumer Price Index for the Los
Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area at the time of payment of the fee in question
and dividing such product by the Consumer Price Index for the Los
Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area at the time the application was deemed
complete.  However, if the resulting quotient is greater than the actual fee
applicable at that time to subdivisions that are proceeding without a vested
tentative map, the actual fee will be used.



(Ord. No. 2765)



ARTICLE III.  PROCEDURES



DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY



SEC. 15-25.  PUBLIC HEARINGS; APPEALS.



   (A)   Public hearings shall be held and notice thereof given
pursuant to section 15-42 for all hearings required by the Subdivision Map
Act and this chapter, and any interested person may appear at such public
hearings and be heard.



   (B)   Appeals from the actions of the commission with respect to
tentative subdivision maps may be taken in the manner provided by Cal. Gov't
Code, Section 66452.5.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-20)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 15-26.  OWNERS' CONSENT REQUIRED.



   No application for any map required by this article shall be accepted
for filing without the written consent of all persons having a record title
interest in the real property as defined in Cal. Gov't Code, Section66436.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-21)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-27.  INCOMPLETE MAPS.



   If at any time during the processing of an application for any map
under this article city staff discovers that any required supporting material
has not been filed, the map has been improperly or incorrectly prepared, or
that required information has not been submitted, the director shall promptly
give written notice thereof to the subdivider.  The time limits specified by
this article shall not run until proper corrections have been made or
required material or information has been submitted as required by such
notice.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-22)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-28.  ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW REQUIRED.



   Prior to initiating an application for a division of land subject to
this article, the subdivider shall request of the planning and environmental
services division ("planning division") an environmental review of the
proposed project.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-23)  (Ord. No. 1570)



DIVISION 2.  TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAPS



SEC. 15-35.  INITIATION OF PROPOSED DIVISION OF LAND.



   Every proposed division of land requiring the approval of a final map
or a parcel map shall be initiated by the submission of an application for a
tentative subdivision map as required in article II of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-25)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-36.  SUBMISSION.



   An application for a tentative subdivision map shall be prepared and
submitted with sufficient copies as required by the planning division and
shall be filed not more than 30 days or less than 21 days prior to the
meeting at which the application will be considered, by delivery of the
application to the secretary of the commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-26)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 15-37.  INFORMATION TO ACCOMPANY TENTATIVE MAP.



   (A)   An application for a tentative subdivision map shall be
accompanied by the completed check list of all information required and
written reports and statements giving essential information relating to the:



      (1)   Development plan, including phasing of development and
proposed final map units;



      (2)   Type of streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, cross
gutters, improvements and utilities proposed to be installed;



      (3)   Proposed methods of sewage disposal;



      (4)   Proposed storm drain facilities, with special emphasis
on dead-end streets;



      (5)   Protective covenants to be recorded, if any;



      (6)   Proposed tree planting and street lighting; and



      (7)   Removal of obstacles detrimental to the completion of
the improvements of the subdivision, including underground drainage and
irrigation facilities.



   (B)   If an environmental impact report is required by the proposed
land division, any necessary environmental data shall be submitted at the
time of filing an application for a tentative subdivision map or within the
time thereafter specified by the director.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-27)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-38.  REVIEW BY STAFF ADVISORY COMMITTEE.



   (A)   On receipt of the required number of copies of the application
for a tentative subdivision map and the required supporting material, the
director shall set a time and place for and call a meeting of the staff
advisory committee for the purpose of studying the application.



   (B)   The staff advisory committee shall make a written report of
its findings.



   (C)   A report concerning the application for a tentative
subdivision map shall be submitted to the commission at the meeting at which
the commission will consider the application.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-28)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 15-39.  STAFF REPORTS.



   Any report or recommendation by city staff concerning an application
for a tentative subdivision map and directed to the commission or the city
council shall be in writing, and a copy shall be made available to the
subdivider at least three days prior to any consideration or action on the
tentative subdivision map by the commission or the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-29)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 15-40.  PLANNING COMMISSION CONSIDERATION AND RECOMMENDATION.



   Within 50 days after an application for a tentative subdivision map has
been filed with the commission, the commission shall hold a noticed public
hearing and by resolution recommend approval, conditional approval or
disapproval of the tentative subdivision map and report the action to the
subdivider and the city council.  If the recommendation is for conditional
approval, the resolution shall recite the conditions.  A copy of the
resolution shall be transmitted promptly to the city council by delivery to
the city clerk, together with a copy of the application for a tentative
subdivision map and all supporting material.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-30)  (Ord. No. 1570, 1779, 2367 2445)



SEC. 15-41.  CITY COUNCIL ACTION.



   At the next regular meeting of the city council following the filing of
the commission's report, the city council shall fix a date for a noticed
public hearing at which the application for a tentative subdivision map will
be considered.  The date set shall be within 30 days thereafter, and the
city council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative
subdivision map within such 30-day period.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-31)  (Ord. No. 1570, 1779)



SEC. 15-42.  NOTICE.



   (A)   The secretary of the commission shall give all required
notices of public hearings held by the commission.  The city clerk shall
give all required notices of public hearings held by the city council.



   (B)   Public hearings shall be held and notice thereof given in all
of the following ways for all hearings required by the Subdivision Map Act
and this chapter:



      (1)   At least ten days before the hearing, a notice that
includes the information specified in Cal. Gov't Code, Section 65094 shall be
published pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Section 6061 in at least one newspaper
of general circulation within the city.



      (2)   At least ten days before the hearing, such notice shall
be mailed or delivered to the owner of the subject real property or the
owner's duly authorized agent, and to the subdivider.



      (3)   At least ten days before the hearing, such notice shall
be mailed or delivered to each local agency expected to provide water,
sewage, streets, roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to
the project, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be
significantly affected.



      (4)   At least ten days before the hearing, such notice shall
be mailed or delivered to all owners of real property as shown on the latest
equalized assessment roll within 300 feet of the real property that is the
subject of the hearing.  In lieu of using the assessment roll, city staff
may use records of the county assessor or tax collector that contain more
recent information than the assessment roll.  If the number of owners to
whom notice would be mailed or delivered pursuant to this paragraph or
subsection (B)(2) of this section is greater than 1,000, city staff, in lieu
of mailed or delivered notice, may provide notice by placing a display
advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of
general circulation within the city at least ten days before the hearing. 
If city staff chooses to provide notice by publication of a display
advertisement, city staff may also, in its discretion, post such notice at
least ten days before the hearing on the subject property and every 100 feet
along a public street that abuts the property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-31.5)  (Ord. No. 1779, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 15-43.  INACTION OF CITY COUNCIL.



   If no action is taken on the application for a tentative subdivision
map by the city council within the specified 30-day period, or any authorized
extension thereof, the application as filed shall be deemed to be approved
insofar as it complies with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and
of this chapter.  The city clerk shall certify such approval.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-32)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-44.  CONDITIONAL APPROVAL BY CITY COUNCIL.



   If the city council conditionally approves a tentative subdivision map,
the developer may submit an application for a corrected tentative subdivision
map or may proceed with the preparation of the final map, meeting all
conditions of the conditional approval; provided, however, that the city
council may require the submission of an application for an amended tentative
subdivision map to conform to the conditions imposed by conditional approval.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-33)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-45.  CONDITIONS IMPOSED ON TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP; LIMITATIONS.



   Conditions imposed on a tentative parcel map requiring improvements
shall be limited to the dedication of rights-of-way, easements, and the
construction of reasonable off-site and on-site improvements for the parcels
being created.  Requirements for the construction of such off-site and
on-site improvements shall be noticed by certificate on the parcel map, on
the instrument evidencing the waiver of such parcel map, or by separate
instrument, and recorded in the manner provided in Cal. Gov't Code, Section
66411.1.  The fulfillment of such construction requirements shall not be
required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for
development of the parcel is issued, or until such time as the construction
of such improvements is required pursuant to an agreement; except that in the
absence of such an agreement the city council may require fulfillment of such
construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the
parcel map and prior to the issuance of such permit or other grant of
approval upon a finding either that such fulfillment is necessary for reasons
of the public health and safety, or that the required construction is a
necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-34)  (Ord. No. 1570, 1684, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 15-46.  TERM OF MAP; TIME EXTENSION.



   (A)   An approved or conditionally approved tentative subdivision
map shall expire 36 months after its approval or conditional approval.



   (B)   On application of the subdivider filed prior to the expiration
of the approved or conditionally approved tentative subdivision map, the time
at which the tentative subdivision map expires may be extended not to exceed
a total of 36 months, which period of extension shall be in addition to the
period of time provided by subsection (A).



   (C)   (1)   The application shall be heard by the commission,
which shall make a recommendation to the city council.



      (2)   The city council, after considering the recommendation
of the commission, shall decide whether to grant the application.



      (3)   The procedure for applications and hearings regarding
map extensions shall be the same as for original maps.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-35)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2312, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 15-47.  EXPIRATION; EFFECT.



   The expiration of the term of an approved or conditionally approved
tentative subdivision map shall terminate all proceedings, and no final map
of all or any portion of the real property included within the tentative map
shall be filed without first processing a new tentative subdivision map.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-36)  (Ord. No. 1570)



DIVISION 3.  FINAL MAPS AND PARCEL MAPS



SEC. 15-50.  PREPARATION OF AND APPLICATION FOR FINAL MAP OR PARCEL MAP.



   (A)   Following approval or conditional approval of a tentative
subdivision map, the developer may cause the real property included within
the tentative subdivision map, or any part thereof, to be surveyed and a
final map or parcel map thereof prepared in accordance with the approved or
conditionally approved tentative subdivision map.



   (B)   Prior to the expiration of the term of the approved or
conditionally approved tentative subdivision map, an application for a final
map or parcel map conforming to the tentative subdivision map may be filed in
accordance with the requirements of this division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-40)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 15-51.  REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION.



   (A)   An application for a final map or parcel map shall not be
deemed complete until the following items have been submitted to the city:



      (1)   All the certificates required by the Subdivision Map
Act, completed and signed, and where necessary acknowledged, excepting those
signatures required of the county clerk, the city treasurer and the city
clerk;



      (2)   A title report and soils report required by conditional
approval of the tentative map;



      (3)   Final improvement plans approved by the city engineer;
and



      (4)   All items, signatures and approvals necessary for
compliance with sections 15-52 through 15-54.



   (B)   Unless waived by mutual agreement between the subdivider and
the city, upon compliance with this section, the time period specified in
section 15-55 shall begin.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-41)  (Ord. No. 1570, 1795, 2367)



SEC. 15-52.  IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT AND BONDS.



   (A)   Prior to the time of filing an application for a final map or
parcel map, the subdivider shall submit in applicable cases a copy of
proposed improvement agreement to the city attorney, who shall examine the
document for form and sufficiency.



   (B)   If the proposed improvement agreement is satisfactory, the
city attorney shall indicate approval of the form of document thereon and
shall return the agreement to the developer for execution, completion and
submission.



   (C)   The developer shall submit to the director the partially
executed improvement agreement, the security required thereunder, and any
information required to enable the director to consider the agreement on or
before the date set by the director to consider and act upon the final map or
parcel map.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-42)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2367, 2445, 2910)



SEC. 15-53.  SUBMISSION FOR EXAMINATION; REJECTION AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   Before filing an application with the planning division for a
final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall submit a copy of the map to the
director, who shall review the affidavits and acknowledgments and the
surveying data, mathematical data, computations and other matters, in order
to determine whether the map complies with the requirements of the
Subdivision Map Act, this chapter and any conditions imposed on the tentative
subdivision map.



   (B)   If the director finds that the final map or parcel map does
not so comply, he/she shall return the final map or parcel map to the
subdivider, together with a statement of the grounds for rejection of the
final map or parcel map and the matters that must be corrected before the
final map or parcel map may be resubmitted for his/her review.



   (C)   If the director finds that the final map or parcel map does so
comply, the city engineer shall endorse his/her approval thereon and return
the final map or parcel map to the subdivider.



   (D)   After a final map or parcel map is endorsed by the city
engineer, the subdivider shall file with the planning division an application
for director approval of the final map or parcel map.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-43)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2367, 2445, 2910)



SEC. 15-54.  SUBDIVIDER'S MEMORANDUM AND REQUIRED DATA.



   An application for a final map or parcel map submitted to the director
shall be accompanied by:



   (A)   A written memorandum of the subdivider, approved by the
signature of the city engineer, stating that the final map or parcel map is
in compliance with the approved tentative subdivision map or that it differs
from the approved tentative subdivision map in certain respects which shall
be set forth fully and in detail.



   (B)   The following data:



      (1)   Traverse sheets and work sheets showing the closure
within the allowable limits of error of the exterior boundaries and of each
block and lot of the development;



      (2)   A copy of the protective covenants to be recorded; and



      (3)   A memorandum in duplicate showing:



         (a)   The total area of the land division;



         (b)   The area in streets, in alleys and in easements;



         (c)   The total area in lots and of individual lots; and



         (d)   The area, in parks, school sites or other lands
offered for dedication or reserved for future or quasi-public use.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-44)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2367, 2445, 2910)



SEC. 15-55.  DIRECTOR ACTION.



   If the city receives an application for a final map or parcel map:



   (A)   The director shall notify the city council at its next regular
meeting after the director receives the map that the director is reviewing
the map for final approval.



   (B)   The city clerk shall provide notice of any pending approval or
disapproval by the director, which notice shall be attached and posted with
the city council’s regular agenda and shall be mailed to interested parties
who request notice.



   (C)   The director shall approve or disapprove the final map within
ten days following the meeting of the city council that was preceded by the
notice in (B), above.



   (D)   The director’s action may be appealed to the city council
pursuant to the appeal procedures set forth in section 15-25.



   The city council shall periodically review the delegation of authority
to the director.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-45)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2445, 2910)



SEC. 15-56.  DEDICATIONS; ACCEPTANCE.



   All streets, highways, easements and parcels of land shown on the final
map or parcel map which are intended for public use shall be offered for
dedication for public use by the subdivider, and the director shall have the
right to reject, accept or conditionally accept the offers of dedication.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-46)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2910)



DIVISION 4.  REQUIREMENTS OF APPROVAL



SEC. 15-60.  COMPLIANCE WITH REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS; WAIVER OF
TECHNICAL ERRORS.



   (A)   Approval shall be denied to any map for failure to meet or
perform any requirement or condition imposed by the Subdivision Map Act or
this chapter, including failure to submit all required information, plans,
reports or agreements.  A final map or parcel map shall be disapproved only
for failure to meet or perform requirements or conditions which are
applicable to the subdivision at the time of approval of the tentative
subdivision map.



   (B)   Any such disapproval shall be accompanied by a finding
identifying the requirements or conditions which have not been met or
performed.  Where the failure of any map to meet or perform any requirement
or condition is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which, in the
determination of the director, does not materially affect the validity of any
map, the map may be approved.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-50)  (Ord. No. 1570, 1684, 2910)



SEC. 15-61.  CONSISTENCY WITH GENERAL AND SPECIFIC PLANS.



   Approval shall be denied to any map which is not consistent with the
city's general plan or a specific plan adopted thereunder or which depicts a
land division or a land use which is not compatible with the objectives,
policies, general land uses and programs specified in the city's general plan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-51)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-62.  DENIAL ON SPECIFIC FINDINGS; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Approval and recommendation thereof shall be denied to any map
by the director, city council or the commission on any of the following
findings:



      (1)   The proposed map is not consistent with applicable
general plan and specific plan;



      (2)   The design or improvement of the proposed development is
not consistent with applicable general plan and specific plan;



      (3)   The site is not physically suitable for the type of
development;



      (4)   The site is not physically suitable for the proposed
density of development;



      (5)   The design of the development or the proposed
improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or to
substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;



      (6)   The design of the development or the type of improvement
is likely to cause serious public health problems; and



      (7)   The design of the development or the type of improvement
will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access
through or use of property within the proposed development; provided,
however, that approval may be granted if it is found that alternate
easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be
substantially equivalent to the ones previously acquired by the public.



   (B)   Approval under this section shall not be denied to any final
map or parcel map which is in substantial compliance with a valid previously
approved tentative subdivision map; nor shall approval be denied to any map
of a condominium project or a community apartment project because of design
or location of buildings on the property shown on the map not violative of
local ordinance or because of the manner in which air space is to be divided
in conveying the condominium.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-52)  (Ord. No. 1570, 1684, 2367, 2445, 2910)



SEC. 15-63.  ACCESS TO PUBLIC RESOURCES.



   Approval shall be denied to any map which does not provide for, have
available, or offer dedication of reasonable public access to public natural
resources as required by Cal. Gov't Code, Article 3.5.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-53)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-64.  WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Approval may be denied to any map if discharge of waste from
the proposed development into an existing community sewer system would result
in violation of existing requirements prescribed by a State regional water
quality control board.



   (B)   The determination of water quality control requirements
relating to every subdivision shall be made at the time of consideration for
approval of any map.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-54)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-65.  ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT.



   (A)   No map filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be approved until an environmental assessment has been made and, if
necessary, until an environmental impact analysis is prepared, processed and
considered.



   (B)   The subdivider shall provide such additional data and
information and shall pay or deposit such fees as may be required for the
preparation and processing of environmental review documents.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-55)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-66.  GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL.



   Every map approved pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned on
compliance with the requirements for grading and erosion control, including
the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-57)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-67.  DEFERMENT OF SUBMISSION OF DOCUMENTS OR PAYMENT OF FEES.



   The director may for cause defer to a date certain, not to exceed 30
days, the submission of documents or the payment of fees required at the time
of filing a final map or parcel map or required prior to the director
consideration of a final map or parcel map.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-58)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2910)



DIVISION 5.  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW



SEC. 15-75.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this division is to establish a process for
comprehensive review of certain development projects to insure that adopted
city standards and policies are implemented, and that sound land use planning
and design practices are followed.  The city council further intends that
the development plan review process will facilitate better design and
maximize the quality of development which serve all segments of the community.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-59.1)  (Ord. No. 1778)



SEC. 15-76.  WHEN REQUIRED.



   (A)   Approval of a development plan shall be required for all
attached or detached single-family residential development projects for which
a tentative subdivision map is required.  A development plan shall not be
required for a residential development project where a planned development
permit or special use permit would also be required.  In the case of a
custom home subdivision, the director may waive the requirements of this
division.  Tract type housing shall not be constructed upon a custom home
subdivision for which a development plan was waived.  Prior to the issuance
of a building permit, the plans for each custom home shall be reviewed by the
director.



   (B)   The development plan shall be submitted either prior to or
concurrent with the application for approval of a tentative subdivision map
or parcel map for such projects.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-59.2)  (Ord. No. 1778)



SEC. 15-77.  APPLICATION.



   (A)   The development plans submitted as part of a residential
subdivision shall be reviewed and approved as a prerequisite to the tentative
subdivision map approval of that project.  Such review and approval shall be
conducted concurrently with review of the tentative subdivision map.  The
application shall include, but is not limited to, the following:



      (1)   A site plan showing the location and arrangement of all
structures to be initially constructed;



      (2)   Floor plans and full elevations of all buildings or
models;



      (3)   Details of exterior materials and colors for structures,
including fencing and walls;



      (4)   A preliminary landscape plan;



      (5)   A fee as set by resolution of the city council; and



      (6)   Additional material requested by the director.



   (B)   Failure to supply any of the above material shall constitute
an incomplete application for tentative map approval.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-59.3)  (Ord. No. 1778)



SEC. 15-78.  REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENT PLANS.



   (A)   The director shall determine whether development plans meet
the following standards:



      (1)   The relationship of the proposed subdivision and
improvements to the uses and physical limitations created by surrounding
development;



      (2)   Conformity of design, colors, material and architecture
with neighboring structures;



      (3)   Conformity with specific design criteria and standards
adopted by the city; and



      (4)   Conformity to any specific plan or other plan adopted by
the city.



   (B)   The director shall approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove the submitted development plan based upon the above standards and
shall summarize and incorporate his/her findings in the staff analysis.  The
decision of the director shall be reviewed by the commission at a noticed
public hearing.  The commission's comments and recommendations shall be
included in its resolution acting upon the corresponding tentative
subdivision map.  Notice of the public hearing shall comply with section
15-42 of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-59.4)  (Ord. No. 1778)



SEC. 15-79.  CONFORMANCE.



   After approval of a subdivision for which a development plan has been
approved, no structure shall be erected or any improvement located or
constructed, unless such improvement conforms to the development plan. 
However, after the project has been constructed in conformity with the
development plan, any improvements constructed by subsequent residents or
property owners need only conform to the requirements of the zone or other
applicable regulations and shall not require an amended development plan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-59.5)  (Ord. No. 1778)



SEC. 15-80.  AMENDMENTS TO DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   (A)   A development plan may be amended upon request of the
subdivider and payment of the established fee prior to the issuance of
building permits for the subdivision or a portion thereof.  The proposed
amendment shall be reviewed by the director whose decision shall be final
unless the subdivider requests review by the commission, in which case the
application shall be processed pursuant to sections 16-444et seq. of the code.



   (B)   The director may approve minor modifications to an approved
development plan at any time.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-59.6)  (Ord. No. 1778)



ARTICLE IV.  DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS



DIVISION 1.  PUBLIC EASEMENTS



SEC. 15-85.  REQUIRED GENERALLY.



   (A)   As a condition of approval of any map, the subdivider shall
dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land
within the subdivision or development that are needed for streets, alleys,
including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public utility
easements and other publiceasements.



   (B)   The subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets,
alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public
utility easements and other public easements.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-60)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-86.  WAIVER OF DIRECT ACCESS TO STREETS.



   A condition of approval of any map may require that any dedication or
offer of dedication of a street shall include a waiver of direct access
rights to such street from any property shown on a final map or parcel map as
abutting thereon, and that if the dedication is accepted such waiver shall
become effective in accordance with the provisions of the waiver of direct
access.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-61)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-87.  DEDICATION UNDER PARCEL MAP.



   If required as a condition of approval of a parcel map, a dedication or
offer of dedication may be made either by certificate on the parcel map or by
separate instrument.  If made by separate instrument, the dedication or
offer of dedication shall be recorded concurrently with, or prior to, the
parcel map being filed for record.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-62)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-88.  BICYCLE PATHS; TRANSIT FACILITIES.



   As a condition of approval of any map, the subdivider may be required
to dedicate or offer to dedicate land for bicycle paths and local transit
facilities subject to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-63)  (Ord. No. 1684)



DIVISION 2.  CONTRIBUTION OF PARK SITES



SEC. 15-95.  PURPOSE.



   (A)   This division is enacted pursuant to authority granted by Cal.
Gov't Code, Section 66477 and is intended to provide a means to implement the
adopted parks, recreation and open space element of the general plan and is
separate and distinct from the imposition of the city park acquisition and
development fee.



   (B)   The city council finds and determines that the public
interest, health, and welfare require the dedication of land and payment of
fees for each 1,000 persons as provided in this division for the acquisition
and development of park and recreational facilities.  The amount and
location of land to be dedicated and fees paid, as determined pursuant to
this division, shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of such park
and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of each subdivision
from which such land or fees were obtained.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-65)  (Ord. No. 1570, 1791)



SEC. 15-96.  REQUIREMENTS.



   As a condition of approval of any subdivision, the developer shall
provide land or fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, for park or
recreational purposes, as follows:



   (A)   For each 1,000 persons residing within the city there shall be
dedicated three acres of land or fees shall be paid in lieu thereof, as
determined by the city.



   (B)   Only the payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions
containing 50 parcels or less, except that when a condominium project, stock
cooperative, or community apartment projects, as those terms are defined in
Section 1351 of the Cal. Civil Code, exceeds 50 dwelling units, dedication of
land may be required notwithstanding that the number of parcels may be less
than 50.



   (C)   This division shall not apply to any condominium project which
consists of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building
which is more than five years old, when no new dwelling units are added.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-66)  (Ord. No. 1570, 1791, 2683)



SEC. 15-97.  INCREASED DENSITY; LATER RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   The commission may recommend, and the city council may
condition its approval of any map to require the applicable dedication or the
payment of the applicable public parks fee if the density of a development is
increased, or a nonresidential development is converted or partially
converted to residential use following approval of any map of the development.



   (B)   The commission may recommend, and the city council may
condition its approval of any map depicting fewer than five lots or parcels
for nonresidential purposes that, if a building permit is requested for
construction of a residential structure on one or more of the parcels within
four years, the public parks fee shall be required to be paid in addition to
the parks acquisition and development fee by the owner of each such parcel as
a condition to the issuance of such permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-67)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-98.  DETERMINATION OF DENSITY FACTOR AND DWELLING UNITS.



   (A)   For the purpose of calculating the amount of land to be
dedicated and fees in lieu thereof, the population density factor for each
dwelling unit is based on the number of bedrooms as follows:



      (1)   Single-family detached units and town houses:  3.9
persons per unit.



      (2)   Condominiums, stock cooperatives:  2.85 persons per
unit.



      (3)   Apartments, mobile homes:  2.0 persons per unit.



   (B)   The basis for determining the total number of dwelling units
shall be the number of dwelling units permitted by the city by special use or
planned development permit, if one has been issued, or by the number of
dwelling units allowed under the zoning of the property included in any map
at the time the final map or parcel map is filed with the city for approval.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-68)  (Ord. No. 1570, 1791, 2683)



SEC. 15-99.  FORMULA FOR DEDICATION OR FEES.



   (A)   The amount of land to be dedicated and fees in lieu thereof
shall be based on the following formula:



   A = 3 (D.F. x D.U.)
      1,000



   (B)   Definition of terms.



      (1)   “A” is the area in acres required to be dedicated as
park sites or to be approved for fee payment in lieu of dedication.



      (2)   “D.F.” is the density factor obtained from preceding
section as applicable to the proposed development.



      (3)   “D.U.” is the number of dwelling units in the
subdivision.



      (4)   “3” is the number of acres of land per 1,000 persons.



      (5)   “1,000” is the number of persons.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-69)  (Ord. No. 1570, 1791, 2683)



SEC. 15-100.  AMOUNT OF FEE IN LIEU OF LAND DEDICATION.



   (A)   The amount of fee in lieu of land dedication shall be
determined by multiplying "A," as derived from section 15-99, times "C," the
fair market value of one acre of usable, unimproved park land within the
subdivision. Fair market value shall be determined as of, and shall be based
on the zoning applicable to the land as of, the date of filing the parcel or
final map or of filing an application for a parcel map waiver.



   (B)   Fair market value shall be determined as follows:



      (1)   At the time of filing a parcel map or a final map or
applying for a parcel map waiver, the developer shall provide an appraisal of
the fair market value of the land subject to the map, prepared by a qualified
appraiser and dated no more than 30 days prior to the date of such filing.
Except as provided in subsections (2) and (3) below, the city shall consider
the appraisal in determining fair market value.



      (2)   If the city is dissatisfied with the appraisal, the city
may select a qualified appraiser to appraise the property at the city's
expense, and the city shall consider the appraisal in determining fair market
value.



      (3)   Alternatively, the city and the developer may agree on
fair market value.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-70)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2683)



SEC. 15-101.  DETERMINATION OF LAND DEDICATION OR FEE.



   (A)   The procedure for determining whether the subdivider is to
dedicate land, pay a fee, or both, shall be as follows:



      (1)   At the time of filing a tentative subdivision map for
approval, the subdivider shall, as a part of filing, indicate whether the
subdivider desires to dedicate property for park and recreation purposes, or
whether the subdivider desires to pay a fee in lieu thereof.  If the
subdivider desires to dedicate land for this purpose, the subdivider shall
designate the area thereof on the tentative subdivision map as submitted.



      (2)   At the time of tentative subdivision map approval, the
city council shall determine whether to require a dedication of land within
the map, payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both.



      (3)   If required, a dedication shall be accomplished in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act.



      (4)   Open space covenants for private park or recreational
facilities shall be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final map
or parcel map and shall be recorded contemporaneously with the final map or
parcel map.



   (B)   Whether the city council accepts land dedication or elects to
require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be
determined by consideration of the following:



      (1)   Recreational element of the city's general plan;



      (2)   Topography, geology, access and location of land in the
development or subdivision available for dedication; and



      (3)   Size and shape of subdivision or development and land
available for dedication.



   (C)   The determination of the city council as to whether land shall
be dedicated, a fee shall be charged, or a combination of both, shall be
final.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-71)  (Ord. No. 1570, 1791)



SEC. 15-102.  TIME OF PAYMENT OF FEE.



   (A)   The total amount of all fees required to be paid pursuant to
this division shall be paid to the city at the time of issuance of one or
more building permits for the subdivision.



   (B)   If the subdivider, prior to the date upon which fees are
otherwise required to be paid under this division, enters into a written
agreement with the city providing that at least 20 % of the units in the
development will be sold or rented only to lower income families or that at
least 10 % of the units in the development will be sold or rented only to
very low income families, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, Sections
50079.5 and 500105 respectively, at housing costs affordable to such
families, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, Sections 50052.5 and
50053, for a period of at least ten years from the date of such written
agreement, the city council may, in such written agreement or in a separate
written agreement entered into prior to the date upon which fees are
otherwise required to be paid under this section, agree to do either or both
of the following:



      (1)   Defer payment of all or part of the fees required by
this section up to the date that the subdivider first requests electrical
service clearance for a unit in the development;



      (2)   Calculate development fees for the project based on such
fees in effect as of a date no earlier than the date such fees otherwise
would be required to be paid under this division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-71.5)  (Ord. No. 1791, 1949, 2031, 2590)



SEC. 15-103.  TIME OF DEVELOPMENT; LIMITATION ON USE OF LAND OR FEE.



   (A)   The land or fees obtained pursuant to this division will be
utilized for park or recreational facilities in accordance with a schedule
approved by the city council to serve the subdivision from which they were
collected in accordance with the following standards:



      (1)   If no park has been designated for the neighborhood,
only fees shall be collected which may be used for an adjacent neighborhood
park, community park or city park which the city council finds will serve the
residents of the subdivision from which the fees were collected.



      (2)   If a neighborhood park has been fully or partially
developed, or if additional land is not required, only fees shall be
collected and any such fees in excess of the needs of the neighborhood park
shall be committed as follows:



         (a)   To acquisition or development of a community park
to serve the neighborhood;



         (b)   To the park acquisition and development fund if
the neighborhood park was acquired or developed other than with money from
the capital outlay fund; or



         (c)   To reimbursement of the capital outlay fund to the
extent that money has been expended therefrom for acquisition or development
of the neighborhood park.



      (3)   If a community park has been fully or partially
developed to serve the neighborhood which is served by a fully developed
neighborhood park, only fees shall be collected and any such fees in excess
of the needs of the community park shall be committed as follows:



         (a)   To acquisition or development of a city park to
serve the neighborhoods;



         (b)   To the park acquisition and development fund if
the neighborhood park or community park was acquired or developed other than
with money from the capital outlay fund; or



         (c)   To reimbursement of the capital outlay fund to the
extent that money has been expended therefrom for acquisition or development
of the community parks.



   (B)   (1)   Any fees collected pursuant to this division shall be
committed within five years after the payment of such fees or the issuance of
building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision,
whichever occurs later.



      (2)   If not so committed, such fees shall be distributed
prorata to the then record owners of the lots in the subdivision.  Fees
which have been appropriated shall be deemed to have been committed.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-72)  (Ord. No. 1570, 1791)



DIVISION 3.  RESERVATION OF SITES



SEC. 15-105.  REQUIREMENTS.



   As a condition of approval of any map, the subdivider shall reserve
sites, appropriate in area and location, for schools, parks, recreational
facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the
standards and formula contained in this division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-73)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-106.  STANDARDS AND FORMULA.



   (A)   If a public use is shown on an adopted specific plan or the
city's general plan containing a community facilities element, recreation and
parks element or a public building element, the subdivider may be required to
reserve sites as so determined by the city in accordance with the definite
principles and standards contained in the adopted specific plan or general
plan.  The reserved area shall be of the size and shape to permit the
balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in
an orderly and efficient manner.



   (B)   The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development
of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible.  The
reserved area shall conform to the adopted specific plan or general plan and
shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient
division of the reserved area if it is not acquired within the prescribed
period.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-74)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-107.  PROCEDURE FOR ACQUISITION OF RESERVED LAND.



   The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at
the time of approval of the final map, enter into an agreement with the
subdivider to acquire the reserved area within two years after the completion
and acceptance of all improvements, unless the period of time is extended by
mutual agreement.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-75)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-108.  PURCHASE PRICE.



   The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the time of the
filing of the tentative subdivision map plus the taxes against the reserved
area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the
subdivider in the maintenance of the reserved area, including any applicable
interest costs incurred on any loan covering the reserved area.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-76)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-109.  TERMINATION.



   If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does
not enter into an agreement with the subdivider, the reservation of the area
shall automatically terminate.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77)  (Ord. No. 1570)



DIVISION 4.  SCHOOL FACILITIES



SEC. 15-115.  TITLE.



   This division shall be known and may be cited as the “School
Facilities Fee Ordinance.”



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.1)  (Ord. No. 1781)



SEC. 15-116.  AUTHORITY.



   This division is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code,
Chapter 4.7, commencing with Section 65970, of Division 1 of Title 7.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.2)  (Ord. No. 1781)



SEC. 15-117.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this division is to provide a method for financing
interim school facilities necessitated by conditions of overcrowding caused
by new residential developments.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.3)  (Ord. No. 1781)



SEC. 15-118.  REGULATIONS.



   The city council may, from time to time, by resolution issue
regulations to provide for the administration and implementation of this
division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.4)  (Ord. No. 1781)



SEC. 15-119.  GENERAL PLAN.



   The 2020 General Plan provides for the location of public schools. 
Where facilities are to be constructed from fees or land required to be
dedicated hereunder or both, they shall be consistent with such general plan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.5)  (Ord. No. 1781)



SEC. 15-120.  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this division, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   CONDITIONS OF OVERCROWDING - The total enrollment of a school,
including enrollment from proposed development, exceed the capacity of the
school as determined by the governing body of the district.



   (B)   DECISION-MAKING BODY - The city council, commission and such
other board, commission, office or official as may be authorized or empowered
to approve or make recommendations for approval of any residential
development.



   (C)   DWELLING UNIT - A building or portion thereof, or a mobile
home, designed for residential occupation by one person or a group of two or
more persons living together as a domestic unit.  Dwelling unit shall not
mean room additions to existing residential structures.



   (D)   APPROVE A RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT -



      (1)   To approve or recommend approval of an ordinance
rezoning property to a residential use;



      (2)   To grant a building permit;



      (3)   To approve or recommend approval of a tentative
subdivision map or parcel map for a subdivision of land; or



      (4)   To grant or recommend the granting of a variance,
special use permit or planned development permit.



   (E)   REASONABLE METHODS OF MITIGATING CONDITIONS OF OVERCROWDING
-  Includes but is not limited to concepts such as:



      (1)   Agreements between a developer and the affected school
district whereby temporary-use buildings will be leased to or for the benefit
of the school district or temporary-use buildings owned by the developer or
school district will be used;



      (2)   The use of relocatable structures, student
transportation, classroom double sessions, year-round school programs, school
boundary realignments, and elimination of low priority school facility uses;



      (3)   The use of available tax, bond, and other revenue
procedures to the extent authorized by law; or



      (4)   The use of funds which could be available from the sale
of surplus school district real property and funds available from any other
sources.



   (F)   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT -



      (1)   The construction of one or more non-mobile home dwelling
units;



      (2)   The construction of a mobile home park;



      (3)   The subdivision of real property for the purpose of such
construction or for the purpose of converting existing multiple-family
structures to condominium or stock cooperative ownership; or



      (4)   The conversion to a residential use of an existing
structure or part thereof pursuant to a variance, special use permit, planned
development permit or other discretionary planning permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.6)  (Ord. No. 1781)



SEC. 15-121.  FINDINGS BY SCHOOL DISTRICT.



   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Sections 65970 et seq., the governing
board of any school district operating an elementary or high school may, with
respect to any of its attendance areas located in whole or in part within the
incorporated territory of the city, make and file with the city council
written findings supported by clear and convincing evidence that:



   (A)   Conditions of overcrowding exist in one or more attendance
areas which will impair the normal functioning of educational programs,
including the reasons for the existence of such conditions; and



   (B)   All reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of
overcrowding have been evaluated, and no feasible method for reducing such
conditions exists.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.7)  (Ord. No. 1781)



SEC. 15-122.  CONTENT OF FINDINGS.



   Findings filed pursuant to section 15-121 shall contain the following:



   (A)   A precise description of the geographic boundaries of the
attendance areas to which the findings relate;



   (B)   A list of the mitigation measures evaluated by the governing
board of the school district and a statement of the reasons why such measures
were found to be infeasible;



   (C)   A summary of the evidence upon which such findings were based;



   (D)   A completed application to the office of public school
construction for preliminary determination of eligibility under the LeRoy F.
Greene School Building Lease-Purchase Law of 1976 (Cal. Education Code, Part
10, Chapter 22, commencing with Section 17700); and



   (E)   Such other information as may be required by regulations
adopted by the city council pursuant to this division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.8)  (Ord. No. 1781)



SEC. 15-123.  CONCURRENCE BY CITY COUNCIL.



   After receipt of findings complying with the requirements of this
division, the city council shall, by resolution, either concur in or reject
such findings.  Such findings may be rejected only if the city council
determines that such findings are not supported by the weight of the
evidence.  At any time after it has concurred in or rejected such findings,
the city council may reconsider the matter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.9)  (Ord. No. 1781)



SEC. 15-124.  SCHOOL DISTRICT SCHEDULE.



   Any school district which files findings shall also file with the city
council a schedule specifying how the school district will use fees or land
received by it pursuant to this division to solve the conditions of
overcrowding.  The schedule shall include the school sites to be used, the
classroom facilities to be made available, and the time when such facilities
will be available.  If the school district cannot meet the schedule, the
school district shall file modifications with the city council together with
a statement of the reasons for the modifications.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.10)  (Ord. No. 1781)



SEC. 15-125.  FINDINGS BY CITY COUNCIL.



   After receipt of the schedule the city council shall by resolution
determine whether the facilities and land use specified in such schedule are
consistent with the city's general plan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.11)  (Ord. No. 1781)



SEC. 15-126.  FINDINGS BY DECISION-MAKING BODY.



   Within any attendance area where the school district has determined
pursuant to this division that conditions of overcrowding exist, no
decision-making body shall approve a residential development unless such
decision-making body first determines one of the following:



   (A)   That the school district has entered into an agreement with
the applicant or some other person which provides a feasible means for
mitigating any aggravation of such conditions of overcrowding which would be
caused by the residential development;



   (B)   Where the application is for a building permit, that the
applicant has paid the school fees as required by this division;



   (C)   Where the application is for an approval which does not
include the grant of a building permit, that such approval is conditioned
upon the payment of school fees pursuant to this division; or



   (D)   That there are specific, overriding fiscal, economic, social
or environmental factors which would benefit the city, thereby justifying
approval of the residential development without requiring the payment of fees
which would otherwise be required pursuant to this division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.12)  (Ord. No. 1781)



SEC. 15-127.  FACILITIES FEE.



   (A)   Every person carrying out a residential development in an area
where school overcrowding has been determined to exist, shall pay a
facilities fee for each elementary and junior high school student and an
additional facilities fee for each senior high school student generated by
the development.  The amount of the facilities fee per student shall be set
by resolution of the city council after consultation with the affected school
districts, and shall bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to
the needs of the community for interim elementary, junior high and high
school facilities and shall be reasonably related and limited to the need for
schools caused by the residential development.  However, fees shall not
exceed the amount necessary to pay five annual lease payments for interim
facilities prorated per student.  The fee shall be paid at the time of the
issuance of a building permit, or when none is required, before occupancy of
an existing structure as a condominium or for residential purposes.



   (B)   In lieu of the payment of fees, the builder of the residential
development may, at his or her option and at his or her expense, provide
interim facilities, owned or controlled by the builder, at the place
designated by the school district, and at the conclusion of the fifth school
year the builder shall, at the builder's expense, remove the interim
facilities from that place.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.13)  (Ord. No. 1781)



SEC. 15-128.  DETERMINATION OF STUDENT POPULATION DENSITY AND DWELLING UNITS.



   (A)   Student population density for the purpose of this division
shall be determined by resolution of the city council based upon the number
of students reasonably expected to be housed in each dwelling unit in the
development.



   (B)   The number of dwelling units shall be determined by reference
to the building permits issued permitting residential development or by
reference to the discretionary permit or map permitting conversion of
existing structures to residential use.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.14)  (Ord. No. 1781)



SEC. 15-129.  DEDICATION OF LAND IN LIEU OF FEES.



   Upon agreement by the developer, the city council and the affected
school district, a developer may dedicate land in lieu of paying the fees
required by this division.  The fair market value of the land so dedicated
shall be equivalent to the amount of fees otherwise required.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.15)  (Ord. No. 1781)



SEC. 15-130.  APPLICATION OF FEES.



   (A)   The fees collected pursuant to this division shall be remitted
to the affected school districts.



   (B)   The fees or land, or both, shall be used by the school
districts in accordance with the requirements of Cal. Gov't Code, Chapter
4.7, Division 1, Title 7.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.16)  (Ord. No. 1781



SEC. 15-131.  SCHOOL DISTRICT REPORT; FREQUENCY THEREOF; CONTENTS.



   (A)   (1)   Any school district receiving funds pursuant to this
division shall maintain a separate account for any fees received and shall
file a report with the city council on the balance in the account at the end
of the previous fiscal year and the facilities leased, purchased, or
constructed during the previous fiscal year.



      (2)   In addition, the report shall specify which attendance
areas will continue to be overcrowded when the fall term begins, and where
conditions of overcrowding will no longer exist.  Such report shall be filed
by August 1 of each year and shall be filed more frequently at the request of
the city council.



   (B)   If overcrowding conditions no longer exist, the city shall
cease levying fees pursuant to this division for residential development in
that attendance area.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-77.17)  (Ord. No. 1781)



ARTICLE V.  IMPROVEMENTS AND STANDARDS



DIVISION 1.  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS



SEC. 15-135.  LAND DIVISIONS OF FOUR LOTS OR FEWER.



   As a condition of approval of every tentative subdivision map for a
division of land into four or fewer lots, the subdivider shall be required to
make, or cause to be made, reasonable off-site and on-site improvements for
the parcels being created.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-78)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-136.  LAND DIVISIONS OF FIVE LOTS OR MORE; DRAINAGE FEES; USE OF
SEWER FACILITIES.



   (A)   As a condition of approval of every tentative subdivision map
for a division of land into five or more lots, the subdivider shall be
required to make, or cause to be made, the following improvements to city
specifications at time of construction:



      (1)   Adequate distribution lines for water supply to each lot
or parcel;



      (2)   Sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances which shall
conform to the existing sewer lines and appurtenances; construction of a
four-inch sewer service line from the main sewer line to the property line of
each lot within the development or subdivision; construction of pumping
stations or booster plants wherever necessary for proper disposal of sewerage;



      (3)   All sanitary sewer lines, appurtenances, pumping
facilities and service connections shall be constructed or laid to the grade
established by the city engineer, and shall be of the size and design as
designated by the engineer;



      (4)   Adequate drainage of the subdivision, its streets,
highways and alleys.  Each lot or parcel in the development shall be so
graded under permit as to drain into the street or alley on which it abuts or
into an approved drainage facility;



      (5)   Adequate grading and surfacing of streets, highways, and
alleys, which shall include the paving of alleys;



      (6)   Adequate sidewalks, curbs, gutters, culverts and bridges;



      (7)   Cross gutters;



      (8)   Street name signs that conform to city standards and
ornamental street lighting of the size, design and at the location designated
by the city engineer.  Trees and landscaping shall be planted in accordance
with an approved landscaping plan; provided, however, that the subdivider may
elect to have street trees planted by city forces by paying to the city the
product of the number of street trees required by the approved landscaping
plan times the street tree price set by city council resolution;



   (B)   At the time of making the survey for the final map, the
engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with
the standards described in Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code, Section 8771 so that
another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey.  All monuments
necessary to establish the exterior boundaries of the development shall be
set or referenced prior to recordation of the final map.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-79)  (Ord. No. 1570, 2163, 2257)



SEC. 15-137.  SUPPLEMENTAL CAPACITY; REIMBURSEMENT.



   (A)   (1)   The city may require that improvements installed by
the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision contain supplemental size,
capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the
subdivision, and that those improvements be dedicated to the public.



      (2)   Supplemental length may include minimum sized offsite
sewer lines necessary to reach a sewer outlet in existence at that time.



   (B)   If the city requires that improvements installed by the
subdivider contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length, as provided
in subsection (A) of this section, the city shall enter into an agreement
with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost
of those improvements, including an amount attributable to interest, in
excess of the construction required for the subdivision and, if the
improvements constructed were master planned facilities, in excess of an
credit for facilities fees applied pursuant to adopted city standards and
procedures.



   (C)   In order to pay the cost, including interest, required by a
reimbursement agreement entered into as provided in subsection (B) of this
section, the city may:



      (1)   Collect from other persons, including public agencies,
using such improvements for the benefit of real property not within the
subdivision, a reasonable charge for such use;



      (2)   Contribute to the subdivider, in a lump sum or in
installments, that part of the cost of the improvements that is attributable
to the benefit of real property outside the subdivision and levy a charge
upon the real property benefitted to reimburse the city for such cost,
together with interest thereon, if any, paid to the subdivider; and



      (3)   Establish and maintain local benefit districts for the
levy and collection of such charge or costs from the property benefitted.



   (D)   This section shall not be construed to prohibit or limit the
city's exercise of authority granted by other city ordinances or resolutions
or by statutes other than Cal. Gov't Code, Sections 66485 and 66486 to
require that subdivision improvements contain supplemental size, capacity,
number or length, to arrange for reimbursement of the subdivider of the
supplemental portion of the cost of those improvements, or to collect that
cost from other persons or property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-79.1)  (Ord. No. 2257)



DIVISION 2.  STANDARDS



SEC. 15-145.  BLOCKS.



   (A)   Any block less than 400 feet in length or more than 1,200 feet
in length may be cause for disapproval of a tentative subdivision map.



   (B)   Between parallel streets, at a location to be designated by
the commission, pedestrian ways or drainage outlets at least six feet in
width may be required.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-80)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-146.  LOTS.



   Each lot shall have a minimum area of 6,000 square feet.  The minimum
width of a lot shall be approximately at right angles to the street line on
straight streets or to the tangent on curved streets. Whenever public
necessity, convenience or general welfare require it, the city council or
commission may waive the requirements of this section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-81)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-147.  STREETS.



   (A)   Arterial streets shall be not less than 84 feet wide.  Street
width shall be between right-of- way lines.



   (B)   Collector streets shall be not more than 84 feet wide.



   (C)   Industrial streets shall be not less than 74 feet wide.



   (D)   Generally, local streets shall be not less than 60 feet wide.



   (E)   Special local streets where railroads, parkways, grade
separations, freeways, marinas or other dominant factors are involved shall
receive special consideration.



   (F)   Dead-end streets shall be terminated by a turn-around of not
less than a 50-foot radius.



   (G)   Along major highways, designated as such by the city, a
service road, separated from the major highway by a raised curb or a plant
strip within raised curbs, shall be required for access to abutting private
property and local streets.  All dimensions of such roads shall receive
special consideration by the commission.



   (H)   Curved streets shall have a center line radius of not less
than 300 feet on local streets and as determined by the public works director
on arterial and collector streets.



   (I)   Street corners shall have a curb radius of not less than 25
feet where both streets are 60 feet in width.  All other street
intersections shall have a curb radius of not less than 35 feet with the
property line so designed as not to reduce the parkway width.



   (J)   Street intersections shall be at approximate right angles.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-82)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-148.  ALLEYS.



   (A)   Alleys, when required, shall be 20 feet wide.  Alley
intersections shall have corner cut backs of not less than ten feet.



   (B)   Alleys are optional in R-1, M-1, M-2 and M-3 zones, but may be
required if:



      (1)   There are lots in the subdivision which will have
vehicular access to a street of major importance, in which case alleys may be
required behind those lots; or



      (2)   The commission recommends to the city council and the
city council determines that the public interest, convenience and necessity
require an alley in the particular area.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-83)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-149.  SIDEWALKS, CURBS.



   Each sidewalk, curb, gutter, cross gutter, pavement, sanitary sewer
line, water main, culvert and drainage structure shall be installed by the
subdivider in the manner shown on the improvement plans and described in the
specifications contained in this article and the official specifications of
the city at the time of construction.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-84)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-150.  SEWERS.



   (A)   Each sanitary sewer line and appurtenance shall conform to the
existing sewer lines and appurtenances; except, however, that if a sewer line
is constructed or laid within a street or road, the subdivider shall
construct a sewer service line not less than four inches in diameter from the
main sewer line to the property line of each and every lot within each
subdivided area.



   (B)   Each sanitary sewer line, appurtenance and service connection
shall be constructed or laid to the grade established by the city engineer
and shall be of the size and design designated by the city engineer.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-85)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-151.  MONUMENTS REQUIRED.



   (A)   At the time of making the survey for any final map or parcel
map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to
conform with the standards described in Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code, Section
8771 so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. 
All monuments necessary to establish the exterior boundaries of the land
division shall be set or referenced prior to the recordation of the final
map.  The interior monuments shall be set within one year following the
recordation of a final map or parcel map and security provided pursuant to
section 15-153.



   (B)   The monuments shall be set as follows:



      (1)   Exterior boundary monuments shall be set at or near each
boundary angle point and at intermediate points approximately 1,000 feet
apart, or at such lesser distances as topography may necessitate to ensure
accuracy in reestablishment of any point or line without unreasonable
difficulty.



      (2)   Center line monuments shall be set to mark the
intersections of all roads, streets, alleys or ways.  Center line monuments
shall also be set to mark either the beginning and end of curves or the
points of intersections of tangents thereof, and where a street or alley ends
at a tract boundary, five feet from that boundary.



      (3)   Corner monuments shall be set at or near such lot corner.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-87)  (Ord. No. 1772)



SEC. 15-152.  MONUMENT CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   All exterior boundary monuments shall be of new galvanized
iron pipe of not less than 1½ inches in diameter and 18 inches in length. 
Center line monuments shall be of new galvanized iron pipe not less than 1½
inches in diameter and 15 inches in length.  At all minor (60 feet or less)
street intersections and/or locations designated by the public works
director, center line monuments shall be constructed to the requirements of
the City of Oxnard Standard Plate 2D (Type A) and at all major (greater than
60 feet) street intersections and/or locations designated by the director of
public works, center line monuments shall be constructed to the requirements
of the City of Oxnard Standard Plate 2D (Type B) in lieu of monuments
constructed to the standards otherwise specified in this section.  All lot
corner monuments shall be of new galvanized iron pipe of not less than
½-inch in diameter and 15 inches in length or a cross-cut in concrete. 
Front lot corners shall be a cross-cut (or other suitable monument) in the
sidewalk any designated distance from the true corner on the side lot line
extended.



   (B)   The engineer or surveyor shall also provide proper ties to the
location of all center line monuments and these ties shall be shown on a tie
sheet in a form approved by the director of public works.  A minimum of
three such ties shall be required for each monument.  Tie notes shall be on
file in the office of the city engineer prior to the acceptance of the
improvements into the city road system.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-87.2)  (Ord. No. 1772, 1998)



SEC. 15-153.  MONUMENT SECURITY.



   If any monuments are to be set following the recordation of a final map
or parcel map, security shall be posted guaranteeing the payment of the cost
of setting the monuments in accordance with the requirements of Cal. Gov't
Code, Sections 66441 and 66496.  The security shall be in an amount equal to
the cost of setting the required monuments as determined by the director of
public works.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-87.5)  (Ord. No. 1772)



ARTICLE VI.  DEVELOPMENT FEE PROCEDURES



DIVISION 1.  IN GENERAL



SEC. 15-165.  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   This division applies to all development fees imposed by the
city council as a condition of development approval for the purpose of
financing capital improvements, the need for which is attributable to such
development, unless the development fee is exempted herein or by other law.



   (B)   The development fees to which this division applies include,
but are not limited to:



      (1)   Planned drainage facilities fees imposed pursuant to
division 2 of this article;



      (2)   Planned wastewater facilities fees imposed pursuant to
division 3 of this article;



      (3)   Planned water facilities fees imposed pursuant to
division 4 of this article;



      (4)   Planned traffic circulation facilities fees imposed
pursuant to division 5 of this article; and



      (5)   Growth requirement capital fees imposed pursuant to
division 6 of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-166.  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this division do not apply to any monetary
exactions other than development fees.



   (B)   Such monetary exactions include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Taxes or special assessments;



      (2)   Fees for processing development applications or
approvals;



      (3)   Fees for enforcement of or inspections pursuant to
regulatory ordinances;



      (4)   Fees collected under development agreements adopted
pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Sections 65864 et seq.;



      (5)   Fees specified in Cal. Gov't Code, Section 66477;



      (6)   Fees collected pursuant to agreements with redevelopment
agencies which provide for the redevelopment of property in furtherance or
for the benefit of a redevelopment project for which a redevelopment project
plan has been adopted pursuant to the Community Redevelopment Law, Cal.
Health and Safety Code, Part 1, commencing with Section 33000, of Division
24; or



      (7)   Fees imposed pursuant to a reimbursement agreement by
and between the city and a property owner or developer for that portion of
the cost of a capital improvement paid by the property owner or developer
which exceeds the need for the capital improvement attributable to and
reasonably related to the development.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.1)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-167.  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as otherwise provided with regard to a particular development
fee, the following definitions apply for purposes of this article and any
resolution adopted to implement development fees imposed by this article:



   (A)   APPLICANT - The owner, or duly designated agent of the owner,
of property as to which a request for development approval is received by the
city.



   (B)   APPROVAL OF A DEVELOPMENT PROJECT - Tentative subdivision map
or parcel map approval if development fees could lawfully be imposed at such
time; building permit issuance if development fees could not lawfully be
imposed at the time of tentative subdivision map or parcel map approval or if
the city did not approve a tentative subdivision map or parcel map for the
project; or any other inspection, certificate, approval or collection of fees
connected with the development project if neither of the foregoing situations
applies.



   (C)   BENEFIT AREA - The geographic area within which development
fees are collected and expended for a particular type of capital improvement
serving development projects within such area.



   (D)   CALCULATE - To determine the amount of development fees to be
collected based on the need for capital improvements related to a particular
development project.



   (E)   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS - Public improvements, such as land
and/or facilities for the storage, treatment, or distribution of water; for
the collection, treatment, reclamation, or disposal of wastewater; for the
collection and disposal of storm waters or for flood control purposes; for
the generation of electricity or the distribution of gas or electricity; for
transportation and transit, including but not limited to streets and
supporting improvements, roads, overpasses, bridges, harbors, ports,
airports, and related facilities; for parks and recreation identified in the
city's adopted capital improvement plan or master plans.



   (F)   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN - The five or six year plan for
capital improvements adopted or updated annually by the city council.  The
capital improvement plan indicating the approximate location, size, time of
availability and estimated cost of capital improvements to be financed with
development fees and appropriates money for capital improvement projects.



   (G)   COLLECTION - The point at which the development fee due is
actually paid by the applicant to the city.



   (H)   COMMITMENT - Earmarking of development fees to fund or
partially fund capital improvements serving new development projects.



   (I)   DEVELOPMENT FEE - A monetary exaction, other than those
referred to in section 15-166, imposed as a condition of or in connection
with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or a
portion of the cost of capital improvements related to the development
project.



   (J)   DEVELOPMENT PROJECT - Any project undertaken for the purpose
of development, including a project involving the construction of a building
or structure or the reconstruction, addition to, remodeling, rehabilitation,
alteration or other improvement of an existing building or structure; however
not including the issuance of a permit to operate.



   (K)   IMPOSITION - The determination that a particular development
project is subject to the condition of payment of development fees and the
attachment of such requirement to the project as a condition of development
approval.



   (L)   MASTER PLAN -



      (1)   A plan adopted by the city council for a specific type
of public facility, including drainage facilities, wastewater facilities,
water facilities, and traffic circulation facilities.



      (2)   A master plan includes, but is not limited to, an
estimate of the total costs of constructing the type of facilities required
by the plan and a map of the area covered by the plan, showing the location
of the facilities.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.2)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-168.  AMOUNT OF FEE; ADOPTION OF RESOLUTION.



   (A)   Development fees shall not exceed the estimated reasonable
cost of providing the facility for which the fee or exaction is imposed.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law or by this article,
development fee amounts and benefit areas shall be established and amended by
city council resolution.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.3)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-169.  PURPOSE; USE; RELATIONSHIP.



   In any action establishing, increasing or imposing a development fee,
the city council shall do all of the following:



   (A)   Identify the purpose of the fee;



   (B)   Identify the use of the fee.  If the use is financing capital
improvements, the improvements shall be identified.  That identification
may, but need not, be made by reference to the capital improvement plan, to
master plans, to applicable general or specific plan requirements, or to
other public documents that identify the capital improvements for which the
fee is charged;



   (C)   Determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the
fee's use and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed;



   (D)   Determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the
need for the capital improvement and the type of development project on which
the fee is imposed; and



   (E)   Determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the
amount of the fee and the cost of the capital improvement or portion of the
capital improvement attributable to the development on which the fee is
imposed.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.4)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-170.  HEARING REQUIRED.



   (A)   Prior to the establishment or increase of any development fee,
the city council shall hold a public hearing at which oral or written
presentations may be made, as a part of a regularly scheduled meeting.



   (B)   Notice of the time and place of hearing, including a general
explanation of the matter to be considered, shall be published in accordance
with Cal. Gov't Code, Section 6062a.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.5)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-171.  AMENDMENT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   At least once every year prior to the adoption of the annual
city budget and the capital improvement plan, staff shall prepare a
development fee report to the city council, incorporating:



      (1)   Recommended amendments to this article and to ordinances
and resolutions establishing development fee amounts;



      (2)   Recommended changes to the capital improvement plan and
to master plans, identifying capital improvements to be funded by development
fees; and



      (3)   Recommended changes to the boundaries of benefit areas.



   (B)   Based on the report and any other relevant factors, the city
council may change, amend or adopt development fees, development fee rates or
schedules, or the identification of capital improvements to be funded by
development fees.  Nothing herein precludes the city council or limits its
discretion to change, amend or adopt such enactments at any other time.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.6)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-172.  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   An ordinance or resolution establishing a new development fee or
increasing an existing development fee shall take effect no sooner than 60
days following the final action by the city council on the ordinance or
resolution.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.7)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-173.  IMPOSITION, CALCULATION AND COLLECTION OF DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   (A)   Development fees shall be imposed as a condition of approval
of a development project.  No tentative subdivision map or final map or
parcel map, grading permit, building permit, final inspection, final
approval, or certificate of occupancy shall be approved, made or issued
unless the provisions of this section have been fulfilled.  An inspection or
approval shall be deemed "final" if the inspection or approval is the last
one to be performed for the project by the city.



   (B)   For development projects for which the city issues a building
permit, development fees shall be calculated and collected at the time of
issuance of the building permit, based on the development fee schedule then
in effect.  For development projects for which the city does not issue a
building permit, development fees shall be calculated and collected, based on
the development fee schedule then in effect, at the time of collection by the
city of any other fee, at the time of issuance by the city of any other
permit, certificate or approval, or at the time of performance by the city of
any inspection of the project, which time shall be selected by the director
of public works.



   (C)   Notwithstanding subsection (B) above, planned water facilities
fees and planned wastewater facilities fees for residential development
projects shall be calculated and collected at the time of application for
connection to the utility system.  For all development projects already
connected to the utility system, such fees based solely on an increase in
water meter size or a change in use shall be calculated and collected prior
to installation of the larger meter or making a change in use.



   (D)   The city council determines that the adoption and annual
update of the capital improvement plan, together with the adoption of any
applicable master plans, constitutes the adoption of a proposed construction
schedule or plan for the public improvements or facilities for which
development fees are imposed by this article on residential development. 
The requirement of payment of such fees by residential development at the
time provided in subsection (B) above is, therefore, in accordance with Cal.
Gov't Code, Section 66007, Subdivisions (b) and (i).



   (E)   Notwithstanding subsection (B) above, 50 % of the amount by
which planned traffic circulation facilities fees exceed credits for the
provision of planned traffic circulation facilities must be paid prior to
issuance of a building permit for a development project.  The remaining
amount must be paid prior to the sale or transfer of all or any part of the
project or issuance of any temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy
for all or any part of the project, whichever first occurs.  This subsection
does not apply to residential, fast-food restaurant or neighborhood
commercial developmentprojects.



   (F)   If the developer, prior to the date upon which fees are
otherwise required to be paid under this section, enters into a written
agreement with the city providing that at least 20 % of the units in the
development will be sold or rented only to lower income families or that at
least 10 % of the units in the development will be sold or rented only to
very low income families, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, Sections
50079.5 and 500105 respectively, at housing costs affordable to such
families, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, Sections 50052.5 and
50053, for a period of at least ten years from the date of such written
agreement, the city council may, in such written agreement or in a separate
written agreement entered into prior to the date upon which fees are
otherwise required to be paid under this division, agree to do either or both
of the following:



      (1)   Defer payment of all or part of the fees required by
this section up to the date that the developer first requests electrical
service clearance for a unit in the development;



      (2)   Calculate development fees for the project based on such
fees in effect as of a date no earlier than the date such fees otherwise
would be required to be paid under this section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.8)  (Ord. No. 2258, 2284, 2590)



SEC. 15-174.  DEVELOPMENT FEE ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   The city shall deposit development fees received with other
fees for the same type of capital improvement in a separate capital
improvement account in a manner to avoid commingling of the fees with other
city revenues and funds, except for temporary investments, and shall expend
the fees solely for the purpose for which they were collected.



   (B)   Any interest income earned by money in the capital improvement
account shall also be deposited in that account and expended only for the
purpose for which the fees were collected.



   (C)   For each separate development fee account, the director of
finance shall, within 60 days of the close of each fiscal year, make
available to the public the beginning and ending balance for the fiscal year
and the fees, interest, and other income and the amount of expenditure by
capital improvement and the amount of refunds made pursuant to subsection (C)
of section 15-177 during the fiscal year.



   (D)   The city council shall review the information referred to in
subsection (C) of this section at the next regularly scheduled public meeting
held not less than 15 days after the information is made available.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.9)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-175.  USE OF DEVELOPMENT FEE PROCEEDS.



   (A)   Development fees shall be expended only for the type of
capital improvement for which they were imposed, calculated, and collected
and shall be expended or committed in accordance with the time limits and
procedures established in this article.  Development fees may be used to pay
the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or
other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance such capital
improvements.



   (B)   Development fees shall not be expended to maintain, repair or
operate capital improvements.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.10)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-176.  TIME LIMIT ON EXPENDITURES.



   The city shall expend or commit development fees deposited in the
development fee account within five years from the date of deposit into the
fund, except as provided in section 15-177(B).



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.11)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-177.  REFUNDS.



   (A)   Once each fiscal year, the city council shall identify all
unexpended or uncommitted development fees in each development fee account.



   (B)   With respect to any portion of development fees unexpended or
uncommitted five or more years after deposit in a development fee account,
the city council shall make findings once each fiscal year to identify the
purpose to which the fee is to be put and to demonstrate a reasonable
relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged.  Such
findings need be made only for money, and not for letters of credit, bonds or
other instruments taken to secure payment of the fees at a future date.  If
the city council makes such findings, the fees are exempt from the refund
requirements.



   (C)   The city shall refund to the then current record owner or
owners of lots or units of the development project or projects on a prorated
basis the unexpended or uncommitted portion of the fee, and any interest
accrued thereon, for which need cannot be demonstrated pursuant to subsection
(B).



   (D)   If the city council finds that the administrative costs of
refunding unexpended or uncommitted development fees exceed the amount to be
refunded, the city council, after a public hearing, notice of which shall be
published in accordance with Cal. Gov't Code, Section 6061 and posted in
three prominent places within the area of each development project subject to
a refund, may determine that the revenues shall be allocated for other
capital improvements for which development fees are collected and which serve
the development projects on which the fee was originally imposed.



   (E)   The city may refund the unexpended or uncommitted portions of
development fees by direct payment, by temporarily suspending fees, by
offsetting the refunds against other development fees due for development
projects on the property, or by other means agreed to by the property owner.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.12)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-178.  CREDIT.



   (A)   Any applicant subject to a development fee imposed pursuant to
this article who dedicates real property or interests therein to the city for
the construction of capital improvements or who constructs, escrows money
with the city for the construction of, agrees to participate in an assessment
district for the construction of or who otherwise contributes funds for
capital improvements may be eligible for a credit for such dedication,
construction or contribution against the development fee otherwise due.



   (B)   Eligibility for, and the amount of, the credit shall be
determined by the director of public works based on adopted city standards
and procedures, including, but not limited to, whether the dedication,
construction or contribution meets capital improvement needs for which the
particular development fee has been imposed, as provided in this article and
the capital improvement plan or applicable master plan; whether the
dedication, construction or contribution will substitute for or otherwise
reduce the need for or cost of capital improvements anticipated to be
provided with development fee funds; and the value of the dedication,
construction or contribution.  In no event, however, shall the credit exceed
the amount of the otherwise applicable development fee.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.13)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-179.  APPEALS.



   (A)   The applicant may appeal any decision of a city official to
the city council, including, but not limited to, calculation of the amount of
the development fee, the number of development units, reimbursement due,
applicability of an exemption, and eligibility for and amount of a credit or
refund.



   (B)   In order to perfect an appeal, the applicant must file a
notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days following the action of
the city official that is the basis of the appeal.  The notice of appeal
shall include, at a minimum:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant/agent;



      (2)   Description, location and size of the affected property;



      (3)   Land use proposed for the affected property;



      (4)   Number of residential units proposed, by type and/or
number of square feet of nonresidential development by type;



      (5)   The particular circumstances giving rise to the appeal;



      (6)   The city official whose action is being appealed;



      (7)   The grounds for the appeal, i.e., why the city
official's decision is erroneous; and



      (8)   Such other relevant information as may be requested by
the city.



   (C)   The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to establish
that the decision of the city official is erroneous pursuant to the express
terms or intent of this article and applicable State law, including, but not
limited to Cal. Gov't Code, Sections 66000 et seq.



   (D)   The city council shall schedule the appeal to be heard at a
regular or special meeting to be held not more than 45 days after the filing
of the notice of appeal by the appellant.  At least 20 days prior to the
hearing date, the city shall notify the appellant of the hearing date by
certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address stated on the notice
of appeal.



   (E)   The hearing on the appeal shall be administrative.  Evidence
may be submitted by the appellant and by the city.  Testimony shall be under
oath.  The city council shall make written findings of fact and conclusions
of law after the close of the hearing.  However, if the city clerk
determines from the notice of appeal or from relevant city documents that the
appeal is improper, the city, within 20 days after receipt of the notice of
appeal, shall reject the notice of appeal, stating the grounds therefor and
notifying the appellant by certified mail, return receipt requested.



   (F)   A request for a continuance of the hearing may be made by the
city council on its own motion or at the request of the appellant.  If
requested by the appellant, the city council shall determine whether a
continuance should be granted.



   (G)   Within 30 days after the close of the administrative hearing,
the city council shall render its decision, in writing, and notify the
applicant of such decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, at
the address listed on the notice of appeal.



   (H)   The findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be completed
not later than 10 days following the decision of the city council and shall
be filed with the city clerk.  Upon the request of the applicant, the
findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be sent to the applicant.



   (I)   Upon the filing of the findings of fact and conclusions of law
with the city clerk, the decision of the city council shall be deemed to be
final.



   (J)   Any petition for judicial review of the city council's final
decision shall be filed not later than 90 days following the date on which
the decision becomes final, and shall be made in accordance with Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure, Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.



   (K)   If the development fee has been paid in full or if the notice
of appeal is accompanied by a cash deposit, letter of credit, bond or other
surety acceptable to the city attorney, in an amount equal to the development
fee calculated to be due, the application for development project approval
shall be processed.  The filing of a notice of appeal shall not stay the
imposition or the collection of the development fee calculated by the city to
be due unless sufficient and acceptable surety has been provided.



   (L)   If, as a result of an appeal pursuant to this section or
judicial review pursuant to section 15-180, a development fee is reduced or
waived, the city council may determine whether and how such reduction or
waiver may affect the development fee calculation methodology.  If the city
council determines that capital improvement needs are correspondingly
reduced, the city council may amend the capital improvement plan, the
applicable master plan, the development fee calculation methodology, the
applicable development fee, or take such other action as it may deem
appropriate.  If the city council determines that capital improvement needs
remain the same, the city council shall appropriate funds in an amount equal
to the reduction or waiver of the development fee and shall deposit same to
the applicable development fee account or take such other action as it may
deem appropriate.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.14)  (Ord. No. 2268)



SEC. 15-180.  PROTESTS/JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   (A)   An applicant may seek judicial review of:



      (1)   A final decision by the city council on an
administrative appeal, pursuant to section 15-179;



      (2)   The adoption, by resolution or ordinance, of a new
development fee or the amendment of an existing development fee or the
automatic adjustment of development fee if such adjustment results in a fee
increase, pursuant to this section and Cal. Gov't Code, Section 66022;



      (3)   The imposition of a development fee as a condition of
development approval, pursuant to this section and Cal. Gov't Code, Section
66020.



   (B)   The applicable time periods for and conditions precedent to
the filing of an action for judicial review are:



      (1)   Appeal from a final decision of the city council not
later than 90 days following the date on which the decision becomes final;



      (2)   Adoption of a development fee ordinance or amendment not
later than 120 days following the effective date of the ordinance or
resolution.  However, if the development fee has been directly imposed as a
condition of development approval and is challenged as a special tax, the
appellant must, at least 30 days prior to initiating legal action, request
that the city provide the documents which establish that the development fee
does not exceed the cost of the capital improvements.  The requirement for
this request is a condition precedent to an action challenging the
development fee as a special tax, but does not alter the applicable time
period for filing an action for judicial review of the fee ordinance or
amendment, pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Section 66024;



      (3)   Imposition of the development fee as a condition of
development approval if a protest is timely filed pursuant to this section
and Cal. Gov't Code, Section 66020, not later than 180 days after the date of
imposition; if a protest is not timely filed pursuant to this section and
Cal. Gov't Code, Section 66020, not later than 90 days following imposition.



   (C)   Any party may protest the imposition of a development fee
pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Sections 66020 and 66021.



      (1)   If payment of the development fee has been imposed as a
condition of development project approval, the protest shall be filed at the
time of such approval or conditional approval of the proposed project;



      (2)   If the development fee has not been calculated and
payment is now required, the protest shall be filed within 90 days after the
date of collection;



      (3)   A valid protest must meet both of the following
requirements:



         (a)   The applicant must tender any required payment in
full or provide evidence satisfactory to the city attorney of arrangements to
ensure performance of the conditions necessary to meet the requirements of
the imposition;



         (b)   The applicant must serve written notice on the
city council, which notice shall contain:



            (i)   A statement that the required payment is
tendered, or that any conditions which have been imposed are provided for or
satisfied, under protest; and



            (ii)   A statement informing the city council of
the factual elements of the dispute and the legal theory forming the basis of
the protest.



      (4)   If a valid and timely protest is filed by an applicant,
the city council shall schedule a hearing date, at a regular or special
meeting, not more than 45 days after the filing of the protest.  The city
shall notify the protestant of the hearing date by certified mail, return
receipt requested, at the address listed on the protest petition at least 20
days prior to the hearing date.  However, if it is determined from the
protest petition or from relevant city documents that the protest is
improper, the city, within 20 days after receipt of the protest petition,
shall reject the protest petition, stating the grounds therefor and notifying
the protestant by certified mail, return receipt requested.



      (5)   The hearing of the protest shall be administrative. 
Evidence may be submitted by the protestant and by the city.  Testimony
shall be under oath.  The city council shall make written findings of fact
and conclusions of law after the close of the hearing.



      (6)   A request for continuance of the hearing may be made by
the city council on its own motion or at the request of the protestant.  If
requested by the protestant, the city council shall determine whether a
continuance should be granted.



      (7)   Within 30 days after the close of the administrative
hearing, the city council shall render its decision, in writing, and notify
the applicant of such decision by certified mail, return receipt requested at
the address listed on the protest petition.



      (8)   The findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be
completed not later than 15 days following the decision of the city council
and shall be filed with the city clerk.  Upon the request of the applicant,
the findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be sent to the applicant.



      (9)   Upon the filing of the findings of fact and conclusions
of law with the city clerk, the decision of the city council shall be deemed
to be final.



      (10)   Any petition for judicial review of the city council's
final decision on the protest shall be filed not later than 90 days following
the date on which the decision becomes final, and shall be made in accordance
with Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.16)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-181.  EFFECT OF DEVELOPMENT FEES ON ZONING AND SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS.



   This article shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible uses of
property, density or intensity of development, design and improvement
standards and public improvement requirements or any other aspect of the
development of land or construction of buildings, which may be imposed by the
city pursuant to zoning ordinances, subdivision ordinances or other
ordinances or regulations of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.17)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-182.  DEVELOPMENT FEES AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   Specific development fees imposed by divisions 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of
article VI of the code reflect a development's proportionate share of the
cost of providing improvements necessary to meet demands created by such
development at established city service level standards.  As such,
development fees are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution
of, either onsite improvement requirements or offsite improvement
requirements imposed by the city pursuant to zoning, subdivision or other
ordinances and regulations.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-88.18)  (Ord. No. 2258)



DIVISION 2.  PLANNED DRAINAGE FACILITIES FEES



SEC. 15-185.  PURPOSE.



   This division imposes fees to defray actual or estimated costs of
constructing planned drainage facilities for the removal of surface and
stormwater, as required by a development project.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.22)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-186.  MASTER PLAN OF DRAINAGE FACILITIES.



   The master plan of drainage for the city contains an estimate of the
total costs of constructing the drainage facilities required by the plan and
a map of the area covered by the plan, showing the location of the
facilities.  The fees imposed by this division shall be based on the master
plan of drainage.  The costs estimated in the master plan of drainage shall
be adjusted to reflect current costs.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.23)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-187.  IMPOSITION OF FEES.



   The approval of each development project resulting in stormwater runoff
shall be conditioned on the payment of fees to carry out the purpose of this
division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.22)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-188.  USE OF FEES.



   The fees collected shall be used to pay for only the planned drainage
facilities identified in the staff report approved by the city council at the
time of setting the fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.23)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-189.  REASONABLE RELATIONSHIP.



   (A)   There is a reasonable relationship between the fee's use and
the type of development project on which the fee is imposed, and between the
need for the drainage facilities financed by the fee and the type of
development project on which the fee is imposed in that all types of
development projects subject to the fee result in greater storm runoff, which
requires more or higher capacity drainage facilities.



   (B)   There is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the
fee and the cost of the drainage facilities or portion thereof attributable
to the development project on which the fee is imposed in that the cost
estimates used to calculate the fee shall be reasonable cost estimates for
constructing the drainage facilities identified, the total fees to be imposed
shall not exceed the total of the cost estimates, and the fees to be imposed
on a particular development project shall not exceed the project's
proportionate share of the cost of the facilities that are necessary to serve
the development project.  Such cost estimates and the method of calculating
each development project's proportionate share thereof shall be set out in
the staff report approved by the city council at the time of setting the fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.24)  (Ord. No. 2258)



DIVISION 3.  PLANNED WASTEWATER FACILITIES FEES



SEC. 15-195.  PURPOSE.



   This division imposes fees to defray actual or estimated costs of
constructing planned wastewater facilities required by a development project.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.30)  (Ord. No. 2268)



SEC. 15-196.  MASTER PLAN OF WASTEWATER FACILITIES.



   (A)   The master plan of wastewater facilities for the city contains
an estimate of the total costs of constructing the wastewater facilities
required by the plan and a map of the area covered by the plan, showing the
location of the facilities.



   (B)   The fees imposed by this division shall be based on the master
plan of wastewater facilities. 



   (C)   The costs estimated in the master plan of wastewater
facilities shall be adjusted to reflect current costs.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.31)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-197.  IMPOSITION OF FEES.



   The approval of each development project requiring a new connection to
the city's wastewater conveyance system or an increase in water meter size
shall be conditioned on the payment of fees to carry out the purpose of this
division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.32)  (Ord. No. 2268)



SEC. 15-198.  USE OF FEES.



   The fees collected shall be used to pay for only the planned wastewater
facilities identified in the staff report approved by the city council at the
time of setting the fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.33)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-199.  REASONABLE RELATIONSHIP.



   (A)   There is a reasonable relationship between the fee's use and
the type of development project on which the fee is imposed, and between the
need for the wastewater facilities financed by the fee and the type of
development project on which the fee is imposed in that all types of
development projects subject to the fee produce wastewater, which requires
more or higher capacity wastewater facilities.



   (B)   There is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the
fee and the cost of the wastewater facilities or portion thereof attributable
to the development project on which the fee is imposed in that the cost
estimates used to calculate the fee shall be reasonable cost estimates for
constructing the wastewater facilities identified, the total fees to be
imposed shall not exceed the total of the cost estimates, and the fees to be
imposed on a particular development project shall not exceed the project's
proportionate share of the cost of the facilities that are necessary to serve
the development project.  Such cost estimates and the method of calculating
each development project's proportionate share thereof shall be set out in
the staff report approved by the city council at the time of setting the fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.34)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-200.  FEES TO BE SET BY ORDINANCE.



   The amount of fees imposed by this division shall be set by ordinance,
as required by Federal Environmental Protection Agency regulations and by
State Water Resources Control Board revenue program guidelines.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.35)  (Ord. No. 2258)



DIVISION 4.  PLANNED WATER FACILITIES FEES



SEC. 15-205.  PURPOSE.



   This division imposes fees to defray actual or estimated costs of
constructing planned water facilities required by a development project.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.40)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-206.  MASTER PLAN OF WATER FACILITIES.



   The master plan of water facilities for the city contains an estimate
of the total costs of constructing the water facilities required by the plan
and a map of the area covered by the plan, showing the location of the
facilities.  The fees imposed by this division shall be based on the master
plan of water facilities. The costs estimated in the master plan of water
facilities shall be adjusted to reflect current costs.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.41)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-207.  IMPOSITION OF FEES.



   The approval of each development project requiring a new connection to
the city's water system shall be conditioned on the payment of fees to carry
out the purpose of this division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.42)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-208.  USE OF FEES.



   The fees collected shall be used to pay for only the planned water
facilities identified in the staff report approved by the city council at the
time of setting the fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.43)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-209.  REASONABLE RELATIONSHIP.



   (A)   There is a reasonable relationship between the fee's use and
the type of development project on which the fee is imposed, and between the
need for the water facilities financed by the fee and the type of development
project on which the fee is imposed in that all types of development projects
subject to the fee require water, which requires more or higher capacity
water facilities.



   (B)   (1)   There is a reasonable relationship between the amount
of the fee and the cost of the water facilities or portion thereof
attributable to the development project on which the fee is imposed in that
the cost estimates used to calculate the fee shall be reasonable estimates
for constructing the water facilities identified, the total fees to be
imposed shall not exceed the total of the cost estimates, and the fees to be
imposed on a particular development project shall not exceed the project's
proportionate share of the cost of the facilities that are necessary to serve
the development project.



      (2)   Such cost estimates and the method of calculating each
development project's proportionate share thereof shall be set out in the
staff report approved by the city council at the time of setting the fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.44)  (Ord. No. 2258)



DIVISION 5.  PLANNED TRAFFIC CIRCULATION FACILITIES FEES



SEC. 15-215.  PURPOSE.



   This division imposes fees to defray actual or estimated costs of
constructing planned traffic circulation facilities required by a development
project.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.50)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-216.  MASTER PLAN OF TRAFFIC CIRCULATION FACILITIES.



   The master plan of traffic circulation for the city contains an
estimate of the total costs of constructing the traffic circulation
facilities required by the plan and a map of the area covered by the plan,
showing the location of the facilities.  The fees imposed by this division
shall be based on the master plan of traffic circulation.  The costs
estimated in the master plan of traffic circulation shall be adjusted to
reflect current costs.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.51)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-217.  IMPOSITION OF FEES.



   The approval of each development project producing additional vehicle
trips shall be conditioned on the payment of fees to carry out the purpose of
this division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.52)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-218.  USE OF FEES.



   The fees collected shall be used to pay for only the planned traffic
circulation facilities identified in the staff report approved by the city
council at the time of setting the fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.53)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-219.  REASONABLE RELATIONSHIP.



   (A)   There is a reasonable relationship between the fee's use and
the type of development project on which the fee is imposed, and between the
need for the traffic circulation facilities financed by the fee and the type
of development project on which the fee is imposed in that all types of
development projects subject to the fee produce traffic, which requires more
or higher capacity traffic circulation facilities.



   (B)   (1)   There is a reasonable relationship between the amount
of the fee and the cost of the traffic circulation facilities or portion
hereof attributable to the development project on which the fee is imposed in
that the cost estimates used to calculate the fee shall be reasonable cost
estimates for constructing the traffic circulation facilities identified, the
total fees to be imposed shall not exceed the total of the cost estimates,
and the fees to be imposed on a particular development project shall not
exceed the project's proportionate share of the cost of the facilities that
are necessary to serve the development project.



      (2)   Such cost estimates and the method of calculating each
development project's proportionate share thereof shall be set out in the
staff report approved by the city council at the time of setting the fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.54)  (Ord. No. 2258)



DIVISION 6.  GROWTH REQUIREMENT CAPITAL FEES



SEC. 15-225.  PURPOSE.



   (A)   This division imposes fees to defray actual or estimated costs
of constructing public facilities required to serve population growth and
increased demand for public services attributable to development projects.



   (B)   The city council is committed to maintaining the same level of
public facilities and the same public facilities-to-population relationship
as existed on July 16, 1981 (the date of adoption of Ordinance No. 1876,
creating and establishing the growth requirement capital fee), in order to
ensure that as population growth occurs in the city, there will be maintained
the same level of public facilities as existed on July 16, 1981.



   (C)   The city council has determined that commercial and industrial
development projects result in a need for additional public services, which
in turn results in a need for additional government and public safety
facilities and essential infrastructure and related facilities.



   (D)   The city council has determined that residential development
projects, including new mobile home park development projects, result in
significant increases in city population and adversely affect the public
facilities-to-population relationship that existed on July 16, 1981, which
creates a need for additional government and public safety facilities,
essential infrastructure and related facilities, and cultural and
recreational facilities.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.60)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-226.  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN.



   The city's capital improvement plan for the city contains an estimate
of the total costs of public facilities required by the plan.  For purposes
of this division, “costs of public facilities” means any costs related to
acquisition, construction, repair and financing of public facilities and
equipment funded through the capital improvement plan, not including costs of
routine maintenance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.61)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-227.  IMPOSITION OF FEES.



   (A)   The approval of each development project producing population
growth or increasing the demand for public services shall be conditioned on
the payment of fees to carry out the purpose of this division.



   (B)   For purposes of this division, “development project” shall
not include alteration of an existing structure that does not increase the
floor area of the structure.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.62)  (Ord. No. 2258, 2710)



SEC. 15-228.  USE.



   (A)   The fees collected shall be used to pay for only the public
facilities identified in the capital improvement plan in the categories of
government and public safety facilities, essential infrastructure and related
facilities, and cultural and recreational facilities.



   (B)   For purposes of this division, the following words shall have
the following meanings:



      (1)   CULTURAL AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES - Any libraries,
auditoriums, concert halls, parks, playgrounds and similar facilities located
in the city.



      (2)   ESSENTIAL INFRASTRUCTURE - Any facilities for the
storage, treatment and distribution of nonagricultural water; facilities for
the collection, treatment, reclamation and disposal of sewage; facilities for
the collection and disposal of stormwaters and for flood-control purposes;
facilities for the generation of electricity and the distribution of gas and
electricity; transportation and transit facilities, including, but not
limited to, streets and supporting improvements, roads, overpasses, bridges,
harbors, ports, airports and related facilities; and any other capital
projects identified in the capital improvement plan that are not related
facilities, cultural and recreational facilities, government facilities or
public safety facilities, as defined in this section 15-228.



      (3)   GOVERNMENT FACILITIES - City hall, city garages and
equipment yards, city offices, parking areas and similar facilities in or
through which the city conducts general city operations.



      (4)   PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES - Any capital improvements or
equipment related to city police and fire operations.



      (5)   RELATED FACILITIES - Any major landscaping, fountains,
monuments, signs and similar structures and facilities of general benefit to
the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.63)  (Ord. No. 2258)



SEC. 15-229.  REASONABLE RELATIONSHIP.



   (A)   There is a reasonable relationship between the need for
additional public facilities and the type of development projects on which
the fee is imposed in that commercial and industrial development projects
create a need for additional government and public safety facilities and
essential infrastructure and related facilities, and residential development
projects create a need for additional government and public safety
facilities, essential infrastructure and related facilities, and cultural and
recreational facilities.



   (B)   There is a reasonable relationship between the fee's use and
the type of development project on which the fee is imposed in that the fee
imposed on commercial and industrial development projects is used to pay for
additional government and public safety facilities and essential
infrastructure and related facilities, and the fee imposed on residential
projects is used to pay for additional government and public safety
facilities, essential infrastructure and related facilities, and cultural and
recreational facilities.



   (C)   There is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the
fee and the cost of the public facilities or portion thereof attributable to
the development project on which the fee is imposed in that the cost
estimates used to calculate the fee shall be reasonable cost estimates for
constructing the public facilities identified, the total fees to be imposed
shall not exceed the total of the cost estimates, and the fees to be imposed
on a particular development project shall not exceed the project's
proportionate share of the cost of the facilities that are necessary to serve
the development project.  A detailed analysis of the basis for the
determination of such reasonable relationship is contained in reports to the
city council from the city manager, entitled “Revision of Growth
Requirement Capital Fee,” dated April 27, 1984; “Growth Capital Fee
Ordinance,” dated May 13, 1988; and “Development Process and
Infrastructure Fees Adjustment,” dated May 23, 1989.  All such reports are
on file with the city clerk and are incorporated herein by reference.  In
addition, the cost estimates of constructing additional public facilities and
the method of calculating each development project's proportionate share
thereof shall be set out in the staff report approved by the city council at
the time of setting the fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.64)  (Ord. No. 2258)



DIVISION 7.  BRIDGE AND THOROUGHFARE FEES



SEC. 15-235.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this division is to make provision for establishing,
apportioning and collecting fees pursuant to Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov't
Code, Section 66410 and following, as a condition of approval of a final map
or as a condition of issuing a building permit for the purpose of defraying
the actual or estimated costs of constructing bridges over waterways,
railways, freeways or canyons or of constructing major thoroughfares.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.70)  (Ord. No. 2387)



SEC. 15-236.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this division, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   BRIDGE - A bridge referred to in the transportation or flood
control provisions of the general plan of the city which identify railways,
freeways, streams, or canyons for which bridge crossings are required.



   (B)   CIRCULATION ELEMENT OR TRANSPORTATION OF FLOOD CONTROL
PROVISIONS - The circulation element of the general plan of the city and the
transportation and flood control provision thereof, heretofore adopted by the
city pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Chapter 3 of Title 7, together with any
additions or amendments thereto hereafter adopted.



   (C)   CONSTRUCTION - Design, acquisition of right-of-way,
administration of construction contracts, actual construction, and associated
activities.



   (D)   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE - A roadway as shown on the circulation
element of the general plan whose primary purpose is to carry through traffic
and provide a network connecting to the State highway system.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.71)  (Ord. No. 2387)



SEC. 15-237.  ESTABLISHING AN AREA OF BENEFIT; PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   Prior to establishing an area of benefit, a public hearing
shall be held by the city council, at which time the city council shall
consider:



      (1)   The boundaries of the area of benefit;



      (2)   The costs, whether actual or estimated, of the bridge
and/or major thoroughfare improvements;



      (3)   A fair method of allocation of costs to the area of
benefit and fee apportionment;



      (4)   How there is a reasonable relationship between the use
of the fees and the type of development project, as defined in Cal. Gov't
Code, Section 66000, on which the fee is proposed to be imposed;



      (5)   How there is a reasonable relationship between the need
for the bridges or major thoroughfares to be financed from the proceeds of
the fees and the type of development project on which the fee is proposed to
be imposed; and



      (6)   How there is a reasonable relationship between the
amount of the fee and the cost of the bridges and/or major thoroughfares or
portion thereof attributable to the development on which the fee is proposed
to be imposed.



   (B)   Notice of the public hearing shall be given pursuant to Cal.
Gov't Code, Sections 65091 and 66016. In addition to the requirements of Cal.
Gov't Code, Sections 65091 and 66016, such notice shall contain preliminary
information related to the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated costs
and the method of fee apportionment.



   (C)   (1)   At any time, not later than the hour set for hearing
objections to the proposed bridge facility or major thoroughfare, any owner
of property to be benefitted by the improvement may file a written protest
against the proposed bridge facility or major thoroughfare or against the
extent of the area to be benefitted by the improvements or against both of
them.  Such protest must be in writing and must contain a description of the
property in which each signer thereof is interested, sufficient to identify
the same and, if the signers are not shown on the last equalized assessment
roll as the owners of such property, must contain or be accompanied by
written evidence that such signers are the owners of such property.  All
such protests shall be delivered to the city clerk and no other protest or
objections shall be considered.  Any protests may be withdrawn by the
owner's making the same, in writing, at any time prior to the conclusion of
the public hearing.



      (2)   If there is a written protest filed with the city clerk
by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be
benefitted by the improvement and sufficient protest are not withdrawn so as
to reduce the area represented to less than one-half of that to be
benefitted, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned and the city
council shall not, for one year from the filing of the written protest,
commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvements under the
provisions of this division.



      (3)   If any majority protest is directed against only a
portion of the improvement, then all further proceedings under the provisions
of this section to construct that portion of the improvement so protested
against shall be abandoned and the city council shall not, for one year from
the date of the decision of the city council on the hearing, commence or
carry on any proceedings for that same portion of the improvement under the
provisions of this division; provided, however that nothing in this section
shall prohibit the city council within such one-year period, from commencing
and carrying on new proceedings for the construction of a portion of the
improvement so protested against if it finds, by the affirmative vote of
four-fifths of its members; that the owners of more than one-half of the area
of the property to be benefitted are in favor of going forward with such
portion of the improvement.



   (D)   (1)   If the city council finds that a majority protest has
not been made, the city council shall decide whether or not to confirm the
area of benefit and establish the fees applicable thereto.



      (2)   If the city council determines to confirm the area of
benefit and establish fees applicable thereto, the city council shall
announce its decision by resolution, a certified copy of which shall be
recorded with the county recorder.  The resolution shall include:



         (a)   The purpose of the fee;



         (b)   The bridges and/or major thoroughfares to be
financed from the proceeds of the fees;



         (c)   The costs, whether actual or estimated, of the
bridge and/or major thoroughfare improvements;



         (d)   The method of fairly allocating the costs to the
area of benefit and fee apportionment;



         (e)   A schedule of the fees established by such
resolution;



         (f)   The determination of how there is a reasonable
relationship between the use of the fees and the type of development project,
as defined in Cal. Gov't Code, Section 66000, on which the fee is proposed to
be imposed;



         (g)   The determination of how there is a reasonable
relationship between the need for the bridges or thoroughfares to be financed
from the proceeds of the fees and the type of development project on which
the fee is proposed to be imposed; and



         (h)   The determination of how there is a reasonable
relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the bridges and/or
major thoroughfares or portion thereof attributable to the development on
which the fee is proposed to be imposed.



      (3)   The fees and the area of benefit to which such fees are
apportioned shall be established as set forth in a city council resolution. 
Such apportioned fees shall be applicable to all property within the area of
benefit and shall be payable as a condition of approval of a final map or as
a condition of issuing a building permit for such property or portions
thereof.



      (4)   Any fee established pursuant to this section shall
become effective 60 days following the date of adoption of the resolution
establishing such fee.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.72)  (Ord. No. 2387)



SEC. 15-238.  REQUIREMENT FOR PAYMENT OF BRIDGE AND THOROUGHFARE FEES.



   (A)   Prior to filing a final map which includes land within an area
of benefit established pursuant to this division, the subdivider shall pay,
or cause to be paid, any fees established and apportioned to said property
pursuant to this division.



   (B)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction on
any property within an area of benefit established pursuant to this division,
the applicant for such permit shall pay, or cause to be paid, any fees
established and apportioned pursuant to this division, unless such fees have
been previously paid pursuant to subsection (A) of this section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.73)  (Ord. No. 2387)



SEC. 15-239.  REQUIREMENTS FOR BRIDGES AND THOROUGHFARES.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15-238:



   (A)   Payment of bridge fees shall not be required unless the
planned bridge facility is an original bridge serving the area or an addition
to any existing bridge facility serving the area at the time of adoption of
the boundaries of the area of benefit.



   (B)   Payment of major thoroughfare fees shall not be required
unless the major thoroughfares are in addition to, or a reconstruction of,
any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of the adoption
of the area benefit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.74)  (Ord. No. 2387)



SEC. 15-240.  EXEMPTIONS FROM FEE.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15-238, payment of such fees
shall not be required for:



   (A)   The use, alteration or enlargement of an existing building or
structure or the erection of one or more buildings or structures accessory
thereto, or both, on the same lot or parcel of land; provided, the total
value, as determined by the city engineers of all such alteration,
enlargement or construction completed within any one-year period does not
exceed one-half of the current market value, as determined by the city
engineer, of all existing buildings on such lot or parcel of land, and the
alteration or enlargement of the existing building or structure does not
result in a change of its classification of occupancy as defined in Uniform
Building Code Section 501;



   (B)   The following accessory buildings and structures:  private
garages, children's playhouses, radio and television receiving antennas,
windmills, silos, tank houses, shops, barns, coops and other buildings which
are accessory to one-family or two-family dwellings.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.75)  (Ord. No. 2387)



SEC. 15-241.  CONSIDERATION IN LIEU OF PAYMENT OF FEES.



   Upon application by the subdivider or applicant for a building permit,
the city council may accept substitute consideration in lieu of fees required
pursuant to this division; provided:



   (A)   The city council finds, upon recommendation of the city
engineer, that the substitute consideration has a value equal to or greater
than the fee; and



   (B)   The substitute consideration is in a form acceptable to the
city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-89.76)  (Ord. No. 2387)



ARTICLE VII.  SOIL REPORTS



SEC. 15-250.  PRELIMINARY SOIL REPORT.



   (A)   Prior to the submission of a final map or parcel map, the
developer shall file with the building division a preliminary soil report,
prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the State, based upon
adequate test borings or excavations.



   (B)   The preliminary soil report may be waived if the building
official has on file a preliminary soil report on the same area or due to the
knowledge he/she has as to the soil qualities of the area of development, no
preliminary analysis is necessary.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-90)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-251.  INVESTIGATION OF CRITICAL SOILS.



   (A)   (1)   If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence
of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected,
would lead to structural defects, a soil investigation of each lot in the
development shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer.



      (2)   The soil investigation shall recommend corrective action
which is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be
constructed in the area of the expansive soil.



   (B)   The report shall be filed with the building division.  The
soil report shall be noted on the final map together with the date of the
report and the name of the engineer making the report and shall indicate the
nature of adverse effects which will develop as a result of change in
moisture content or the addition of water to the soil.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-91)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-252.  APPROVAL OF INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   The building official shall approve the soil investigation if
he/she determines that the recommended corrective action is likely to prevent
structural damage to each structure to be constructed on each lot in the
development.  Any building permit issued shall be conditioned upon the
incorporation of the applicable approved recommended corrective action in the
construction of each structure.



   (B)   Appeal from the determination of the building division shall
be to the city council in the manner provided by section 16-455 of this code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-92)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-253.  LIMITATION ON FILL.



   In grading or leveling the surface of areas within any development
other than streets or alleys, all debris or foreign material such as, but not
limited to, rocks, broken stone, concrete or plaster which are not naturally
a part of the land, or which have been loosened from the land, shall be
removed.  Cavities or uneven portions with the development shall be filled
with soils suitable for planting and landscaping.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-93)  (Ord. No. 1570)



ARTICLE VIII.  REVERSION TO ACREAGE



SEC. 15-260.  IN GENERAL.



   Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the
Subdivision Map Act and this article.  Subdivisions may also be merged and
resubdivided without reverting to acreage pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code,
Section 66499.20½ and this chapter.  Subdivisions of four or fewer
contiguous parcels under common ownership may be merged without reverting to
acreage pursuant to section 15-267 of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-100)  (Ord. No. 2243)



SEC. 15-261.  INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   By owners - Proceedings to revert subdivided real property to
acreage may be initiated by petition of all of the owners of record of the
property.  The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the city
engineer.  The petition shall contain the information required by section
15-262 and any other information required by the city engineer.



   (B)   By city council - At the request of any person or on its own
motion, the city council may by resolution initiate proceedings to revert
subdivided real property to acreage.  The city council shall direct the city
engineer to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the
proceedings.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-101)  (Ord. No. 2243)



SEC. 15-262.  CONTENTS OF PETITION.



   The petition to revert subdivided real property to acreage shall
contain, but not be limited to, the following:



   (A)   Adequate evidence of title to the real property;



   (B)   Sufficient data to enable the city council to make all of the
determinations and findings required by this article; and



   (C)   A final map which delineates dedications which will not be
vacated and dedications which are a condition to reversion.  The final map
shall be conspicuously marked by the title, “The purpose of this map is a
reversion to acreage.”



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-102)  (Ord. No. 2243)



SEC. 15-263.  REVIEW BY CITY ENGINEER.



   (A)   The petition for the reversion, together with all other data
required by this article, shall be submitted to the city engineer for review.



   (B)   Upon finding that the petition meets all of the requirements
of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter, the city engineer shall submit
the final map, together with a report and recommendation or approval or
conditional approval of the reversion to acreage, to the city council for its
consideration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-103)  (Ord. No. 2243)



SEC. 15-264.  CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL.



   (A)   A public hearing shall be held by the city council on all
proposed reversions to acreage.  Notice of the public hearing shall be given
by the city clerk in the time and manner provided in Cal. Gov't Code, Section
60451.3.



   (B)   The city council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it
adopts as resolution containing the following findings:



      (1)   Dedications or offers of dedications to be vacated or
abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or
prospective public purposes; and



      (2)   Either:



         (a)   All owners of an interest in the real property
within the subdivision have consented to reversion;



         (b)   None of the improvements required to be made have
been made within two years from the date the final map or parcel map was
filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of
the improvements, whichever is the later; or



         (c)   No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been
sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-104)  (Ord. No. 2243)



SEC. 15-265.  CONDITIONS.



   As conditions of reversion the city council shall require that:



   (A)   The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate following reversion
such streets, easements and other interests as are necessary for the purposes
specified by city ordinances;



   (B)   The city retain all previously paid fees and all or any
portion of improvement securities or deposits necessary to accomplish the
purposes of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter; and



   (C)   The city council may also require such other conditions as are
necessary to accomplish the purposes or provisions of the Subdivision Map Act
or this chapter or to protect the public health, safety or welfare.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-105)  (Ord. No. 2243)



SEC. 15-266.  FILING OF FINAL MAP.



   Upon approval of a reversion to acreage, the city clerk shall transmit
the final map, together with the city council resolution approving the
reversion, to the county recorder for recordation.  When the final map is
filed for record by the county recorder, the reversion shall become effective
and all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the final map shall
be of no further force or effect.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-106)  (Ord. No. 2243)



SEC. 15-267.  MERGER WITHOUT REVERSION TO ACREAGE OF CONTIGUOUS PARCELS
UNDER COMMON OWNERSHIP.



   An application by an owner of real property to create one new lot from
two or more contiguous, previously existing lots owned by the applicant, by
eliminating all common lot lines which separate such lots from each other,
may be approved without reverting to acreage, subject to the following
conditions:



   (A)   An application for such merger shall be filed with the
development services director in such form and with such information as the
director may require.



   (B)   An application meeting the criteria of this section may be
approved on such conditions as are necessary to accomplish the purposes or
provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter or to protect the
public health, safety or welfare, as well as any other conditions authorized
by this section. The satisfaction of some or all of the conditions imposed
may be required as a condition precedent to recordation of an instrument
evidencing the merger.  The city shall condition a grant in any application
that the owner dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, easements and other
interests necessary for public purposes and that the city retain all
previously paid development fees if necessary to accomplish the purposes of
the Subdivision Map Act.



   (C)   If all lots to be merged were created in compliance with
applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of the lot's creation,
even if one or more of the lots is nonconforming at the time of application,
the application may be approved by the director if the resulting parcel and
all structures and parking spaces thereon comply with the general plan, with
any applicable specific plan, and with the minimum area, width, frontage and
yard requirements of the zone in which the parcel is located.



   (D)   If any lot to be merged was not created in compliance with
applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of the lot's creation,
the application shall be heard by the commission, which may impose on the
granting of the application whatever conditions the commission could impose
on the issuance of a conditional certificate of compliance pursuant to Cal.
Gov't Code, Section 66499.36 Subdivision (B) with respect to such illegally
created lot.  If one or more of the lots to be merged in nonconforming at
the time of application, the application may be approved if the resulting
parcel and all structures and parking spaces thereon comply with the general
plan, with any applicable specific plan, and with the minimum area, width,
frontage and yard requirements of the zone in which the parcel is located.



   (E)   No application may be approved if a nonconforming use or
structure will be thereby created.



   (F)   No application which proposes to vacate or abandon any
dedication or offer of dedication may be approved unless the commission makes
a written finding that such dedication or offer of dedication is unnecessary
for present or prospective public purposes.



   (G)   After an application is approved, merger does not occur until
an instrument evidencing the merger is recorded in the official records of
the county recorder.  The form of the instrument, entitled “Notice of
Voluntary Merger,” shall be prescribed by the director and submitted to the
city engineer for review prior to recordation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-107)  (Ord. No. 2243)



ARTICLE IX.  IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENTS



SEC. 15-275.  GENERALLY.



   If, under the Subdivision Map Act, a subdivider agrees to improve the
streets and easements in a development, the agreement shall be reduced to
writing in a form satisfactory to the city attorney; and the filing for
approval of the final map or parcel map shall be deferred until the
execution, of such agreement by the developer and until furnishing any
required security.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-110)  (Ord. No. 1570)



ARTICLE X.  SECURITY AND SECURITY RELEASE



SEC. 15-280.  IMPROVEMENT SECURITY.



   (A)   Any improvement, agreement, performance, or act required or
authorized by the Subdivision Map Act, for which security may be required,
shall be secured in the manner provided in Cal. Gov't Code, Section 66499.



   (B)   The improvement security shall be in an amount equal to 100%
of the total estimated cost of the improvement or of the act to be performed,
said security conditioned upon the faithful performance of the act or
agreement, and an additional amount equal to 50% of the total estimated cost
of the improvement or the performance of the act required, securing payment
to the contractor, his/her subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor,
materials or equipment to said contractor or subcontractors for the
improvement or performance of the required act.



   (C)   The improvement security shall secure the faithful performance
of any changes or alterations in the work not to exceed 10% of the original
estimated cost of the improvement.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-111)  (Ord. No. 1570, 1758, 1826)



SEC. 15-281.  IMPROVEMENT SECURITY RELEASE.



   The improvement security required hereunder shall be released in the
following manner:



   (A)   Security given for faithful performance of any act,
performance, or agreement shall be released upon the final completion and
acceptance of the act or work subject to the provisions of subsection (B)
hereof.



      (1)   The city manager may release a portion of the security
in conjunction with the partial performance or the acceptance by the city of
the performance, the act, or work as it progresses upon application therefor
by the developer; provided, however, that no release of security shall be for
an amount less than 25% of the total improvement security given for faithful
performance of the act or work, and the security shall not be reduced to an
amount less than 25% of the total improvement security given for faithful
performance until final completion and acceptance of the act or work.



      (2)   In no event shall the city manager authorize a release
of improvement security which would reduce the security to an amount below
that required to guarantee the completion of the performance, the act, or
work and any other obligation imposed by this chapter, the Subdivision Map
Act or the improvement agreement.



   (B)   Security given to secure payment to the contractor,
subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment may be
released 65 days after the recording of a notice of completion, or if a
notice of completion is not recorded, 95 days.  The amount of the security
required shall be the total security less the amount of all claims of lien
that have been recorded and notice given to the city in writing.



   (C)   No security given for the guaranty or warranty of work shall
be released until the expiration of the period thereof.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-112)  (Ord. No. 1570)



ARTICLE XI.  EFFECT OF APPROVALS



SEC. 15-285.  APPROVAL OF MAP NOT TO AUTHORIZE VIOLATION OF OTHER LAWS.



   Neither the approval or conditional approval of any parcel map shall
constitute or waive compliance with any other applicable provision of this
code, nor shall any such approval authorize or be deemed to authorize a
violation or failure to comply with other applicable provisions of this code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-115)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-286.  SALES CONTRARY TO PARCEL MAP REGULATIONS TO BE VOIDABLE.



   Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell made contrary to the
provisions of these parcel map regulations is voidable to the extent and in
the same manner as is provided for violation of the Subdivision Map Act.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-116)  (Ord. No. 1570)



SEC. 15-287.  REQUIREMENTS OF PURCHASER UNAWARE OF VIOLATION.



   Any person purchasing any parcel in good faith and without notice of
violation of the provisions of this article by his/her predecessor in title
shall be required to meet the standards of this chapter relating to design
and improvement as a condition of obtaining a building permit.  For purposes
of this chapter, any such parcel shall be deemed to be property described by
metes and bounds and a tentative parcel map and parcel map shall be required
as provided in this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 27-117)  (Ord. No. 1570)



CHAPTER 16:  ZONING CODE



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   16-1.   Content of the zoning ordinance



   16-2.   Interpretation of chapter



   16-3.   Violation of license or permit condition



   16-4.   Time limit for judicial review



   16-5.   Duties of officials/employees



ARTICLE II.  DEFINITIONS



   16-10.   Definitions



ARTICLE III.  ZONES, USES AND REQUIREMENTS



DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY



   16-15.   Zones established



   16-16.   Boundaries of zones shown on zoning map incorporated by
reference



   16-17.   Rules for zones where boundaries uncertain



   16-18.   Usage limited to proper zone.



DIVISION 2.  R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY ZONE



   16-20.   Purpose



   16-21.   Uses permitted



   16-22.   Related uses



   16-23.   Architectural standards



   16-24.   Minimum dwelling size



   16-25.   Height permitted



   16-26.   Minimum lot area



   16-27.   Minimum lot frontage



   16-28.   Minimum lot width



   16-29.   Minimum lot depth



   16-30.   Exception to area requirements



   16-31.   Front yard



   16-32.   Side yard



   16-33.   Rear yard



   16-34.   Interior yard space



   16-35.   Space accessory buildings may occupy



DIVISION 3.  R-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY ZONE



   16-40.   Purpose



   16-41.   Uses permitted



   16-42.   Related uses



   16-43.   Height permitted



   16-44.   Density



   16-45.   Front yard



   16-46.   Side yard



   16-47.   Rear yard



   16-48.   Interior yard space



   16-49.   Space accessory buildings may occupy



   16-50.   Prohibited uses



DIVISION 4.  R-3 GARDEN APARTMENT ZONE



   16-55.   Purpose



   16-56.   Uses permitted



   16-57.   Related uses



   16-58.   Height permitted



   16-59.   Density



   16-60.   Front yard



   16-61.   Side yards



   16-62.   Rear yards



   16-63.   Interior yard space



   16-64.   Reserved



DIVISION 5.  R-4 HIGH RISE RESIDENTIAL ZONE



   16-70.   Purpose



   16-71.   Uses permitted



   16-72.   Related uses



   16-73.   Height permitted



   16-74.   Density



   16-75.   Front yard



   16-76.   Side yards



   16-77.   Rear yard



   16-78.   Interior yard space



   16-79.   Prohibited uses



DIVISION 6.  MH-PD MOBILE HOME PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE



   16-85.   Purpose



   16-86.   Uses permitted



   16-87.   Related uses



   16-88.   Mobile home park site plan required



   16-89.   Design criteria



   16-90.   Subdivision prohibited; lot area; marking; anchorage



   16-91.   Yard setbacks; maximum lot coverage



   16-92.   Interior yard space required



   16-93.   Open space; recreation area



   16-94.   Landscaping; fences and screening



   16-95.   Vehicular access and circulation; loading areas; driveways



   16-96.   Street names and space numbers



   16-97.   Parking



   16-98.   Walkways



   16-99.   Boundary wall; buffer zones



   16-100.   Recreation vehicle storage; general storage lockers.



   16-101.   Common laundry service facilities



   16-102.   Management office



DIVISION 7.  C-O COMMERCIAL OFFICE ZONE



   16-105.   Purpose



   16-106.   Uses permitted



   16-107.   Related uses



   16-108.   Height permitted



   16-109.   Front yard



   16-110.   Side yard



   16-111.   Rear yard



   16-112.   Residential uses prohibited



   16-113.   Conversion of existing structures prohibited



   16-114.   Incidental retail and professional services



   16-115.   Cannabis uses prohibited



DIVISION 8.  C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER ZONE



   16-120.   Purpose



   16-121.   Basic provisions



   16-122.   Uses permitted



   16-123.   Related uses



   16-124.   Prohibited uses



   16-125.   Height permitted



   16-126.   Lot area



   16-127.   Front yard



   16-128.   Side yard



   16-129.   Rear yard



   16-130.   Property development standards



DIVISION 9.  C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE



   16-135.   Uses permitted



   16-136.   Related uses



   16-137.   Height permitted



   16-138.   Lot area per dwelling unit



   16-139.   Front yard



   16-140.   Side yard



   16-141.   Rear yard



   16-142.   Yard requirements for dwellings



   16-143.   Cannabis uses prohibited



   16-144.   Operating standard for sale or storage of used fabric items



DIVISION 10.  CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT



   16-145.   Purpose and intent



   16-146.   Definitions



   16-147.   Permitted uses



   16-148.   Conditionally permitted uses



   16-149.   Prohibited uses



   16-150.   Property development standards



   16-151.   Operational standards



   16-152.   Development design standards; special requirements



   16-153.   Downtown design review permits



   16-154.   Decision by planning and environmental services manager



   16-155.   Downtown design review committee



DIVISION 11.  C-M COMMERCIAL AND LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE



   16-160.   Purpose



   16-161.   Basic provisions



   16-162.   Uses permitted



   16-163.   Related uses



   16-164.   Prohibited uses



   16-165.   Limitations



   16-166.   Height permitted



   16-167.   Lot area



   16-168.   Front yard



   16-169.   Side yard



   16-170.   Rear yard



DIVISION 12.  BRP BUSINESS AND RESEARCH PARK ZONE



   16-175.   Purpose and intent



   16-176.   Permitted uses



   16-177.   Related uses



   16-178.   Prohibited uses



   16-179.   Property development standards



   16-180.   Development design standards/special requirements



   16-181.   Development design review



   16-182.   Performance standards



DIVISION 13.  M-L LIMITED MANUFACTURING ZONE



   16-185.   Purpose and intent



   16-186.   Special use permit requirement



   16-186.1.   Related use – special use permit requirement



   16-187.   Appearance



   16-188.   Permitted uses



   16-189.   Change or minor expansion of existing use



   16-190.   Accessory uses permitted



   16-191.   Prohibited uses



   16-192.   Industrial service centers



   16-193.   Development standards; general



   16-194.   Development standards; division of property



   16-195.   Development standards; lot area and width



   16-196.   Development standards; building height limit



   16-197.   Development standards; minimum setback requirements



   16-198.   Development standards; maximum coverage



   16-199.   Development standards; walls



   16-200.   Development standards; access



   16-201.   Development standards; landscaping




   16-202.   Development standards; underground utilities, lighting,
trash enclosures, tanks, transformers, etc.




   16-203.   Performance standards; general



   16-204.   Exceptions



   16-205.   Noise



   16-206.   Smoke and particulates



   16-207.   Toxic or noxious matter



   16-208.   Odiferous matter



   16-209.   Glare or heat



   16-210.   Vibration



   16-211.   Electricity and radioactivity



   16-212.   Liquid and solid wastes



   16-213.   Fire and explosive hazards



   16-214.   Mechanical equipment



   16-215.   Certificate of occupancy



DIVISION 14.  M-1 LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE



   16-220.   Purpose and intent



   16-221.   Permitted uses



   16-222.   Change or minor expansion of existing use



   16-223.   Special use permit requirement



   16-224.   Appearance



   16-225.   Accessory uses permitted



   16-226.   Prohibited uses



   16-227.   Industrial service centers



   16-228.   Development standards required



   16-229.   Building sites



   16-230.   Lot area and width



   16-231.   Building height limit



   16-232.   Minimum setback requirements



   16-233.   Maximum coverage



   16-234.   Walls



   16-235.   Access



   16-236.   Landscaping



   16-237.   Underground utilities, lighting, trash enclosures



   16-238.   Performance standards



   16-239.   Applicability of division 13



   16-240.   Certificate of occupancy



DIVISION 15.  M-2 HEAVY MANUFACTURING ZONE



   16-245.   Permitted uses



   16-246.   Special use permit requirement



   16-247.   Height permitted



   16-248.   Front yard



   16-249.   Side yard



   16-250.   Rear yard



   16-251.   Cannabis uses prohibited



DIVISION 16.  C-R COMMUNITY RESERVE ZONE



   16-255.   Purpose



   16-256.   Permitted uses



   16-257.   Related uses



   16-258.   Prohibited uses



   16-259.   Industrial service centers



   16-260.   Height permitted



   16-261.   Front yard



   16-262.   Side yard



   16-263.   Rear yard



   16-264.   Lot coverage



DIVISION 17.  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (ADDITIVE) ZONE



   16-270.   Purpose



   16-271.   Modification of requirements of basic zone



   16-272.   Procedure to establish P-D zone



   16-273.   Procedure to obtain special use permit



   16-274.   Recordation of notice of issuance of special use permit



   16-275.   Minimum lot area



   16-276.   Modification of special use permit for planned development



   16-277.   Subsequent zone changes



   16-278.   Time limit for commencement of improvements



DIVISION 18.  LOT SIZE ADDITIVE



   16-285.   Purpose



   16-286.   Lot size additive; definitions



   16-287.   Lot size additive; effect



   16-288.   Minimum requirements



DIVISION 19.  AIRPORT HAZARD OVERLAY ZONE



   16-290.   Purpose and intent



   16-291.   Applicability



   16-292.   Airport sphere of influence defined



   16-293.   Review by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) required



   16-294.   Aircraft hazard and land use risk assessment required



   16-295.   Aircraft hazard and land use risk assessment contents



   16-296.   Review by Oxnard Airport Authority



ARTICLE IV.  STANDARDS FOR ALL ZONES



DIVISION 1.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



   16-300.   Accessory buildings on through lots



   16-301.   Accessory structures and accessory buildings, exemptions



   16-302.   Authorized vehicle repair, storage, assembly or disassembly



   16-303.   Building heights



   16-304.   Cornice requirements



   16-305.   Extension of fire escapes into yards



   16-306.   Extension of open stairways and balconies



   16-307.   Extension of uncovered porches



   16-308.   Fences, hedges, height limitations; front yard



   16-309.   Fences, hedges, height limitations; side and rear yard



   16-310.   Fence limitations, commercial zones



   16-311.   Fence limitations, industrial zone



   16-312.   Fence types, prohibited and exemptions



   16-313.   Fence maintenance requirements



   16-314.   Fences, public property



   16-315.   Fences, schools



   16-316.   Fences, safety or emergency



   16-317.   Garage use for other than storage of vehicle



   16-318.   [Reserved]



   16-319.   Lot restrictions



   16-320.   On-site lighting



   16-321.   Porte cochere requirements



   16-322.   Solid waste disposal area and recycled materials
collection area



   16-323.   Standards for siting antennas



   16-324.   Zone wall



DIVISION 2.  PROHIBITIONS



   16-330.   General prohibitions



   16-331.   Multiplex motion picture theaters prohibited



   16-332.   Oil drilling prohibited in all zones; exception



   16-333.   Parking on residential property visible from public streets



ARTICLE V.  SPECIFIC USE REQUIREMENTS



DIVISION 1.  ADULT BUSINESSES



   16-335.   Purpose



   16-336.   Definitions



   16-337.   Location of adult businesses



   16-338.   Measurement of distance



   16-339.   Existing adult businesses



   16-340.   Adult business permit required



   16-341.   Investigation and action on application



   16-342.   Issuance of permit



   16-343.   Expiration of permit



   16-344.   Suspension of permit



   16-345.   Revocation of permit



   16-346.   Transfer of permit



   16-347.   Adult business employee license



   16-348.   Review of denial, suspension or revocation



   16-349.   Regulations pertaining to adult businesses with video
booths



   16-350.   Restrictions regarding minors



   16-351.   Signs



   16-352.   Lighting



   16-353.   Hours of operation



   16-354.   Criminal penalties and additional remedies



   16-355.   Immunity from prosecution



DIVISION 2.  ATTACHED DWELLING UNIT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



   16-360.   Purpose and intent



   16-361.   Applicability



   16-362.   Development standards



   16-363.   Development design review



DIVISION 3.  BED AND BREAKFAST USES



   16-370.   Purpose



   16-371.   Definitions



   16-372.   Limitations on locations



   16-373.   Type of permit required



   16-374.   Standards for traditional bed and breakfast (homestay)



   16-375.   Standards for bed and breakfast inns



DIVISION 4.  COMMUNITY HOUSING CONVERSIONS



   16-380.   Purpose



   16-381.   Special use permit required



   16-382.   Requirements for filing



   16-383.   Completed filing



   16-384.   Copy to buyers



   16-385.   Hearing



   16-386.   Physical standards for conversions



   16-387.   Notices to tenants



   16-388.   Effect upon low and moderate income housing supply



   16-389.   Findings



DIVISION 5.  COMMUNITY OWNERSHIP UNITS



   16-395.   Special use permit required



DIVISION 6.  HOME OCCUPATIONS



   16-400.   Purpose



   16-400.1   Applicability



   16-401.   Permit and license required



   16-402.   Permit initiation and expiration



   16-403.   Operating standards



   16-404.   Prohibited home occupations



   16-405.   Revocation



   16-406.   Appeal



DIVISION 7.  (RESERVED)



DIVISION 7A.  DENSITY BONUS AND RELATED INCENTIVES AND CONCESSIONS PROGRAM



   16-410A.   Purpose



   16-410B.   Definitions



   16-410C.   Eligibility for density bonuses and incentives



   16-410D.   Fees



   16-410E.   Application required



   16-410F.   Content of application



   16-410G.   Effect of proposal for waiver or reduction of development
standards



   16-410H.   Density bonus allowance for housing development with
affordable housing component



   16-410I.   Density bonus for housing development with affordable
housing component and child care facility



   16-410J.   Density bonus for senior citizen housing development



   16-410K.   Density bonus for land donation



   16-410L.   Affordable housing incentives



   16-410M.   Number of incentives granted



   16-410N.   Criteria for denial of application for incentives



   16-410O.   Waiver or modification of development standards



   16-410P.   Parking standard modifications for qualified housing
developments



   16-410Q.   Density bonus and affordable housing incentive program



   16-410R.   Determination on density bonus and affordable housing
incentive program requests



   16-410S.   Affordable housing agreement and equity sharing agreement



   16-410T.   Density bonus or incentive for condominium conversion
projects



   16-410U.   Enforcement provisions



   16-410V.   Burden is on applicant



DIVISION 7B.  (RESERVED)



DIVISION 7C.  ALL-AFFORDABLE HOUSING OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM (AAHOP) AND -AH
ADDITIVE ZONE



   16-420A.   Intent



   16-420B.   Creation and selection of additive zones (-AH)



   16-420C.   Permitted uses



   16-420D.   Affordability requirements



   16-420E.   Density of units



   16-420F.   Plan review and processing



   16-420G.   Assistance for AAHOP projects



   16-420H.   Interpretation of this Division 7C




DIVISION 8.  INCENTIVES TO CONVERT APARTMENTS TO AFFORDABLE CONDOMINIUM UNITS




   16-425.   Purpose



   16-426.   Condominium density bonus or other incentives



   16-427.   Definitions



   16-428.   Fees



   16-429.   Preliminary proposal



   16-430.   Application for condominium density bonus permit



   16-431.   Supplementing application



   16-432.   Project design



   16-433.   Staff recommendation



   16-434.   Procedure to decide application



   16-435.   Continued affordability



DIVISION 9.  LARGE FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES



   16-440.   Standards for large family day care homes



DIVISION 10.  OIL DRILLING DISTRICTS



   [RESERVED]



DIVISION 11.  PLANNED RESIDENTIAL GROUPS



   16-445.   Special use permit required



   16-446.   Senior and/or senior assisted living residential facilities



DIVISION 12.  RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS



   16-450.   Intent and purpose



   16-451.   Applicability



   16-452.   Uses permitted



   16-453.   Development standards



   16-454.   Yards and setbacks



   16-455.   Distance between buildings



   16-456.   Maximum building height



   16-457.   Required off-street parking



   16-458.   Walls, fences, and landscaping



   16-459.   Signs



DIVISION 13.  ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS



   16-465.   Purpose and findings



   16-466.   Ministerial considerations



   16-467.   Standards for review



   16-468.   Parking



   16-469.   Exception for accessory unit within existing single family
residence or accessory structure



   16-469.5.   Accessory dwelling unit in C-2 and CBD zones



DIVISION 14.  SIGNIFICANT HERITAGE FEATURES



   16-470.   Procedures for designating significant heritage features



   16-471.   Findings necessary for designation as significant heritage
feature



DIVISION 15.  TEMPORARY USES



   16-475.   “Temporary use” defined



   16-475.1.   Exemptions



   16-476.   Permitted



   16-477.   Permit required; permit application; issuance of permit



   16-478.   Fee



   16-479.   Time limits



   16-480.   Expiration of use; removal of materials; bond required



   16-481.   Denial of permit; appeal



   16-482.   Signs



   16-483.   Prohibited uses



DIVISION 16.  WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES



   16-485.   Purpose



   16-486.   Applicability



   16-487.   Definitions



   16-488.   Approval process



   16-489.   Co-location



   16-490.   General requirements



   16-491.   Health and safety



   16-492.   Development standards



   16-493.   Removal of abandoned wireless communications facilities



   16-494.   Removal of wireless communications facilities within
utility rights-of-way



   16-495.   Nonconforming wireless communications facilities



   16-496.   Modifications to existing wireless communications
facilities



   16-497.   Modifications to development standards



   16-498.   Validation of proper operation



   16-499.   Violations



DIVISION 17.  REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION



   16-501.   Purpose and intent



   16-501.1.   Applicability



   16-501.2.   Application requirements



   16-501.3.   Review authority



   16-501.4.   Review procedure



   16-501.5.   Findings and decision



   16-501.6.   Compliance with existing rules



   16-502.   Appeal of determination



   16-502.1.   [Reserved]



   16-502.2.   [Reserved]



   16-502.3.   Modifications



   16-502.4.   Time extensions



   16-502.5   Discontinuance and revocation



   16-503.   Restrictive covenant



DIVISION 18. EMERGENCY SHELTERS



   16-504.   Emergency shelter development and operation standards



ARTICLE VI.  NONCONFORMING USES



   16-505.   Intention of article



   16-506.   Definition, nonconforming building



   16-507.   Definition, nonconforming use



   16-508.   Building limitations



   16-509.   Land use limitations



   16-510.   When caused by reclassification



   16-511.   Exceptions



   16-512.   Council may order use changed or structure removed



   16-513.   Computation of time for removal of structure



   16-514.   Use may be continued when building destroyed; limitation



   16-515.   Appeal of decision regarding a nonconforming use or a
nonconforming building



ARTICLE VII.  PERMIT PROCEDURES



DIVISION 1.  ZONE CLEARANCE PERMIT



   16-520.   Purpose and intent



   16-520.1   Applicability



   16-520.2   Permit and license required



   16-520.3   Approval



   16-520.4   Permit initiation and expiration



   16-520.5   Revocation



   16-520.6   Appeal



DIVISION 2.  DEVELOPMENT DESIGN REVIEW PERMIT



   16-525.   When required; procedures



DIVISION 3.  SPECIAL USE PERMIT



   16-530.   Special use permits; when required; purpose



   16-531.   Requirements for granting



   16-532.   Conditions



   16-533.   Form and contents of application



   16-534.   Manner of initiating proceedings to obtain permit;
reapplication



   16-535.   Application fee



   16-536.   Hearing on application; required



   16-537.   Notice of hearing



   16-538.   Time for holding



   16-539.   Continuance of hearings



   16-540.   Decision



   16-541.   Notice to applicant



   16-542.   Effective date of resolution



   16-543.   When applicant may exercise special use permit



   16-544.   Finality of decision



   16-545.   Appeal of decision to council; who may appeal; filing
procedures; fee



   16-546.   Notice and time of hearing; certain actions suspended
pending conclusion of appeal



   16-547.   Delivery of records to council



   16-548.   Review and hearing procedures; quorum



   16-549.   Decision of council generally; referral back to
commission; no withdrawal before hearing



   16-550.   Notice



   16-551.   Finality



   16-552.   Revocation



   16-553.   Expiration



DIVISION 4.  MODIFICATIONS TO SPECIAL USE PERMITS



   16-560.   Minor modifications; when required; procedures



   16-561.   Major modifications



DIVISION 5.  VARIANCES



   16-565.   Variances; when permitted



   16-566.   Conditions on variances



   16-567.   Information accompanying application



   16-568.   Procedure



   16-569.   Expiration



ARTICLE VIII.  CHANGE OF BOUNDARIES AND USES



   16-575.   Authorized



   16-576.   Procedure–how initiated; reapplication



   16-577.   Application form and contents



   16-578.   Fee



   16-579.   Hearing



   16-580.   Notice



   16-581.   Recommendation to city council



   16-582.   Continuance of hearing



   16-583.   When decision rendered



   16-584.   Report to council



   16-585.   Decision to be sent to applicant



   16-586.   Effect of failure of commission to act



   16-587.   Commission decision advisory only



   16-588.   Review by city council



   16-589.   Notice requirements



   16-590.   Conditional approval of reclassification of property



ARTICLE IX.  ADVERTISING SIGNS



DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY



   16-595.   Purpose



   16-596.   Sign definitions



   16-597.   Noncommerical signs



DIVISION 2.  PERMITS AND SPECIFICATIONS



   16-600.   Sign permits required



   16-601.   Sign area



   16-602.   Safety and maintenance



DIVISION 3.  SIGN REGULATIONS IN SPECIFIC ZONES



   16-605.   Signs in residential zones



   16-606.   Signs in commercial office zone



   16-607.   Signs in neighborhood commercial zones



   16-608.   Signs in general commercial and industrial zones



DIVISION 4.  SIGN REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ZONES



   16-610.   General restrictions



   16-611.   Nonconforming signs; abatement required; terms of abatement



   16-612.   Subdivision signs



ARTICLE X.  OFF-STREET PARKING



DIVISION 1.  GENERAL



   16-615.   Intent and purpose



   16-616.   Applicability of requirements



   16-617.   Status of existing developments [Reserved]



   16-618.   Status of previous approvals



   16-619.   Schedules of vehicle off-street parking [Reserved]



DIVISION 2.  PARKING SPACE AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS



   16-620.   Computation of off-street parking spaces



   16-621.   Increases and decreases in requirements



   16-622.   Schedule of vehicle off-street parking requirements



   16-623.   Schedule of bicycle parking requirements



   16-624.   Schedule of motorcycle parking requirements



   16-625.   Parking and loading requirements in redevelopment projects
in a redevelopment area



   16-626.   Residential subterranean garages



DIVISION 3.  VEHICLE TRIP REDUCTION



   16-630.   Definitions



   16-631.   Trip reduction measures



   16-632.   Transportation information



   16-633.   Carpool and vanpool spaces



DIVISION 4.  PARKING AREA DESIGN



   16-635.   Parking plan submittal requirements



   16-636.   Design standards for vehicle parking areas



   16-637.   Design standards for bicycle parking



   16-638.   Dimensions of vehicular parking spaces



   16-639.   Dimensions of vehicle parking bays and aisles



   16-640.   Parking area landscape plans



   16-641.   Parking area landscape requirements



   16-642.   Parking area landscape maintenance



   16-643.   Parking area paving and construction standards



   16-644.   Off-street loading and unloading areas



   16-645.   Location of parking spaces



   16-646.   Landscaping for above-grade parking structures



   16-647.   Drive-through facilities



DIVISION 5.  RELIEF FROM PARKING REQUIREMENTS



   16-650.   Appeal of decision regarding administrative relief



   16-651.   Administrative relief from parking provisions



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 16-1.  CONTENT OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE.



   (A)   The zoning ordinance of the city shall consist of this
chapter. 



   (B)   The area within the coastal zone, as established by the
California Coastal Commission, shall be governed by chapter 17 of the code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-1.2.1)  (Ord. No. 2130)



SEC. 16-2.  INTERPRETATION OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   This chapter establishes the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare for the city. The city council does not intend this chapter to
interfere with or abrogate or annul, any easement, covenant or other
agreement. 



   (B)   Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater
restrictions against buildings or land, or upon the use thereof, or upon the
height of buildings, or require larger open spaces than are imposed or
required by other sections of this code, or other pertinent rules and
regulations, or private easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of
this chapter shall control.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-1)



SEC. 16-3.  VIOLATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT CONDITION.



   (A)   No person shall violate a provision of this chapter.  No
licensee or permittee shall fail to perform or shall violate any condition of
a license or permit granted pursuant to this chapter. 



   (B)   Violations of this chapter may be prosecuted as a violation of
this code pursuant to section 1-10.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-1.1)  (Ord. No. 1506)



SEC. 16-4.  TIME LIMIT FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   Any court action or proceeding to review any decision on matters
contained in this chapter including the validity of the proceedings or
conditions imposed, shall not be maintained unless such action or proceeding
is commenced within 90 days after the effective date of such decision. 
Thereafter all persons are barred from commencing or maintaining any such
action or proceeding or raising any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness
of any such decision, proceeding, or condition.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-1.2)  (Ord. No. 1842)



SEC. 16-5.  DUTIES OF OFFICIALS/EMPLOYEES.



   All officials or public employees vested with the duty or authority to
issue permits or licenses required by law shall conform to the provisions of
this chapter and shall not issue any license or permit for uses, buildings or
purposes that would conflict with the provisions of this chapter.  Any such
license or permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions hereof, shall be
null and void.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-2)



ARTICLE II.  DEFINITIONS



SEC. 16-10.  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall
have the following meanings:



      (1)   ACCESSORY BUILDING - Any structure built for the
support, shelter, or enclosure of property that is separate from but related,
subordinate, and secondary to the main use of the property, such as but not
limited to: storage sheds, greenhouses, and garages.



      (2)   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT - An independent living facility
for one or more persons located entirely within or attached to an existing
legal structure or as a detached structure that includes permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, and is situated on the
same parcel as an existing primary single-family dwelling, but is subordinate
to and smaller than the primary dwelling.



      (3)   ACCESSORY SIGN - Any sign which advertises goods
manufactured or produced, goods for sale, or services rendered on the
property upon which such sign is located, also known as an on-premise sign.



      (4)   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE - A man-made object other than
ornamental statuary, having a permanent location on the ground and more than
six inches above the finished grade that is separate from but related,
subordinate, and secondary to the main use of the property, such as but not
limited to: patio covers, gazebos, and children's play structures.



      (5)   ACCESSORY USE - A use of property separate from, but
related, subordinate and secondary to, the main use of the property.



      (6)   ADULT DAY CARE FACILITY - A state-licensed facility that
provides less than 24-hour per day care to persons 18 years of age or older
in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for
sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of these
individuals.



      (7)   ADULT HEALTH CARE CENTER - Any family day home, day care
center, or social rehabilitation center, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety
Code, § 1570.7, and licensed by the State Department of Health, which
provides, on less than a twenty-four hour basis, nonmedical care to adults in
need of personal services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance or
training essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the
protection of the individual.



      (8)   ALLEY - Any public thoroughfare for the use of
pedestrians or vehicles, not less than ten feet nor more than thirty feet
wide, which has been deeded or dedicated to the city as a secondary means of
access to abutting property.



      (9)   ANTIQUE SHOP - A retail business that sells works of
art, furniture, decorative objects and the like, all of which are at least
thirty years old.



      (10)   APARTMENT - A room or suite of rooms in a multi-family
dwelling designated as a residence for one family and containing one kitchen.



      (11)   APARTMENT HOTEL - A building containing six or more
apartments, designated for use as second or temporary dwellings for transient
guests.



      (12)   APARTMENT HOUSE - Any building which is designed to he
or is in fact occupied as the residence of two or more families living
independently of each other in such building, in separate apartments, and
where such apartments are rented or leased for a period of not less than one
month.



      (13)   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE - A building used for the
overhaul and repair of vehicles, including body repairs, engine overhaul,
upholstery work, parts rebuilding and like activities.



      (14)   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION - Any business which
dispenses gasoline and which may also sell other automotive-related and
nonrelated goods and services, but which excludes auto body work, complete
engine and transmission overhaul and rebuilding and similar intensive
vehicle-related services.



      (15)   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING - The dismantling or destruction of
one or more motorcycles or motor vehicles.



      (16)   BABYSITTING - The care of one or more children by an
individual in a home on a temporary basis, and without the benefit of formal
advertising or established hours of business.



      (17)   BASEMENT - A story partly underground with less than
one-half its height above the average finished grade.



      (18)   BED AND BREAKFAST INN - An establishment, originally
built as a single-family residence, operated by a resident owner and
containing three to five guest bedrooms, each of which is available for rent
to the general public for up to twenty-nine consecutive days.



      (19)   BEDROOM - Any room that is or can be used for sleeping
purposes, including any room other than a kitchen, bathroom, or utility
service room, such as a study, den and loft.



      (20)   BUILDING - Any structure built for the support,
shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.



      (21)   BUILDING HEIGHT - Total height of a building measured
from the average finished grade at the base of the building to the highest
point of the building.



      (22)   BUILDING SITE - The area, including all required yards,
open space and parking, which a main building and its accessory buildings and
uses occupy.



      (23)   BUSINESS - Any use of property for profit requiring a
business license.



      (24)   CANNABIS - Shall have the same meaning as set forth in
Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code Section 26001(f), as that section now appears or may
hereinafter be amended or renumbered.



      (25)   CAR WASH (MECHANICAL) - Any operation which provides
for the washing of motor vehicles primarily through the use of mechanical
equipment which may include conveyor chains, blowers, steam guns, roller
brushes, high pressure vacuum units and similar equipment.



      (26)   CAR WASH (NONMECHANICAL, SELF-SERVICE) - Any operation
which provides for the washing of motor vehicles by the customer, which
employs persons only to check, maintain and supervise the use of the facility
and equipment, and which has equipment limited to water softeners, water
heaters, soap mixing tanks, low pressure vacuum units and similar equipment
that produces only a low volume of sound.



      (27)   CHILD CARE CENTER - A state-licensed child care
facility other than a family day care home, in which less than twenty-four
hour per day nonmedical care and supervision is provided in a group setting
for children.



      (28)   CHURCH - A building operated primarily for worship or
for promotion of religious activities excluding other buildings or activities
maintained by religious organizations such as educational institutions,
hospitals, homeless shelters and day care centers or operations that are
commercial in nature.



      (29)   CLUB - An association of persons for some common,
nonprofit purpose excluding groups organized primarily to render a service
which is customarily carried on as a business.



      (30)   COMMERCIAL DISTRICT - Stores and businesses located in
a shopping center of more than ten acres but less than thirty acres and
designed to serve several neighborhoods.



      (31)   COMMERCIAL SCHOOL - A nonaccredited school providing
training or personal improvement, such as a beauty college, dance school,
business school, or gymnasium.



      (32)   COMMISSION - The Planning Commission of the city.



      (33)   COMMON AREA - Any area or space designed for joint use
by tenants occupying mobile home parks, condominiums, planned residential
groups and similar residential developments.



      (34)   COMMUNITY APARTMENT PROJECT - A project in which an
undivided interest in the property is coupled with the right of exclusive
occupancy of any apartment located thereon.



      (35)   COMMUNITY CARE FACILITY - A State-licensed facility
maintained and operated to provide nonmedical residential care, day
treatment, adult day care, or foster family agency services for children
and/or adults, including, but not limited to, the physically handicapped,
mentally impaired, incompetent persons, and abused or neglected children, as
further defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 1502.



      (36)   CONDOMINIUM - An estate in real property consisting of
an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property,
together with a separate interest in space in a building on real property
such as a residence.



      (37)   CONGREGATE LIVING HEALTH FACILITY - A State-licensed
residential home with a non-institutional home-like environment that provides
twenty-four hour medical supervision and skilled nursing with services for
persons who are physically disabled, have a diagnosis of terminal illness, or
are catastrophically and severely disabled, as further defined in Cal. Health
and Safety Code, Section  1250.



      (38)   CORNER LOT - A lot having frontage on two intersecting
streets.



      (39)   DETACHED BUILDING - Any building that is not physically
joined to another building by a common wall.



      (40)   DIRECTOR - The city's development services director or
designee.



      (41)   DRIVE-IN THEATER - A motion picture theater containing
a vehicle parking area where patrons remain in their vehicles to view the
entertainment presented on one or more screens.



      (42)   DRIVE-THRU FACILITY - A facility which, by its design,
allows people to receive goods and/or services while remaining in their motor
vehicles.



      (43)   DUPLEX - A building containing two dwelling units.



      (44)   DWELLING UNIT - A room or suite of rooms designed as a
residence for one family and containing one kitchen.



      (45)   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION - An institution offering
academic instruction or training leading to a degree, or accredited by the
state, including private colleges or trade schools but not including dance
schools, business schools, and similar commercial establishments.



      (46)   EMERGENCY SHELTER FOR FAMILIES - A permanent facility
consisting of a building or group of buildings with overnight sleeping
accommodations providing temporary housing for six months or less to homeless
families with children under the age of 18, or 21 if they are full-time
students or disabled, pursuant to standards set forth in article V, division
18. Such accommodations shall include basic supportive services such as
meals, restroom, bathing and laundry facilities. No family shall be denied
emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. For purposes of this
definition, "disabled" means persons with special needs, including mental
disabilities, developmental disabilities, AIDS, substance abuse or chronic
health conditions.



      (47)   EMERGENCY SHELTER, PERMANENT - A permanent facility
consisting of a building or group of buildings with overnight sleeping
accommodations providing temporary housing for six months or less to homeless
persons pursuant to standards set forth in article V, division 18. Such
accommodations shall include basic supportive services such as meals,
restroom, bathing and laundry facilities. No individual or household shall be
denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.



      (48)   EMERGENCY SHELTER, TEMPORARY - A temporary facility
consisting of a building or group of buildings with overnight sleeping
accommodations providing housing to homeless persons for winter warming or
similar short-term, temporary operation not to exceed four months within a
twelve-month period. No individual or household shall be denied emergency
shelter because of an inability to pay.



      (49)   ENTERTAINMENT - Any performance or activity defined
herein; provided, however, that the term does not include vocal music or
music from a single, unamplified, stringed instrument, including piano.



      (50)   FAMILY - A group of residents whose members jointly
occupy a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit; have joint use of and
responsibility for common areas; share household activities such as meals,
chores, maintenance and expenses; but not including residents of commercial
group living such as hotels, dormitories and fraternities.



      (51)   FARMWORKER - An employee, also known as an agricultural
worker, engaged in agricultural work/farming and any practices performed on a
farm in conjunction with farming including cultivating and tillage of soil,
the raising of animals and the preparation of agricultural products for
market and or to carriers for transportation to market.



      (52)   FARMWORKER EMPLOYEE HOUSING - A residential use of one
or more single or multi family dwelling units and accessory dwellings of the
same type and in the same zone, and/or group quarters structures with common
dining area. A farmworker housing complex does not need to be located on the
site of a qualifying agricultural operation where the farmworkers are
employed.



      (53)   FAST FOOD RESTAURANT - An establishment whose principal
business is sale of pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food served in
disposable packaging directly to the customer, for consumption either within
the restaurant building or off premises.



      (54)   FRONTAGE - The portion of a lot, parcel or site that
abuts a dedicated public street, not an alley.



      (55)   FRONTAGE OF BLOCK - The length of a block measured
between two cross streets whereon more than four lots have frontage.



      (56)   FRONT LOT LINE - The line dividing a lot or parcel from
an officially designated street; provided, however, that if the street is
without frontage, the commission shall designate the front lot line.



      (57)   FRONT YARD - The yard measured the full width of the
lot, lying between the front lot line and the closest portion of the main
building.



      (58)   GARAGE - An accessory building or portion of the main
building having a minimum of four walls, and designed and used principally
for the housing of motor vehicles.



      (59)   GENERAL COMMERCIAL - Individual stores and businesses
where each establishment is located on a separate lot, with separate parking
and loading facilities and not in a shopping center.



      (60)   GUEST HOUSE - An accessory building for the housing of
temporary guests, not containing a kitchen and not being rented or leased.



      (61)   HABITABLE ROOM - Any room used, or intended or designed
to be used for sleeping, living, cooking or dining purposes, excluding such
enclosed spaces as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, service rooms,
connecting corridors, laundries, unfinished attics, foyers, storage spaces,
cellars, utility rooms and similar spaces.



      (62)   HOME FINDING AGENCY - Any individual or organization
engaged in finding homes or other facilities as defined in the Cal. Code of
Regulations, for placement of persons of any age for temporary or permanent
care, or adoption, including providing continuing social services to such
persons.



      (63)   HOME OCCUPATION - Gainful employment engaged in by the
occupants of a dwelling, which is incidental and subordinate to and
compatible with the residential use of the property and  surrounding
residential uses.



      (64)   HOTEL - A building providing separate bedrooms or baths
for the accommodation of travelers, semipermanent residents and the like,
where no kitchen facility is provided, whether known as a hotel, motel, or
rooming house.



      (65)   INLAND WATERWAY - A body of water confined to a channel
which permits navigation by vessels and ships and is connected directly to
the ocean.



      (66)   INSTITUTION - An organization having a social,
educational, or religious purpose such as a school, church, hospital, club or
lodge.



      (67)   INTERIOR LOT - A lot having lots adjoining on two sides.



      (68)   INTERIOR YARD SPACE - The area on the lot behind the
front setback line which is open from ground to sky and used as private open
space except as otherwise permitted in this chapter.



      (69)   JUNK - Scraps of copper, wood, brass, rope, rags,
batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste, or junked, dismantled or
wrecked motor vehicles or parts thereof, iron, steel and other scrap ferrous
or nonferrous material.



      (70)   KEY LOT - A lot whose side lot forms the rear lot line
of a reversed corner lot.



      (71)   KITCHEN - Any room used, or intended or designed to be
used for cooking and preparing food.



      (72)   LANDSCAPING - The treatment and maintenance of a yard
area with predominantly vegetative materials, such as lawn or ground cover,
shrubs or trees, and ornamental flagstone, brick or rock work and the like,
organized in a manner designed to create or enhance a specific appearance.



      (73)   LARGE FAMILY DAY CARE HOME - A State-licensed facility
that provides care, protection and supervision for seven to fourteen children
in the provider's own home for periods less than twenty-four hours per day,
as further defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 1596.78.



      (74)   LOT - A parcel of real property officially subdivided
and recorded prior to or according to Chapter 15 of this code.



      (75)   LOT AREA - The number of square feet enclosed by the
lot lines of a lot.



      (76)   LOT DEPTH - The average lineal distance between the
front and rear lot lines, measured perpendicular to the front lot line.



      (77)   LOT WIDTH - The lineal width of a lot measured at the
midpoint between the front lot line and rear lot line.



      (78)   MAIN BUILDING - The building wherein the principal use
of a lot or parcel is conducted, including attached structures where more
than eight lineal feet of a wall is commonly used.



      (79)   MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT - Items designed to be
used as temporary dwellings for recreational outings, or designed to be used
for other recreational purposes, such as travel trailers, trailer coaches,
pickup campers, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, boats and boat trailers.



      (80)   MARIJUANA - Shall have the same meaning as cannabis.



      (81)   MINI-WAREHOUSE - Any structure designed, built or used
as individual compartments for five or more occupants on a lease or rental
basis for the purpose of storage of any item for a period of more than
forty-eight hours.



      (82)   MOBILE HOME - A manufactured relocatable vehicle, other
than a motor vehicle, designed or equipped for human residential habitation
and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.



      (83)   MOBILE HOME LOT - A parcel of land in a mobile home
park rented and used exclusively by the occupants of the mobile home located
on that lot.



      (84)   MOBILE HOME PARK - A contiguous area or tract of land
of at least sixteen acres under single ownership which has been planned and
improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient residential use.



      (85)   MOBILE HOME STAND - The part of a mobile home lot
reserved for the placement of a mobile home.



      (86)   MOBILE OFFICE - A vehicle other than a motor vehicle
designed or used as an office for industrial, professional or commercial
purposes, and designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle.



      (87)   MOTEL - A building or group of buildings or units
attached, semi-attached or detached, designed to serve as temporary sleeping
quarters for transient persons, whether known as a motel, auto court, tourist
court or bungalow court, excluding an adult motel, as defined in section
16-336(A)(5).



      (88)   MOTION PICTURE THEATER - An establishment containing
two or fewer screens where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown for any form of
consideration.



      (89)   MOTOR VEHICLE - A device by which any person or
property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a public street, excepting a
device moved by human power.



      (90)   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING - A building containing two or
more dwelling units.



      (91)   MULTIPLEX MOTION PICTURE THEATER - An establishment
containing three or more screens where films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown
for any form of consideration.



      (92)   NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL - Stores and businesses located
in a shopping center of less than ten acres and designed to serve a local
neighborhood rather than several neighborhoods.



      (93)   NONACCESSORY SIGN - A sign which advertises products,
services or other uses not associated with any use established on the
premises on which such sign is located, also known as an off-premise sign and
including, but not restricted to, billboards and outdoor advertising
structures.



      (94)   NONCONFORMING - Buildings or uses which become not
permitted or not in compliance with zoning regulations by reason of changes
in the zoning regulations or land use zone classification of the property on
which such building or uses are located.



      (95)   OCCUPIED AREA - That area of an individual mobile home
lot which has been covered by a mobile home and its accessory structures.



      (96)   PARKING SPACE - A rectangular space, clearly delineated
on the ground or pavement, of dimensions required elsewhere in this chapter,
to be used for the parking or stopping of motor vehicles.



      (97)   PARKING STRUCTURE - A structure used for the parking of
vehicles where parking is accommodated on two or more levels.



      (98)   PATIO - A deck or paved area not extending above the
first floor level of a building and open to the sky.



      (99)   PATIO SHELTER - A covered shelter for semi-outdoor
recreational activities, which is enclosed on no more than two sides, whether
or not the remaining two sides are partially enclosed by a low wall,
supporting structural members, lattice work, louvers, screens and the like.



      (100)   PAWNSHOP - An establishment that engages in the
business of loaning money on the security of pledges of personal property,
and purchasing and selling personal property.



      (101)   PERGOLA - An open-work structure or lattice having at
least fifty percent of its roof open to the sky.



      (102)   PERMANENT STORAGE - The storage of any item of
personal property for a period of more than forty-eight hours.



      (103)   PERMANENT STRUCTURE - Any object having a solid
foundation or fixed location on the ground.



      (104)   PRIMARY DWELLING UNIT - The main residential structure
containing one dwelling unit located on a single-family lot.



      (105)   PRIVATE SCHOOL - An accredited private school or
college providing academic or trade education.



      (106)   PRIVATE STREET - A privately owned vehicular
right-of-way used as access by two or more lots which do not have frontage on
a public street.



      (107)   PRODUCT ASSEMBLY PLANT - Production facilities
primarily engaged in final or partial assembling or packaging of
premanufactured, treated, or fabricated components, materials or products.



      (108)   PUBLIC CAMPGROUND - A public area wherein major
recreational equipment may be placed as temporary dwellings.



      (109)   PUBLIC PARKING LOT - A parking lot for motor vehicles
created to serve the public either as a separate business or as an accessory
use to a business, whether owned by a governmental agency or by a private
person or business.



      (110)   QUARRY - Any premises or site from which rock, sand,
gravel, stone, earth, soil or any other mineral is removed or excavated for
the purpose of sale, excluding the necessary grading or excavating of a
building site under a valid building permit.



      (111)   REAR LOT LINE - The lot line most nearly parallel to
the front lot line and dividing the lot from an alley or adjoining lot;
provided, however, that the Planning Commission shall designate the rear lot
line for through lots.



      (112)   REAR YARD - The yard measured the full width of the
lot, lying between the rear lot line and the nearest portion of the main
building.



      (113)   RECREATION COMMERCIAL - Indoor or outdoor sport, game,
or recreational activity which may occur within a building or as outdoor
activities, including but not limited to arenas, stadiums, rinks, golf
courses, ranges, auditoriums, or theaters.



      (114)   REQUIRED YARD - The yard area required by this chapter.



      (115)   RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - Facilities or
establishments primarily performing research or development of industrial or
scientific products.



      (116)   RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY FOR THE ELDERLY - A housing
arrangement of residents at least sixty years of age, where personal care and
supervision are provided, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, §
1569.2.



      (117)   REVERSED CORNER LOT - A corner lot whose rear lot line
abuts the side lot line of an adjoining lot.



      (118)   SCRAP METAL PROCESSING FACILITY - Any property which
is maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling
wrecked, scrapped, ruined, abandoned or dismantled motor vehicles or motor
vehicle parts.



      (119)   SENIOR AND/OR SENIOR ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENTIAL
FACILITY - A state-licensed residential facility with seven or more residents
that provides a range of community dining and/or recreation areas integrated
with individual apartment units that may have individual cooking facilities;
that provides at least one non-medical and/or medical support service to
residents such as housekeeping, laundry, media room facility, library, hair
care, recreation, and transportation services; that is restricted to
qualifying residents or senior citizens as those terms are defined in Cal.
Civil Code, section 51.11; that may include a secure area(s) for residents
with limited memory or cognitive abilities and/or limited physical mobility;
and that is subject to the regulations for Planned Residential Groups set
forth in section 16-466 of this code.



      (120)   SIDE LOT LINE - All other lot lines that are not front
or rear lot lines.



      (121)   SIDE STREET - A street providing secondary frontage to
a lot, and having an angle between forty-five to one hundred and forty
degrees at its intersection with the street providing principal frontage for
the lot in question.



      (122)   SIDE YARD - The yard lying between the side lot line
and the closest portion of the main building and between the front and rear
yards.



      (123)   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING - A building containing one
dwelling unit whether built as a detached building or as an attached
townhouse type of unit that does not involve common ownership or adjacent
parcels of real property. The definition of single family dwelling does not
include farmworker employee housing, but shall including farmworker employee
housing projects with six or fewer residents as allowed by state law.



      (124)   SMALL RESIDENTIAL HEALTH OR CARE FACILITY - A facility
licensed, authorized or certified by the State that provides nonmedical
health or care services to six or fewer persons (except as otherwise provided
herein), which State statutes identify as a residential use of property
subject only to standards and restrictions applicable to other dwellings of
the same type in the same zone, including but not limited to: a congregate
living facility, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 1250, having
no more than six beds; an intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled
habilitative, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 1250, serving no
more than six persons; an intermediate care facility/developmentally
disabled-nursing, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 1250, having
no more than six beds; a state-licensed residential care facility, as defined
in Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 1568.01, serving no more than six persons;
a small family day care home serving no more than eight children, as defined
in Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 1596.78; a pediatric day health and
respite care facility, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 1760.2,
having no more than six beds; an alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or
treatment facility, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11834.02,
serving no more than six persons; and a state authorized, certified or
licensed family care home, foster home or group home providing care on a
twenty-four hour a day basis to six or fewer mentally disordered or otherwise
handicapped persons or dependent and neglected children, as referred to in
Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code, § 5116.



      (125)   STORY - That portion of a building included between
the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above,
except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included
between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above;
also, if the finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar or unused
underfloor space is more than six feet above grade as defined herein for more
than fifty percent of the total perimeter or is more than twelve feet above
grade as defined herein at any point, such basement, cellar or unused
underfloor space shall be considered as a story.



      (126)   STREET - Land dedicated to or owned by a city, county,
or state and designated as a public right-of-way, but not including an alley
as defined herein.



      (127)   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS - Any change to a bearing wall,
column, beam, joist, roof, rafter or other supporting member of a building or
structure.



      (128)   STRUCTURE - A man-made object other than ornamental
statuary, having a permanent location on the ground, and more than six inches
above the finished grade.



      (129)   SUBTERRANEAN GARAGE - Any enclosed motor vehicle
storage area of which any portion extends below the average grade of the
project site.



      (130)   SUPPORTIVE HOUSING - Housing with no limit on length
of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to
onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in
retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his
or her ability to live and. when possible, work in the community. Such
housing shall be considered a residential use of the property and shall be
subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings
of the same type and in the same zone.



      (131)   SWAP MEET - Any indoor or outdoor facility containing
multiple tenant spaces, stalls or booths from which new or used merchandise,
crafts, or food are sold, exchanged or bought by separate vendors. An
admission fee may or may not be charged. Any facility bearing the name of, or
otherwise being promoted as a swap meet or flea market, shall constitute a
swap meet for purposes of this chapter.



      (132)   TANDEM PARKING SPACE - A parking space located so that
it abuts a second parking space, such that vehicular access to that second
space can be made only through the abutting space.



      (133)   THEATER - A motion picture theater or an establishment
regularly featuring live performance of dramatic productions for any form of
consideration.



      (134)   THRIFT STORE or SECONDHAND STORE - A retail business
that engages or specializes in the sale of previously owned, secondhand or
used merchandise, in which the area devoted to such merchandise is larger
than twenty-five percent of the total floor area devoted to retail sales;
provided, however, that this definition does not include antique shops or
specialty retail stores that sell only one type of used merchandise,
including but not limited to used record stores, used bookstores, used
furniture stores, and sports trading card stores.



      (135)   THROUGH LOT - An interior lot whose front and rear lot
lines both abut public streets.



      (136)   TIMESHARE - Dwelling units or commercial transient
quarters (such as hotel or motel rooms) divided for purposes of marketing and
sale into at least twelve annual time segments of not less than one week or
more than thirty days during which the units or quarters may be occupied,
with the annual right of occupancy extended over a specified period of time.



      (137)   TOWNHOUSE - A single-family dwelling unit attached to
one or more other single-family dwelling units with each dwelling unit
occupying a separate lot.



      (138)   TOWNHOUSE CONDOMINIUM - A townhouse, having associated
with it an undivided interest in common in a parcel of real property that is
contiguous with the townhouse lots.



      (139)   TRADITIONAL BED AND BREAKFAST - An establishment which
contains no more than two guest bedrooms each of which is available for rent
to the general public for up to twenty-nine consecutive days.



      (140)   TRAILER - A vehicle designed to be towed behind an
automobile or truck.



      (141)   TRAILER PARK - Any area where one or more mobile homes
are located.



      (142)   TRANSIENT - A tourist or other person abiding in the
city for a short period of time.



      (143)   TRANSITIONAL HOUSING - Five or more dwelling unit(s)
used as rental housing but operated under program requirements that call for
the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to
another eligible program recipient. Supportive services arc provided to
facilitate the movement of homeless individuals and their families to
permanent housing. An eligible person(s) may live in the dwelling for up to
two years, pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§ 50675.2(h) and
50801(i). Some units may be designated for transition in place, where
person(s) may stay in the unit for more than two years. Such housing shall be
considered a residential use of the property and shall be subject only to
those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type
and in the same /one.



      (144)   USE - Utilization of property or buildings for a
specific purpose.



      (145)   USE AREA - An open or yard area, uncovered by building
or structures, used as the main use or accessory use of a lot or parcel.



      (146)   USED CAR JUNK AREAS - Any property which is
maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying, or selling
wrecked, scrapped, ruined, abandoned or dismantled motor vehicles or motor
vehicle parts.



      (147)   VEHICLE - Automobile or two-axled truck, customarily
used for private transportation, including self-propelled motor homes,
recreational and off-road vehicles, utility and travel trailers, and boats
and boat trailers.



      (148)   WORK/LIVE - A business establishment, part of which
may be used as an accessory dwelling unit by the business operator or
employee.



      (149)   YARD - An open area on a private lot or parcel,
unobstructed by buildings or structures from the ground to the sky, except by
encroachments permitted in this chapter.



      (150)   YARD AREA - The area of yard on a given lot expressed
in numbers of square feet.



   (B)   These definitions are to be used throughout this chapter
unless expressly otherwise provided.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-3)  (Ord. No. 617, 725, 893, 958, 1039, 1049, 1099, 1115,
1116, 1131, 1150, 1217, 1233, 1294, 1409, 1424, 1477, 1504, 1555, 1564, 1629,
1632, 1705, 1827, 1829, 1894, 1959, 1967, 2021, 2026, 2130, 2132, 2165, 2313,
2335, 2347, 2466, 2561, 2626, 2671, 2713, 2727, 2847, 2864, 2890, 2896; 2914,
2925, 2928, 2929)



ARTICLE III.  ZONES, USES AND REQUIREMENTS



DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY



SEC. 16-15.  ZONES ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Classes of zones in the city shall be established as follows:



      (1)   R-1, Single-family zone;



      (2)   R-2, Multiple-family zone;



      (3)   MH-PD, Mobile home planned development zone;



      (4)   R-3, Garden apartment zone;



      (5)   R-4, High rise residential zone;



      (6)   C-O, Commercial office zone;



      (7)   C-1, Neighborhood shopping center zone;



      (8)   C-2, General commercial zone;



      (9)   CBD, Central business district;



      (10)   C-M, Commercial and light manufacturing zone;



      (11)   BRP, Business and research park zone;



      (12)   M-L, Limited manufacturing zone;



      (13)   M-1, Light manufacturing zone;



      (14)   M-2, Heavy manufacturing zone;



      (15)   C-R, Community reserve zone;



      (16)   P-D, Planned development (additive) zone;



      (17)   Lot size additive zone; and



      (18)   Airport hazard overlay zone.



   (B)   These zones shall classify, regulate, restrict and segregate
the uses of property and buildings, regulate the area of yards and other open
spaces about buildings, and regulate the density of population.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-30)  (Ord. No. 442, 617, 725, 789, 1503)



SEC. 16-16.  BOUNDARIES OF ZONES SHOWN ON ZONING MAP INCORPORATED BY
REFERENCE.



   The boundaries of the zones described in section 16-15 for property
within the city are hereby established as set forth on those maps, consisting
of a sector index and sector maps, entitled “Zoning Maps of the City of
Oxnard,” dated October 2, 1962, and as revised, amended and added to from
time to time as provided by this chapter and the statutes of the State,
copies of which maps are on file in the city clerk's office and the
director's office.  Such maps and all the notations, references and other
information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the
matters and information set forth by such maps were all fully described
herein.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-31)  (Ord. No. 789, 798)



SEC. 16-17.  RULES FOR ZONES WHERE BOUNDARIES UNCERTAIN.



   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown on the
zoning map, the following rules shall apply:



   (A)   Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following
street and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries.



   (B)   In the case of unsubdivided property and where a zone boundary
divides a lot, the locations of such boundaries, unless the same are
indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on
such zoning map.



   (C)   Where a public street or alley or any private right-of-way or
easement of any railroad, railway, canal, transportation or public utility
company, is vacated or abandoned, the zoning regulations applicable to
abutting property shall apply to such vacated or abandoned street, alley or
property.



   (D)   All property in the city not otherwise classified, and all
property hereinafter annexed and not zoned upon annexation, is hereby
classified as R-1, excepting property developed as school sites, which shall
be classified as R-2.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-32)  (Ord. No. 789)



SEC. 16-18.  USAGE LIMITED TO PROPER ZONE.



   No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered,
nor shall any building or property be used for any purpose other than is
permitted in the zone in which such building or property is located. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-4)  (Ord. No. 976, 1409, 1623, 1843)



DIVISION 2.  R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY ZONE



SEC. 16-20.  PURPOSE.



   This zone shall provide a district of low density, single-family
dwellings, with selected related uses by special use permit, and second
dwelling units subject to certain conditions.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-36)  (Ord. No. 893, 1019, 2026)



SEC. 16-21.  USES PERMITTED.



   (A)   The following provisions shall apply in the R-1 single-family
zone.



   (B)   Only the following uses are permitted in this zone:



      (1)   Accessory buildings, including other uses customarily
incidental to a permitted use.



      (2)   Adult day care facilities serving no more than six
adults.



      (3)   Babysitting.



      (4)   Child care centers serving no more than six children.



      (5)   Congregate living health facilities of no more than six
beds.



      (6)   Farmworker housing.



      (7)   Grounds, private greenhouses and horticultural
collections, flower and vegetable gardens and fruit trees, not grown
expressly for profit.



      (8)   Large family day care homes that the Planning Manager
finds to comply with the standards set out in section 16-440.



      (9)   Manufactured housing consisting of single-family
dwellings constructed by modular manufactured methods or mobile homes
certified under the National Mobile Homes Construction and Safety Standards
Act of 1974, provided such homes are of a permanent character secured to a
permanent foundation.



      (10)   Off-street parking, as provided in article X of this
chapter.



      (11)   Residential care facilities for the elderly serving no
more than six persons.



      (12)   Accessory dwelling units, provided that the standards
in Division 13 of Article V of Chapter 16 of the Municipal Code (starting at
section 16-465) are met and an application for such a unit is approved by the
director.



      (13)   Signs, as provided in article IX of this chapter.



      (14)   Single-family dwelling - Conventionally built
single-family dwellings of a permanent character.  Separate servants’
quarters may be established in connection with single-family dwellings of
nine rooms or larger, exclusive of bathrooms, when such dwellings are located
on lots of not less than 10,000 square feet.



      (15)   Small residential health or care facilities that
conform to city ordinances restricting building heights, setbacks, lot
dimensions, placement of signs and other matters applicable to dwellings of
the same type in the same zone, and that provide services to no more than six
persons, or to no more than eight children in the case of a small family day
care home.



      (16)   Storage, incidental to permitted uses, provided such
storage is contained within an accessory building.



      (17)   Supportive housing.



      (18)   Traditional bed and breakfast for which a development
review permit is approved by the director.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-36.1)  (Ord. No. 893, 1019, 1115, 1126, 1131, 1217, 1629,
1789, 1878, 2026, 2165, 2671, 2713, 2864; 2914)



SEC. 16-22.  RELATED USES.



   The following uses are permitted only on approval of a special use
permit  as provided in sections 16-530 to 16-553:



   (A)   Churches;



   (B)   Swim clubs, tennis clubs, golf courses and similar uses
incidental to a residential tract or development;



   (C)   Public utility structures; and



   (D)   Townhouse condominiums as provided in section 16-395; and



   (E)   Congregate living health facilities of seven to 15 beds.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-36.2)  (Ord. No. 1019, 1629, 1706, 1789, 2671)



SEC. 16-23.  ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   The following exterior architectural standards shall apply to
all single-family dwellings including mobile homes located in an R-1 zone:



      (1)   Exterior siding shall be made of nonreflective and
nonmetallic materials. Acceptable siding material includes wood, stucco,
ceramic tile, brick, stone, or other masonry materials, or any combination of
these materials.



      (2)   Color/texture of exterior materials shall be compatible
with the adjacent single-family structures.



      (3)   Roof structures, except for authorized deck areas, shall
be sloped and provide an eave projection of no less than 6 inches and no
greater than 30 inches.



      (4)   Roofing material shall consist of one of the following:
wood shingle, wood shake, synthetic, composite shingle, ceramic tile, or
concrete tile, except  metallic roofing surfaces shall not be permitted on
the residential structure or on any garage or carport.



   (B)   (1)   A finding that a proposed residential structure
complies with the foregoing architectural standards shall be made as part
of  the special use permit or planned development permit.



      (2)   If the proposed structure does not entail a special use
permit or planned development permit, the director shall make a finding of
compliance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-36.3)  (Ord. No. 1373)



SEC. 16-24.  MINIMUM DWELLING SIZE.



   Every single-family dwelling located on any lot of 6,000 to 7,000
square feet shall contain at least 1,000 square feet, exclusive of garages,
carports, or any accessory building.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-36.4)  (Ord. No. 1373)



SEC. 16-25.  HEIGHT PERMITTED.



   Two stories shall be permitted but shall not exceed 25 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-37)  (Ord. No. 893, 1409, 1574)



SEC. 16-26.  MINIMUM LOT AREA.



   Every newly created lot shall have a lot area of not less than 6,000
square feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-38)  (Ord. No. 893, 1409)



SEC. 16-27.  MINIMUM LOT FRONTAGE.



   The frontage measured at the front lot line shall be at least 50
feet.  Frontage for this purpose shall be defined as the linear measurement
between the two side property lines at their point of tangency with the curb.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-38.1)  (Ord. No. 1827)



SEC. 16-28.  MINIMUM LOT WIDTH.



   (A)   Interior lots shall be no less than 60 feet in width.



   (B)   Corner lots shall be no less than 75 feet in width.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-38.2)  (Ord. No. 1827)



SEC. 16-29.  MINIMUM LOT DEPTH.



   The depth of a lot shall be at least 100 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-38.3)  (Ord. No. 1827)



SEC. 16-30.  EXCEPTION TO AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   Where a lot has less area than required in section 16-26 and was of
record on March 29, 1945, the lot may be occupied by not more than one
single-family residence.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-39)  (Ord. No. 893, 1019)



SEC. 16-31.  FRONT YARD.



   (A)   There shall be a front yard setback of not less than 20 feet;
except that houses constructed with garages having a swing driveway, with the
entrance facing the side property line, may have a minimum 15-foot setback. 
Where standard dwellings within any block vary from the required setback, the
average setback of such standard dwellings shall determine the required
setback within that block if the standard dwellings comprise at least 60% of
the block.



   (B)   In calculating the average setback, houses on reverse corner
lots and houses wholly on the rear half of the lot shall not be counted.  In
no case shall setbacks of less than 15 feet be allowed, or setbacks of more
than 60 feet be required.



   (C)   There shall be a distance of not less than 20 feet, measured
at the center line of the driveway, between the garage door and the front
property line.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-40)  (Ord. No. 893, 946, 1019, 1409, 1611)



SEC. 16-32.  SIDE YARD.



   (A)   On interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side of a
building of not less than 10% of the width of the lot; provided that such
side yard shall not be less than three feet and need not exceed five feet in
width.



   (B)   On corner lots the side yard regulation shall be the same as
for the interior lots except in the case of a reversed corner lot.  In the
case of a reversed corner lot, there shall be a side yard on the street side
of the corner lot of not less than 50% of the front yard required on the lots
in the rear of such corner lot, and no accessory building on the corner lot
shall project beyond the front yard line on the lots in the rear; provided
further that this regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the
buildable width (after providing the required interior side yard) of a
reversed corner lot of record on March 29, 1945, to less than 28 feet, nor to
prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this regulation cannot
reasonably be complied with.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-41)  (Ord. No. 893, 1019)



SEC. 16-33.  REAR YARD.



   (A)   There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25% of the depth
of the lot; provided, such rear yard need not exceed 25 feet.



   (B)   Single-story and two-story additions projecting into the
required rear yard may be made if attached to existing single-family
dwellings provided such additions maintain a minimum 15-foot setback from the
rear property line for those lots not abutting an alley; and for those lots
having rear property lines that abut a street, alley or parking space
maintained by the public and more than 20 feet wide, the addition shall
maintain a 15-foot setback from the center line of the street, alley or open
space and in no case less than five feet from the rear property line.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-42)  (Ord. No. 893, 1409, 1611)



SEC. 16-34.  INTERIOR YARD SPACE.



   Interior yard space shall be provided on each lot equal to at least 15%
of the lot area, or 900 square feet, whichever is less, and shall be
completely open from ground to sky except for a patio, pergola, or a roof or
balcony overhang not exceeding 30 inches.  Interior yard space may include
all of that open area from the required front yard setback line to the rear
property line which has a minimum dimension of 10 feet by 15 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-42.1)  (Ord. No. 893, 1019, 1777, 1611)



SEC. 16-35.  SPACE ACCESSORY BUILDINGS MAY OCCUPY.



   An accessory building is permitted if the accessory building is not
more than one story in height and maintains the same required front, rear and
side yard setback as the main building.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-42.2)  (Ord. No. 1409, 1611)



DIVISION 3.  R-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY ZONE



SEC. 16-40.  PURPOSE.



   This zone shall provide a district of low density multi-family
dwellings as well as emergency shelters for families and supportive housing
pursuant to statutory requirements that maintain a residential character
suitable for locations abutting single-family dwellings.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-51)  (Ord. No. 904, 1019, 2864)



SEC. 16-41.  USES PERMITTED.



   Only the following uses are permitted in the R-2 multiple-family zone,
unless another use is authorized by section 16-42 as a related use:



   (A)   All uses permitted in the R-1 single-family zone, except
manufactured housing and mobile homes;



   (B)   Multiple-family dwelling units, either in separate buildings
or combined in one or more main buildings;



   (C)   Accessory buildings, including other uses customarily
incidental to a permitted use;



   (D)   Off-street parking, as provided in article X of this chapter;



   (E)   Grounds, private greenhouse and horticultural collections,
flower and vegetable gardens and fruit trees not grown expressly for profit;



   (F)   Signs, as permitted in article IX of this chapter; and



   (G)   Storage incidental to permitted uses provided such storage is
contained within an accessory building.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-51.1)  (Ord. No. 904, 1019, 1115, 1126, 1131, 1294, 1878,
2924)



SEC. 16-42.  RELATED USES.



   The following uses are permitted only on approval of a special use
permit as provided in sections 16-530 through 16-553:



   (A)   Adult day care facilities serving no more than 15 adults;



   (B)   Child care centers serving no more than 15 children;



   (C)   Condominiums as provided in section 16-395;



   (D)   Congregate living health facilities of more than 15 beds;



   (E)   Convents serving no more than 15 persons;



   (F)   Emergency shelters for families;



   (G)   Private or parochial schools, except those of a correctional
nature or those intended for the mentally retarded or insane;



   (H)   Public or private parks and playgrounds;



   (I)   Public schools, elementary, junior high, high school, colleges;



   (J)   Residential care facilities for the elderly serving no more
than 15 persons;



   (K)   Residential stock cooperatives and community apartments as
provided in section 16-395; and



   (L)   Those related uses listed in the R-1 zone.



   (M)   Senior and/or senior assisted living residential facility.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-51.2)  (Ord. No. 1019, 1217, 1294, 1629, 1706, 1789,
1814, 2026, 2671, 2864, 2896)



SEC. 16-43.  HEIGHT PERMITTED.



   Two stories shall be permitted, but shall not exceed 25 feet except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-52)  (Ord. No. 904, 1409, 1574)



SEC. 16-44.  DENSITY.



   There shall be at least 3,500 square feet of lot area for each dwelling
unit.  There shall be no more than six dwelling units in any one building. 
No more than one dwelling unit may be constructed on any lot with an average
width of less than 50 feet or with an area less than 7,000 square feet.  Any
lot of record on May 21, 1981, which is 6,000 or more square feet may contain
two dwelling units, provided the lot meets the minimum width required by this
section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-53)  (Ord. No. 904, 1019, 1333, 1862, 1866)



SEC. 16-45.  FRONT YARD.



   (A)   There shall be a front yard of not less than 25% of the depth
of the lot, provided such front yard need not exceed 25 feet.  Where
standard dwellings within any block vary from the required setback, the
average of such standard dwellings shall determine the required setback for
that block if such standard dwellings comprise at least 60% of the block. 
In calculating such average setback, houses on reversed corner lots and
houses wholly on the rear half of a lot shall not be counted. 



   (B)   In no case shall setbacks of less than 25 feet be allowed, or
more than 60 feet be required.  Where six or more dwellings are to be built
concurrently within a given block, front yards of that block may average a
minimum of 20 feet, provided houses within each block are staggered between
15 to 25 feet, and provided further that there shall be a distance of not
less than 20 feet measured at the center line of the driveway between the
garage door and the front property line.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-54)  (Ord. No. 904, 1611)



SEC. 16-46.  SIDE YARD.



   (A)   On interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side of a
building of not less than 10% of the width of the lot, provided that such
side yard shall not be less than three feet and need not exceed five feet in
width.



   (B)   On corner lots the side yard regulation shall be the same as
for interior lots except in the case of a reversed corner lot.  In this
case, there shall be a side yard on the street side of the corner lot of not
less than 50% of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of such
corner lot, and no accessory building on the corner lot shall project beyond
the front yard line on the lots in the rear. This regulation shall not be
interpreted to reduce the buildable width (after providing the required
interior side yard) of a reversed corner lot of record on March 29, 1945, to
less than 25 feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building
where this regulation cannot reasonably be complied with.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-55)  (Ord. No. 904, 1611)



SEC. 16-47.  REAR YARD.



   There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25% of the depth of the
lot, provided such rear yard need not exceed 25 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-56)  (Ord. No. 904, 1611)



SEC. 16-48.  INTERIOR YARD SPACE.



   (A)   Each lot shall provide for interior yard space in an area
equal to at least 30% of the lot area.  This interior yard space shall be
completely open from ground to sky except for a patio or pergola or the
projections of those items referred to in sections 16-304, 16-305, 16-306,
and 16-307.



   (B)   Each interior yard space area shall have a minimum dimension
of 15 by 15 feet.



   (C)   The interior yard space shall be completely separate from any
area required for automobile circulation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57)  (Ord. No. 904, 1237, 1409, 1862, 1866, 2152)



SEC. 16-49.  SPACE ACCESSORY BUILDINGS MAY OCCUPY.



   An accessory building may occupy any part of the required rear yard
setback provided such building is located at least six feet from the nearest
part of the main building, and is one story in height.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.1)  (Ord. No. 409)



SEC. 16-50.  PROHIBITED USES.



   Timeshare uses shall not be permitted in the R-2 multiple-family zone,
and are not to be construed as included in the permitted uses enumerated in
section 16-41 or the related uses enumerated in section 16-42.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.1.1)  (Ord. No. 1959)



DIVISION 4.  R-3 GARDEN APARTMENT ZONE



SEC. 16-55.  PURPOSE.



   This zone shall provide a district of moderate density multiple-family
dwellings as well as emergency shelters for families, transitional housing
and supportive housing pursuant to statutory requirements, suitable for
locations abutting commercial centers and in other locations where moderate
density is warranted.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-58)  (Ord. No. 970, 1019, 2864)



SEC. 16-56.  USES PERMITTED.



   Only the following uses are permitted in the R-3 Garden Apartment Zone:



   (A)   Accessory buildings including other uses customarily
incidental to a permitted use;



   (B)   Grounds, private greenhouses and horticultural collections,
flower and vegetable gardens and fruit trees not grown expressly for profit;



   (C)   Multiple-family dwellings and garden apartments;



   (D)   Off-street parking;



   (E)   Public parking on R-3 lots adjacent to or across the alley
from C-2 lots;



   (F)   Signs, as permitted in article IX of this chapter;



   (G)   Storage incidental to permitted uses provided such storage is
contained within an accessory building;



   (H)   Transitional housing; and



   (I)   Uses permitted in the R-2 multiple-family zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-58.1)  (Ord. No. 970, 1019, 1126, 1464, 2864)



SEC. 16-57.  RELATED USES.



   The following uses are permitted only on approval of a special use
permit as provided in sections 16-530 through 16-533:



   (A)   Those related uses listed in the R-2 multiple-family zone;



   (B)   Hospitals and convalescent hospitals;



   (C)   Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges, excepting
those the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a
business;



   (D)   Adult day care facilities serving more than 15 adults;



   (E)   Child care centers serving more than 15 children;



   (F)   Congregate living health facilities of more than 15 beds; and



   (G)   Bed and breakfast inn, in accordance with the regulations
contained in sections 16-370 through 16-375.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-58.2)  (Ord. No. 1019, 1294, 1496, 1629, 1789, 2026,
2165, 2671)



SEC. 16-58.  HEIGHT PERMITTED.



   Three stories shall be permitted, which shall not exceed 35 feet except
as otherwise provided in this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-59)  (Ord. No. 970, 1409, 1574)



SEC. 16-59.  DENSITY.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in this section, there shall be at
least 2,400 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit.  No more than
two dwelling units shall be constructed on any lot with an average width
between 50 and 60 feet.



      (2)   No more than one dwelling unit shall be constructed on
any lot with an average width less than 40 feet.



   (B)   Any lot of record on May 21, 1981, which has more than 4,800
square feet may contain three dwelling units, provided the lot meets the
minimum width requirement herein.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-60)  (Ord. No. 970, 1019, 1862, 1866)



SEC. 16-60.  FRONT YARD.



   There shall be a front yard of 20 feet; provided, however, that if
access to all parking is from an alley, the front yard may be a minimum of 15
feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-61)  (Ord. No. 970, 1409)



SEC. 16-61.  SIDE YARDS.



   Side yards shall be five feet for one or two story buildings and shall
be 7½ feet for 2½ story buildings.  Street side yards shall be one-half
the required front yard.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-62)  (Ord. No. 970, 1019)



SEC. 16-62.  REAR YARD.



   There shall be a rear yard of 25 feet.  An accessory building may
occupy any part of the required rear yard setback provided such building is
located at least six feet from the nearest part of the main building, and is
one story in height.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-63)  (Ord. No. 970, 1409)



SEC. 16-63.  INTERIOR YARD SPACE.



   Each lot shall provide for interior yard space in an area equal to at
least 30 % of the lot area.  This interior yard space shall be completely
open from ground to sky except for a patio or pergola or the projections of
those items referred to in sections 16-304 through 16-307.  The interior
yard space shall be located in an area between the required front yard
setback and the rear property line.  Each interior yard space area shall
have a minimum dimension of 15 by 15 feet.  The interior yard space shall be
completely separate from any area required for automobile circulation.
Twenty-five percent of the required interior yard space may be on decks if
such decks have a minimum dimension of ten feet and a minimum of 200 square
feet, and are directly accessible from the units served.  All decks shall be
open to the sky except for allowed roof projections and shall be provided
with flooring and railings suitable for outdoor activity.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-63.1)  (Ord. No. 970, 1019, 1237, 1409, 1862, 1866, 2152)



SEC. 16-64.  RESERVED.



Editor’s note:



   Section 16-64 was repealed by Ord. No. 2864, adopted April 23, 2013.
The section related to prohibited uses and was derived from Ord. Code. §
34-64, and Ord. No. 442, 970, 1019, and 1959.



DIVISION 5.  R-4 HIGH RISE RESIDENTIAL ZONE



SEC. 16-70.  PURPOSE.



   This zone shall provide a district for high density, high rise
multi-family dwellings, emergency shelters for families, transitional housing
and supportive housing pursuant to statutory requirements, and other uses
suitable for location within the city core and in other selected areas.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-65)  (Ord. No. 1037, 2864)



SEC. 16-71.  USES PERMITTED.



   Only the following uses are permitted in the R-4 High Rise Residential
Zone:



   (A)   Uses permitted in the R-3 garden apartment zone;



   (B)   High rise or high density apartments;



   (C)   Accessory buildings including other uses customarily
incidental to a permitted use;



   (D)   Off-street parking;



   (E)   Grounds,  landscaping, flower and vegetable gardens and fruit
trees not grown expressly for profit;



   (F)   Signs, as permitted in article IX of this chapter; and



   (G)   Storage incidental to permitted uses provided such storage is
contained within an accessory building.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-65.1)  (Ord. No. 1037, 1126)



SEC. 16-72.  RELATED USES.



   Those related uses listed in the R-3 zone are permitted only on
approval of a special use permit as provided in sections 16-530 to 16-553.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-65.2)  (Ord. No. 1037, 1629)



SEC. 16-73.  HEIGHT PERMITTED.



   Four stories shall be permitted but shall not exceed 45 feet except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.  However, buildings not exceeding 11
stories or 100 feet maximum may be approved by special use permit as provided
in sections 16-530 to 16-553.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-66)  (Ord. No. 1037, 1409, 1574)



SEC. 16-74.  DENSITY.



   There shall be at least 1,500 square feet of lot area for each dwelling
unit.  No more than two dwelling units shall be constructed on any lot with
an average width between 40 and 50 feet or with an area between 4,000 and
5,000 square feet.  No more than one single-family dwelling unit shall be
constructed on any lot with an average width less than 40 feet or an area
less than 4,000 square feet.  Any lot with an average width between 65 and
50 feet shall comply with the R-3 zone standards.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-67)  (Ord. No. 1037, 1862, 1866)



SEC. 16-75.  FRONT YARD.



   The front yard depth shall be 20 feet, provided, however, that if
access to all parking is provided from an alley, the front yard depth shall
be at least 15 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-67.1)  (Ord. No. 1037, 1862, 1866)



SEC. 16-76.  SIDE YARDS.



   Side yards shall be five feet for one or two story buildings and shall
be increased 2½ feet for each story over two.  Street side yards need not
exceed ten feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-67.2)  (Ord. No. 1037)



SEC. 16-77.  REAR YARD.



   (A)   Rear yards shall be five feet for one or two story buildings
and shall be increased 2½ feet for each story over two.  Street rear yards
need not exceed ten feet.



   (B)   An accessory building may occupy any part of the required rear
yard setback, provided such building is located six feet from the nearest
part of the main building, and is one story in height.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-67.3)  (Ord. No. 1037, 1409)



SEC. 16-78.  INTERIOR YARD SPACE.



   Each lot shall provide for interior yard space in an area equal to at
least 30 percent of the lot area.  This interior yard space shall be
completely open from ground to sky except for a patio or pergola or the
projections of those items referred to in sections 16-304 through 16-307. 
The interior yard space shall be located in an area between the required
front yard setback and the rear property line.  Each interior yard space
area shall have a minimum dimension of 15 by 15 feet.  The interior yard
space shall be completely separate from any area required for automobile
circulation.  Twenty-five percent of the required interior yard space may be
on decks if such decks have a minimum dimension of ten feet and a minimum of
200 square feet, and are directly accessible from the units served.  All
decks shall be open to the sky except for allowed roof projections and shall
be provided with flooring and railings suitable for outdoor activity.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-67.4)  (Ord. No. 1037, 1862, 1866, 2152)



SEC. 16-79.  PROHIBITED USES.



   Timeshare uses shall not be permitted in the R-4 high rise residential
zone, and are not to be construed as included in the permitted uses
enumerated in section 16-71 or in the related uses enumerated in section
16-72.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-67.5)  (Ord. No. 1959)



DIVISION 6.  MH-PD MOBILE HOME PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE



SEC. 16-85.  PURPOSE.



   This zone shall provide a district for the development of mobile home
parks and to permit mobile home use for single-family, farmworker housing,
small, licensed residential care facilities, as well as supportive housing
pursuant to statutory requirements.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.2)  (Ord. No. 1477, 2864)



SEC. 16-86.  USES PERMITTED.



   (A)   Mobile home parks are permitted in this zone on approval of a
special use permit as provided in sections 16-530 to 16-553 and this division.



   (B)   In addition, the following uses are permitted in this zone:



      (1)   Accessory uses normally incidental to mobile home parks;



      (2)   Adult day care facilities serving no more than six
adults;



      (3)   Child care centers serving no more than six children;



      (4)   Common recreation facilities and structures;



      (5)   Congregate living health facilities of no more than six
beds;



      (6)   Farmworker housing;



      (7)   Large family day care homes that the Planning Manager
finds to comply with the standards set out in section 16-440;



      (8)   Residential care facilities for the elderly serving no
more than six persons;



      (9)   Residential mobile homes for single-family use only;



      (10)   Small residential health or care facilities that
conform to city ordinances restricting building heights, setbacks, lot
dimensions, placement of signs and other matters applicable to dwellings of
the same type in the same zone, and that provide services to no more than six
persons, or to no more than eight children in the case of a small family day
care home; and



      (11)   Supportive housing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.3)  (Ord. No. 1477, 2671, 2864)



SEC. 16-87.  RELATED USES.



   The following related uses are permitted on approval of a special use
permit as provided in sections 16-530 to 16-553:



   (A)   Office for mobile home space rental in a mobile home or in a
recreation building only;



   (B)   Mobile home and mobile home accessory equipment sales;



   (C)   Other mobile home residential uses that are in accord with the
intent of this division as determined by the commission; and



   (D)   Congregate living health facilities of no more than 15 beds.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.4)  (Ord. No. 1477, 2671)



SEC. 16-88.  MOBILE HOME PARK SITE PLAN REQUIRED.



   The developer of a mobile home park shall submit a detailed site plan,
drawn to a 1 inch equals 40 feet scale with each special use permit
application.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.5)  (Ord. No. 1477)



SEC. 16-89.  DESIGN CRITERIA.



   An application for special use permit to develop a mobile home park,
supported by a detailed site plan, may be approved if the proposed
development meets the following design criteria:



   (A)   Density - The maximum permitted density shall be 6½ mobile
home lots per gross acre.



   (B)   Lot dimensions - Minimum lot widths and areas shall be as
required to meet lot coverage and yard, mobile home spacing and other
requirements as set forth in this division.  If these requirements are met,
and the resulting lot pattern is functional and efficiently provides for
utilities and for convenient pedestrian and vehicular access, lot lines shall
not be required to be perpendicular to streets or radial to curves, and lot
shapes may take any form.



   (C)   Lot location - Lots intended for placement of mobile homes
shall be so located with respect to streets and driveways as to optimize the
placement of such mobile homes for occupancy.  Considering size, required
yards and manner of support, the lot shall be suitable for the type of mobile
home unit proposed.



   (D)   Yards and open spaces - Yards and other open spaces required
by this division shall be designed to perform a variety of functions
including assuring adequate privacy, usable outdoor living space, desirable
views, natural light and ventilation, access to and around the units,
off-street parking space and spacing between mobile homes and other buildings
to reduce potential adverse effects of noise, odor, glare and fire hazards.



   (E)   Data required - Upon the request of the director of community
development, the developer shall furnish data to show that storm waters and
other drainage can adequately be carried on the proposed mobile home park
streets.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.6)  (Ord. No. 1477)



SEC. 16-90.  SUBDIVISION PROHIBITED; LOT AREA; MARKING; ANCHORAGE.



   (A)   Subdivision of a mobile home park is prohibited.



   (B)   The minimum lot area for each mobile home shall be 3,000
square feet.  Each lot in a mobile home park shall be marked clearly on the
ground by permanent flush stakes, markers or other suitable means.



   (C)   Any improvements necessary on the lot for the support or
anchoring of the type of mobile home unit proposed shall be provided and the
mobile home unit so supported or anchored before occupancy.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.7)  (Ord. No. 1477)



SEC. 16-91.  YARD SETBACKS; MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.



   (A)   The front yard setback shall be a minimum of ten feet.



   (B)   The side yard setback shall be a minimum of ten feet.



   (C)   The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of ten feet.



   (D)   Mobile homes adjacent to a public way or other residential or
commercial zone or use shall be set back an additional ten feet from the
mobile home lot lines or required perimeter wall, except when the commission
determines that special circumstances justify modification of this standard.



   (E)   Covered patios and covered parking spaces may project into the
required ten-foot setback a maximum of five feet and shall maintain a minimum
of five feet from the established lot line in a side yard but shall maintain
the required ten-foot front yard setback.



   (F)   The maximum lot coverage by the mobile home and its accessory
structures shall be 75 percent.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.8)  (Ord. No. 1477)



SEC. 16-92.  INTERIOR YARD SPACE REQUIRED.



   Interior yard space of not less than 450 square feet shall be provided
on each lot.  The space shall be completely open from ground to sky and may
include only area from the required front yard setback line to the rear
property line which has a minimum dimension of 15 feet by 15 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.9)  (Ord. No. 1477)



SEC. 16-93.  OPEN SPACE; RECREATION AREA.



   (A)   Common landscaped open space and recreation areas shall be
provided in the park in accordance with this section.



   (B)   Common open space shall comprise 16 percent of the gross
mobile home park acreage, if the park provides a common recreation center
with a total floor area of not less than 25 square feet per mobile home lot
for the first 150 lots, and 15 square feet per lot thereafter, but in no case
less than 4,000 square feet.



   (C)   Common open space shall be 20 percent of the gross mobile home
park acreage, if the park does not provide a common recreation center as
described above.



   (D)   Common open spaces shall have a minimum dimension of ten feet
by ten feet.  Park walkways at least ten feet wide and leading to open space
and recreation facilities may count as part of this area.



   (E)   Recreation areas shall be provided at central locations
convenient to park residents and the park service centers.



   (F)   Recreation areas may include space for common buildings and
common use facilities, such as indoor recreation areas, swimming pools,
outdoor courts for games and similar recreation facilities.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.10)  (Ord. No. 1477)



SEC. 16-94.  LANDSCAPING; FENCES AND SCREENING.



   (A)   The common open areas of each mobile home park shall be
landscaped in accordance with a landscape plan approved by the director.



   (B)   The director shall approve a mobile home park landscape plan
that meets the following criteria:



      (1)   All setbacks, buffer zones and open spaces shall be
landscaped.  Trees, shrubs, vines and ground cover are required in
landscaping in varying proportions and must harmonize.



      (2)   A permanent irrigation system comprised of bubblers,
sprinklers and hose bibs shall be installed for all common open space and
common recreation areas.



      (3)   Rock shall be utilized as ground cover only in a
balanced landscaping design, and shall not predominate.



      (4)   Substantial numbers of specimen trees of not less than
15 gallon container size shall be planted throughout the park and in the
common open areas.  Specimen trees shall also be required at least every 30
feet along any setback adjacent to public streets.



      (5)   Adjacent to public ways or other residential or
commercial zones or uses, transitional screening shall be provided by
landscaping the ten-foot wide buffer zones required by section 16-99. 
Landscaping which will grow to not less than 20 feet in height shall be
planted therein in order to screen the mobile homes from external land uses.



      (6)   All open areas except driveways, parking areas,
walkways, utility areas, improved decks, patios and porches shall be
landscaped and maintained adequately.



      (7)   At least one tree of 15 gallon stock, eight feet high
shall be planted on each mobile home lot.



      (8)   Fence and landscaping material shall be limited in
height at intersections of streets, driveways and pedestrian walkways to that
deemed compatible with pedestrian and traffic safety as described in section
16-95.



      (9)   All landscaping required in this section shall be
installed prior to occupancy and maintained properly by the park management
or owners, or both, in accordance with the landscaping plan approved by the
director.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.11)  (Ord. No. 1477)



SEC. 16-95.  VEHICULAR ACCESS AND CIRCULATION; LOADING AREAS; DRIVEWAYS.



   (A)   Main entrance - The main vehicular entrance to a mobile home
park shall consist of 2 ten-foot travel lanes for ingress and an additional 2
ten-foot travel lanes for egress, separated by a landscaped median a minimum
ten feet in width to a depth of the intersection with the first cross street
that connects with the general park circulation network.



   (B)   Secondary entrance -



      (1)   A secondary entrance for access by mobile homes and
emergency vehicles is required and shall consist of one 18-foot travel lane
for ingress and one 18-foot travel lane for egress with no parking allowed to
the first cross street.  This entrance may be permitted only on an abutting
thoroughfare or collector street, and shall provide solid gating the same
height as the adjoining wall.



      (2)   No fencing, landscaping or other material impediment to
visibility more than 2½ feet above curb level shall be created or maintained
at the intersection of any street in a mobile home park, and any street
providing access to a mobile home park within right triangles constructed as
follows:  the apex of the right angle being the intersection of the edge of
the private drive and the public right-of-way, one leg extending into the
mobile home park 25 feet, the second leg extending 50 feet along the public
right-of-way toward the oncoming traffic, the end of these legs being
connected by the peripheral wall.  Where there is pedestrian or bicycle
access from within the mobile home park to a street at its edges by paths or
across yards or other open space without a barrier to access to the street,
no material impediment to visibility more than 2½ feet above curb level
shall be created or maintained except as appropriate to the circumstances of
the particular case.



   (C)   Vehicular circulation -



      (1)   All other streets shall be 36 feet in width, curb to
curb, if guest parking is allowed on one side of the street; or shall be 28
feet in width, curb to curb, if no parking is allowed on the street.



      (2)   Cul-de-sacs with a minimum 50-foot turning radius shall
be provided where necessary for access or public safety.



   (D)   Internal park roadways - Internal park roadways and areas used
for access or parking shall be designed, constructed and paved in accordance
with city standards.



   (E)   Loading areas - Loading areas shall be provided where
necessary for convenient access to delivery vehicles, which shall not
obstruct the main traveled way.



   (F)   Driveways - A driveway designed to serve the mobile home lots
shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.12)  (Ord. No. 1477, 1498)



SEC. 16-96.  STREET NAMES AND SPACE NUMBERS.



   (A)   The street names and house numbers of the mobile home park
shall be subject to approval of the city's street naming committee, and shall
be integrated with those of the surrounding area according to the city’s
street naming policy.



   (B)   Each mobile home space shall be uniformly addressed with
numbers that are visible from the park street or service road.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.13)  (Ord. No. 1477)



SEC. 16-97.  PARKING.



   (A)   Residential off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of
two spaces in tandem for each mobile home pad and shall be contiguous to each
pad.  One space shall be covered.



   (B)   Additional parking spaces shall be provided at a ratio of one
parking space to five mobile home spaces, and shall be located within
centralized bays not more than 150 feet from the mobile homes served.  This
condition may be modified by the commission to enhance the design of the park.



   (C)   Residential parking spaces shall be designed to assure that a
parked vehicle will not encroach into the street or walkway area.  Where the
parking access is from the front of the mobile home, the required parking
area shall not project closer to the access street than the front of the
mobile home.



   (D)   Parking shall be provided adjacent to common recreational
facilities and the common administrative offices at a ratio of at least one
space for each 15 mobile home lots contained in the park.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.14)  (Ord. No. 1477, 1498, 2336)



SEC. 16-98.  WALKWAYS.



   (A)   Pedestrian circulation shall be provided by a system of
walkways.  A walkway shall originate near an individual mobile home lot,
service area, parking bay or storage area and shall lead to a common
recreation area or service facility.



   (B)   Walkways shall be a minimum width of four feet.



   (C)   Walkways shall not in all cases be adjacent to interior
streets.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.15)  (Ord. No. 1477)



SEC. 16-99.  BOUNDARY WALL; BUFFER ZONES.



   A six-foot high solid masonry or brick wall shall be constructed along
all boundaries abutting other properties.  Adjacent to any public street
there shall be a ten-foot wide buffer zone located back of the property line
in front of the above required wall.  The buffer zone shall be located
adjacent to the exterior boundaries, between the property line and the
required perimeter wall.  The buffer zone shall be landscaped as provided in
section 16-94.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.16)  (Ord. No. 1477)



SEC. 16-100.  RECREATION VEHICLE STORAGE; GENERAL STORAGE LOCKERS.



   (A)   In addition to other required parking within a park,
centralized storage areas for recreation vehicles of all types shall be
provided with a minimum of one storage space for each four mobile home spaces.



   (B)   Storage areas shall have a drained surface usable under normal
seasonal weather conditions.



   (C)   Storage areas shall be screened from view by permanent masonry
walls eight feet in height.



   (D)   A general storage locker with a minimum of 90 cubic feet
capacity shall be provided on each occupied mobile home lot.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.17)  (Ord. No. 1477)



SEC. 16-101.  COMMON LAUNDRY SERVICE FACILITIES.



   (A)   Laundry facilities equipped with washing machines and dryers
shall be provided in a permanent building which is centrally located and
accessible to all tenants.



   (B)   The laundry facilities shall include at least one lavatory and
water closet for each sex located in distinctly marked rooms.



   (C)   Outside drying yards, if provided with the laundry facility,
shall be screened with a six-foot high decorative wall constructed with
materials of the same type as other walls or fences within the park.



   (D)   The laundry facility building shall be constructed of
materials that carry out the general theme of other permanent buildings in
the park.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.18)  (Ord. No. 1477)



SEC. 16-102.  MANAGEMENT OFFICE.



   (A)   Each mobile home park shall maintain a management office. 
The office shall be an integral part of the main recreation facility or
manager's mobile home and shall not be in a separate building.  The
management office shall have access to a lavatory and water closet.



   (B)   The person to whom a city business license for a mobile home
park is issued shall provide resident, full-time supervision at all times to
maintain the park in compliance with this division and to keep its facilities
in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.19)  (Ord. No. 1477)



DIVISION 7.  C-O COMMERCIAL OFFICE ZONE



SEC. 16-105.  PURPOSE.



   This zone shall provide a district for low-profile professional uses
suitable for location abutting residential uses and for high-rise offices and
related uses in selected locations.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-57.68)  (Ord. No. 1036)



SEC. 16-106.  USES PERMITTED.



   The following uses are permitted in the C-O Commercial Office Zone:



   (A)   Professional and business offices, including medical, dental,
legal, engineering, architectural, insurance, real estate and other offices
not engaged in selling goods or products;



   (B)   Laboratories, when incidental to medical, dental and similar
uses;



   (C)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of
the above uses when located on the same lot;



   (D)   Off-street parking;



   (E)   Signs, as permitted in article IX of this chapter;



   (F)   Home-finding agency;



   (G)   Children's day care facility serving no more than 15 children;



   (H)   Beauty shops and barber shops; and



   (I)   Adult motels.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-68.1)  (Ord. No. 1036, 1126, 1149, 1629, 2313, 2529)



SEC. 16-107.  RELATED USES.



   The following uses are permitted only on approval of a special use
permit as provided in sections 16-530 through 16-553:



   (A)   Adult day care facilities and child care centers serving no
more than 15 persons;



   (B)   Hospitals and convalescent hospitals;



   (C)   Hotels and motor hotels;



   (D)   Churches;



   (E)   Resort-vacation timeshares; provided that such timeshare uses
shall be subject to R-3 zone development standards contained in sections
16-58 through 16-63;



   (F)   Mortuaries;



   (G)   Pharmacies engaged primarily in selling pharmaceuticals and
medical supplies;



   (H)   Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges, except
those the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a
business;



   (I)   Office condominiums as provided in section 16-395;



   (J)   Adult day care facility and child care centers serving no more
than 15 persons; and



   (K)   Residential care facility.



   (L)   Senior and/or senior assisted living residential facility.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-68.2)  (Ord. No. 1036, 1149, 1629, 1706, 1959, 2671, 2896)



SEC. 16-108.  HEIGHT PERMITTED.



   Single-story buildings not exceeding 15 feet shall be permitted. 
Additional stories may be permitted on approval of a special use permit as
provided in sections 16-530 through 16-553.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-69)  (Ord. No. 1036)



SEC. 16-109.  FRONT YARD.



   There shall be a front yard of not less than ten feet.  The front yard
shall not be used for off-street parking.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-70)  (Ord. No. 1036)



SEC. 16-110.  SIDE YARD.



   There shall be a side yard of not less than five feet from any interior
lot line and a side yard of not less than ten feet from any corner lot line.
There shall be a one-foot increase in the required side yard setback for each
additional story after the first story.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-70.1)  (Ord. No. 1036)



SEC. 16-111.  REAR YARD.



   There shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet.  There shall be
a one-foot increase in the required setback for each additional story after
the first story.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-70.2)  (Ord. No. 1036)



SEC. 16-112.  RESIDENTIAL USES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Residential uses shall not be permitted in this zone, except
that any existing dwelling may be maintained and any necessary structural
alterations that are required by law may be made to perpetuate such a
nonconforming use.



   (B)   A special use permit for a multi-story structure as referred
to in section 16-108 may approve penthouses or one or more floors of living
units in addition to the professional uses or other uses permitted by this
division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-70.3)  (Ord. No. 1036)



SEC. 16-113.  CONVERSION OF EXISTING STRUCTURES PROHIBITED.



   Existing dwellings and other residential structures shall not be
converted to professional use. Existing hotels and motels shall not be
converted to timeshare use.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-70.4)  (Ord. No. 1036, 1959)



SEC. 16-114.  INCIDENTAL RETAIL AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.



   Retail commercial uses shall not be permitted except that where a
special use permit application has been filed for a multi-story structure as
required in section 16-108, the special use permit approval body may approve
retail uses, such as restaurants and coffee shops, and personal services,
such as barbershops, intended primarily to serve the occupants of the
building.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-70.5)  (Ord. No. 1036)



SEC. 16-115. CANNABIS USES PROHIBITED.



   All cannabis-related uses are prohibited in the C-O Commercial Office
Zone.



(Ord. No. 2929)



DIVISION 8.  C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER ZONE



SEC. 16-120.  PURPOSE.



   This zone shall provide a district of convenience shopping and personal
services located primarily to serve the neighborhood within which the
district is located and having development standards and performance
standards suitable for location abutting residential uses.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-71)  (Ord. No. 1566)



SEC. 16-121.  BASIC PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Property may be zoned as a neighborhood shopping center only
when all of the following standards are met:



      (1)   The property is located at the intersection of
thoroughfares or at the intersection of a thoroughfare and a collector street.



      (2)   The neighborhood within which the property is situated
contains a minimum of 600 residents or is shown on adopted city maps to
contain that number of dwelling units after development.



      (3)   The property, when developed as a neighborhood shopping
center, shall:



         (a)   Have as a major tenant, a convenience market or
similar outlet for daily shopping needs;



         (b)   Feature architecture of residential character in
conformance with the neighborhood; and



         (c)   Be in conformance with the traffic and circulation
requirements of this code.



   (B)   Only one neighborhood shopping center may be so zoned for each
neighborhood specified in the general plan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-72)  (Ord. No. 1565)



SEC. 16-122.  USES PERMITTED.



   (A)   All stores, shops or businesses in a C-1 zone shall be retail
establishments selling new merchandise only.  All shops secondary to the
convenience market shall be no larger than 1,500 square feet of gross floor
area unless a special use permit grants additional gross floor area.  All
sales or storage shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building,
except for service stations.



   (B)   The following uses only are permitted in the C-1 zone provided
such uses do not sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the
premises:



      (1)   Bakery or doughnut shop employing not more than five
persons on premises;



      (2)   Barber shop or beauty shop;



      (3)   Bicycle repair shop, employing not more than five
persons on premises;



      (4)   Candy, nut, confectionary store;



      (5)   Car wash (nonmechanical or self-service);



      (6)   Convenience market;



      (7)   Embroidery, sewing notions shop;



      (8)   Gift shop;



      (9)   Grocery, fruit or vegetable store;



      (10)   Ice cream shop;



      (11)   Laundry and dry cleaning establishments;



      (12)   Meat markets or delicatessen store;



      (13)   Pharmacies engaged primarily in selling pharmaceutical
medical supplies;



      (14)   Shoe repair store;



      (15)   Soft drink fountain;



      (16)   Stationery store;



      (17)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to
any of the above uses, subject to the approval of the director; and



      (18)   Accessory signs as permitted herein.  No freestanding
sign shall be permitted.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-73)  (Ord. No. 1565, 1716, 2565)



SEC. 16-123.  RELATED USES.



   The following uses are permitted only on approval of a special use
permit as provided in sections 16-530 through 16-553:



   (A)   Service stations limited to the retail sale of gasoline, oil,
tires and automobile accessories, lubrication services, minor automotive
repairs and the replacement or installation of automotive accessories
provided that:



      (1)   No service station shall have more than two pump islands
or more than six pumps;



      (2)   No service station shall have more than two lubrication
hoists and all such hoists shall be located within an enclosed structure; and



      (3)   No sales or rentals of trucks, trailers, cars,
equipment, etc., shall be permitted.



   (B)   Restaurant, general purpose, provided that:



      (1)   The establishment does not serve alcoholic beverages or
offer entertainment;



      (2)   The establishment does not serve food to patrons in
their automobiles or permit take-out or delivery of food other than as a
clearly incidental or minor part of the operation.



   (C)   Electric distribution substation.



   (D)   Convenience market including incidental sales of alcoholic
beverages for consumption off the premises;



   (E)   Children's day care facility serving more than 15 children;



   (F)   Adult day care facility; and



   (G)   Other uses similar in nature or operation to uses permitted in
section 16-122 or the above related uses.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-74)  (Ord. No. 1565, 1716, 2565)



SEC. 16-124.  PROHIBITED USES.



   The following uses shall not be permitted in the C-l zone:



   (A)   New residential uses. Existing residential uses shall be
subject to the provisions herein;



   (B)   Conversion of dwellings to commercial uses unless a special
use permit is approved as provided in sections 16-530 through 16-553;



   (C)   Drive-in or take-out cafe or restaurant;



   (D)   Food delivery, catering or food pickup or take-out
establishments;



   (E)   Bars, cocktail lounges and the like;



   (F)   Liquor stores;



   (G)   Advertising structures other than those permitted in article
IX of this chapter; and



   (H)   Cannabis-related uses.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-75)  (Ord. No. 1565, 2929)



SEC. 16-125.  HEIGHT PERMITTED.



   No buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed one
story or 20 feet in height.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-76)  (Ord. No. 1565)



SEC. 16-126.  LOT AREA.



   Each neighborhood shopping center shall normally be rectangular in
shape with an area of approximately one acre and a depth of approximately 150
feet.  In no case shall a neighborhood shopping center have less than 21,780
square feet (one-half acre) or more than 65,340 square feet (one and one-half
acre) including the area, if any, devoted to service station use.  Such
centers shall have a minimum width of 100 feet and a minimum average depth of
135 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-77)  (Ord. No. 1565)



SEC. 16-127.  FRONT YARD.



   There shall be a front yard of not less than ten feet, except that
where a C-1 zone abuts a residential zone the front yard in the C-1 zone
shall be equal to the largest abutting front yard required for the
residential zone; however, in no event need such front yard exceed 20 feet. 
The first ten feet of the front yard shall be landscaped except for approved
curb cuts, and no parking shall be permitted in this area.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-78)  (Ord. No. 1565)



SEC. 16-128.  SIDE YARD.



   Where a lot abuts upon the side of a lot in any residential zone, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet.  On a corner lot, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet on the side abutting a
street.  Where a reversed corner lot rears upon a lot in any residential
zone, the side yard on the street side of the reversed corner lot shall be
not less than 50% of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of such
corner lot.  In all other cases the side yard for a commercial building
shall be landscaped and no parking shall be permitted in these areas.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-78.1)  (Ord. No. 1565)



SEC. 16-129.  REAR YARD.



   There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 15 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-78.2)  (Ord. No. 1565)



SEC. 16-130.  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   A neighborhood shopping center shall have a zone wall, landscaping and
on-site lighting as required by this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-78.3)  (Ord. No. 1565, 2336)



DIVISION 9.  C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE



SEC. 16-135.  USES PERMITTED.



   (A)   The following uses are permitted in the C-2 General Commercial
Zone:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the C-O and C-1 zones;



      (2)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any
of the above uses when located on the same lot;



      (3)   Antique store;



      (4)   Bank;



      (5)   Billiard or pool hall;



      (6)   Bird store or pet shop;



      (7)   Blueprinting, photostating and printing;



      (8)   Cleaning and pressing establishment using noninflammable
and nonexplosive cleaning fluid;



      (9)   Commercial school including business college;



      (10)   Conservatory of music;



      (11)   Department store;



      (12)   Electric distributing substation;



      (13)   Emergency shelters for families, except that such
facilities shall not be permitted in the airport hazard overlay zone;



      (14)   Emergency shelters, temporary, except that such
facilities shall not be permitted in the airport hazard overlay zone;



      (15)   Employment agency;



      (16)   Fire and police stations;



      (17)   Furniture store;



      (18)   Health spa or massage parlor, excluding an adult
massage parlor, as defined in section 16-336;



      (19)   Ice storage house of not more than five ton capacity;



      (20)   Interior decorating store;



      (21)   Large family day care homes that the Planning Manager
finds to comply with the standards set out in section 16-440; child care
centers serving no more than 15 children; adult day care facilities serving
no more than 15 adults; residential care facilities for the elderly serving
no more than 15 persons; congregate living health facilities of no more than
15 beds; and small residential health or care facilities that conform to city
ordinances restricting building heights, setbacks, lot dimensions, placement
of signs and other matters applicable to dwellings of the same type in the
same zone, and that provide services to no more than six persons, or to no
more than eight children in the case of a small family day care home;



      (22)   Library;



      (23)   Lodge, fraternal organization not to include sale of
alcoholic beverages;



      (24)   Medical laboratory;



      (25)   Mortuary;



      (26)   Music or vocal instruction;



      (27)   Music store;



      (28)   Newsstand, newspaper office;



      (29)   Nursery, flower or plants;



      (30)   Off-street parking;



      (31)   Public parking area;



      (32)   Radio and television store and repair shop where repair
is incidental to retail sales;



      (33)   Restaurant, general or fast food, not serving alcoholic
beverages;



      (34)   Retail stores or businesses not involving any kind of
manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than as is clearly
incidental to the retail business conducted on the premises; and provided
that not more than five persons are employed in the manufacture, processing
or treatment of products, and that such operations or products are not
objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other similar
causes;



      (35)   Storage garage;



      (36)   Studios (except motion picture);



      (37)   Taxidermist;



      (38)   Telephone exchange;



      (39)   Theater;



      (40)   Trade school that is not objectionable due to noise,
odor, or vibration; and



      (41)   Wedding chapel.



   (B)   No other uses shall be permitted in the C-2 zone without the
approval of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-79)  (Ord. No. 417, 958, 1039, 1049, 1110, 1148, 1409,
1427, 1458, 1463, 1530, 1706, 2313, 2460, 2671, 2807, 2864)



SEC. 16-136.  RELATED USES.



   (A)   The following uses are permitted only on approval of a special
use permit:



      (1)   The related uses permitted in the C-O and C-1 zones;



      (2)   The permitted and related uses in the R-3 zone;



      (3)   Bar or cocktail lounge or restaurant serving alcoholic
beverages;



      (4)   Commercial condominiums as provided in section 16-395;



      (5)   Commercial recreational uses, including but not limited
to a skating rink, bowling alley, miniature golf, kiddie ride, amusement
center, driving range and sports auditorium;



      (6)   Community care facilities serving more than six persons;
except that such facilities shall not be permitted in the airport hazard
overlay zone;



      (7)   Congregate living health facilities of more than 15
beds; except that such facilities shall not be permitted in the airport
hazard overlay zone;



      (8)   Convenience stores or mini-markets which may both serve
packaged alcoholic beverages and dispense gasoline;



      (9)   Drive-in and drive-through establishments, including
drive-in restaurant, drive-through or mechanical car wash and film processing
booth;



      (10)   Emergency shelters, permanent, except that such
facilities shall not be permitted in the airport hazard overlay zone;



      (11)   Farmworker housing, except that such facilities shall
not be permitted in the airport hazard overlay zone;



      (12)   Mobile home sales area provided that no repair or
reconditioning is permitted;



      (13)   Motor vehicle repair including tune-up, carburetor
shop, transmission and radiator repair, electrical specialty, front end
alignment, top and upholstery shop, wheel balancing and the installation of
brakes, mufflers and tires, provided that all repair activity and storage of
materials takes place within an enclosed building;



      (14)   New and used vehicle sales, including truck sales and
incidental automotive service and repair;



      (15)   Nonaccessory sign;



      (16)   Pawnshops;



      (17)   Recreational vehicle park not including vehicle storage
or trailers over 30 feet in length;



      (18)   Resort-vacation timeshare uses subject to R-3 zone
development standards;



      (19)   Sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off-site;



      (20)   Service stations except that sales of alcoholic
beverages in connection with such use shall be prohibited;



      (21)   Small animal veterinary hospitals serving common
household pets, provided that no outdoor kennels are permitted;



      (22)   Supportive housing, except that such facilities shall
not be permitted in the airport hazard overlay zone;



      (23)   Swap meet, provided that the use is carried out in a
building of at least 10,000 square feet, there is no outdoor display of
merchandise unless allowed by a temporary use permit pursuant to section
16-476, and there are no signs on the exterior of the building identifying
individual vendors; and



      (24)   Transitional housing, except that such facilities shall
not be permitted in the airport hazard overlay zone.



   (B)   The special use permit shall be granted as provided in
sections 16-530 through 16-553.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-79.1)  (Ord. No. 1413, 1426, 1427, 1458, 1463, 1530,
1706, 1780, 1959, 1979, 2132, 2561, 2626, 2671, 2847, 2864)



SEC. 16-137.  HEIGHT PERMITTED.



   No building shall exceed two stories or 35 feet; provided, however,
that additional stories may be approved by the issuance of a special use
permit as provided in sections 16-530 through 16-553.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-80)  (Ord. No. 1458)



SEC. 16-138.  LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT.



   Every main residential building shall have a lot area of not less than
600 square feet per dwelling unit, except for hotels or apartment hotels that
have no cooking facilities in any individual room, suite or apartment.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-81)



SEC. 16-139.  FRONT YARD.



   There shall be a front yard of not less than ten feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-82)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-140.  SIDE YARD.



   Side yards shall be not less than five feet.  Where a lot zoned
general commercial abuts another lot so zoned, no setback shall be required.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-83)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-141.  REAR YARD.



   No rear yard setback shall be required of commercial structures of 16
feet in height or less, provided that there shall be no penetrations in the
wall located on the zero property line.  For buildings over 16 feet in
height, a 15-foot rear yard setback shall be required.  Buildings on
properties which abut a public alley shall provide a ten-foot rear year
setback.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-84)  (Ord. No. 1409, 2132)



SEC. 16-142.  YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR DWELLINGS.



   (A)   Buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply
with the front, side and rear yard regulations of the R-3 zone.



   (B)   Buildings having commercial uses on the lower floor and
residential uses on the upper floor or floors shall comply with the front,
side and rear yard regulations of the C-2 zone for commercial floors and the
R-3 zone for the residential floors.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-85)  (Ord. No. 1409)



SEC. 16-143.  CANNABIS USES PROHIBITED.



   All cannabis-related uses are prohibited in C-2 General Commercial Zone.



(Ord. No. 2929)



Editor’s note:



   Section 16-143 was repealed by Ord. No. 2864, adopted April 23, 2013.
The section related to prohibited use and was derived from Ord. Code §
34-86, and Ord. No. 442 and 1959.



SEC. 16-144.  OPERATING STANDARD FOR SALE OR STORAGE OF USED FABRIC ITEMS.



   Operators of retail stores that sell previously owned, secondhand or
used merchandise, shall thoroughly launder or dry-clean such merchandise that
is made of fabric (such as curtains, slipcovers and bed linens) before
offering such merchandise for sale or storing such merchandise on the
premises.  On request of police department or code enforcement division
personnel, the operator of such a store who has complied with this operating
standard shall sign a statement under penalty of perjury providing the facts
as to how and when such compliance occurred.



(Ord. No. 2626)



DIVISION 10.  CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT



SEC. 16-145.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   This zone shall integrate residential, commercial, cultural
and recreational land uses; encourage conservation of land resources and
minimize auto travel; encourage a lively pedestrian-oriented commercial
district; and provide for the location of employment and retail centers in
close proximity to residential development of varying densities.



   (B)   This zone also shall encourage flexibility in architectural
design and building bulk, while creating high-quality urban environments for
residents, businesses, employees and institutions.  The CBD zone implements
the Oxnard Downtown District Master Plan.  Advertising signs, building
styles, colors and materials are regulated to implement this special
theme-oriented district that reflects early Oxnard building styles and
provides a strong pedestrian orientation.  This theme is characterized by a
variety of classic architectural styles dating from the late 1800's through
the mid 1900's.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-105.1)  (Ord. No. 2101, 2587)



SEC. 16-146.  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this division, the following words shall have the following
meanings:



   (A)   MANAGER - The planning and environmental services manager.



   (B)   COMMITTEE - The downtown design review committee.



(Ord. No. 2587)



SEC. 16-147.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted in the CBD Central Business District
Zone.  However, in structures that front on A Street between Third Street
and Sixth Street and that are constructed on vacant property or that replace
existing structures on or after the effective date of this section, the only
permitted uses in the front one-third of the street level floor are retail
and restaurant/café uses.



   (A)   Service uses -



      (1)   Banks and similar financial institutions;



      (2)   Data processing and computer centers, including service
and maintenance;



      (3)   Executive, administrative and professional offices;



      (4)   Government office buildings and public facilities,
utility offices, post offices, chambers of commerce, visitors' bureaus and
parks;



      (5)   Health and exercise centers and spas;



      (6)   Adult motels, except on A Street between Third Street
and Sixth Street;



      (7)   Medical offices;



      (8)   Mortuary or funeral home;



      (9)   Large family day care homes that the Planning Manager
finds to comply with the standards set out in section 16-440; child care
centers serving no more than 15 children; and adult day care facilities
serving no more than 15 adults; residential care facilities for the elderly
serving no more than 15 persons; congregate living health facilities of no
more than 15 beds; and small residential health or care facilities that
conform to city ordinances restricting building heights, setbacks, lot
dimensions, placement of signs and other matters applicable to dwellings of
the same type in the same zone, and that provide services to no more than six
persons, or to no more than eight children in the case of a small family day
care home;



      (10)   Veterinarian offices;



      (11)   Consolidated transportation uses, except on A Street
between Third Street and Sixth Street;



      (12)   Radio and television stations, excluding transmission
facilities, except on A Street between Third Street and Sixth Street; and



      (13)   Similar uses as determined by the manager.



   (B)   Retail -



      (1)   Stores selling antiques or collectibles;



      (2)   Appliance sales with incidental repair;



      (3)   Bakeries;



      (4)   Barber shops;



      (5)   Beauty shops;



      (6)   Book stores, stationery;



      (7)   Boutique shops;



      (8)   Business service establishments, such as blueprinting
and metal stamps, duplicating, printing and photocopying services;



      (9)   Confectioneries;



      (10)   Craft sales, including limited product assembly;



      (11)   Florist shops;



      (12)   Galleries and art studios;



      (13)   Groceries;



      (14)   Pet shops;



      (15)   Pharmacies;



      (16)   Photography studios;



      (17)   Restaurants, including those with roof gardens;



      (18)   Outdoor dining or sidewalk cafés;



      (19)   Specialty clothing/leather goods;



      (20)   Specialty/gourmet food items;



      (21)   Tailor, dressmaking and millinery shops;



      (22)   Toys/novelty stores; and



      (23)   Similar uses as determined by the manager.



   (C)   Cultural uses -



      (1)   Art galleries;



      (2)   Museums;



      (3)   Studios for professional work including photography,
music, drama, dancing, sculpture, painting, ceramics, weaving, jewelry; and



      (4)   Similar uses as determined by the manager.



   (D)   Technology -



      (1)   Software development, excluding any manufacturing of
components;



      (2)   Electronic device/component development, excluding any
manufacturing of devices or components; and



      (3)   Similar uses as determined by the manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-105.2)  (Ord. No. 2102, 2313, 2463, 2466, 2587, 2671)



SEC. 16-148.  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses shall be allowed in the CBD zone on approval of a
special use permit in accordance with sections 16-530 through 16-553;
provided, however, that only those following uses that are retail and
restaurant/café uses may be approved if located in the front one-third of
the street level floor of structures that front on A Street between Third
Street and Sixth Street and that are constructed on vacant property or that
replace existing structures on or after the effective date of this section:



   (A)   Assembly or concert halls;



   (B)   Hotels and motels;



   (C)   Nightclubs which are operated as a place of entertainment,
characterized by the following principal uses of the floor area within the
nightclub:



      (1)   Live, recorded or televised entertainment, including but
limited to performances by magicians, musicians or comedians;



      (2)   Patron dancing; and



      (3)   Seating for patrons.  Alcohol may be served in
association with an on-site ancillary restaurant;



   (D)   Child care centers serving more than 15 children; adult day
care facilities serving more than 15 adults; residential care facilities for
the elderly serving more than 15 persons; and congregate living health
facilities of more than 15 beds;



   (E)   Parking garages and parking lots as the only use on a lot;
however, in the area bounded by Third Street to the north, Sixth Street to
the south, the west side of Oxnard Boulevard to the east, and the east side
of B Street to the west, parking garages shall not be located closer than 25
feet to A Street, and the space between the parking garage and A Street shall
consist of permanent, enclosed floor area intended for occupancy by retail
and/or restaurant/café uses and any necessary vehicle entrances to the
parking garages.



   (F)   Private clubs and garages;



   (G)   Churches and related facilities;



   (H)   Public or private schools and colleges for general or
vocational education in a classroom setting;



   (I)   Residential uses, including mobile home parks and residential
units over commercial or office uses;



   (J)   Motor vehicle or truck services and sales, except on A Street
between Third Street and Sixth Street;



   (K)   Sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the site or
for consumption on a site having a restaurant;



   (L)   Street vendors utilizing movable carts;



   (M)   Pawnshops; however, if the building occupied by such use
fronts on A Street between Third Street and Sixth Street, the pawnshop use
may be carried on only in the rear two-thirds of the building, unless the
building has no street-level windows (other than as part of entry doors) on A
Street.



   (N)   Bed and breakfast inns, subject to the regulations contained
in sections 16-370 through 16-375;



   (O)   Clinics and laboratories;



   (P)   Farmers' markets; and



   (Q)   Theaters, motion picture theaters and multiplex motion picture
theaters.



   (R)   Senior and/or senior assisted living residential facility.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-105.3)  (Ord. No. 2101, 2128, 2165, 2463, 2466, 2587,
2671, 2896)



SEC. 16-149.  PROHIBITED USES.



   The following uses are prohibited in the CBD zone and shall not be
considered similar uses as determined by the manager:



   (A)   Bars which are not accessory to restaurants;



   (B)   Drive-in restaurants/drive-through restaurants;



   (C)   Internally illuminated outdoor vending machines visible from a
public street or public parking lot;



   (D)   Massage therapy not located on the same premises as and as an
ancillary use to a medical office, or to premises where active exercise
activities are performed for the purpose of physical fitness, or to premises
where personal grooming services are provided;



   (E)   Mini-warehouses and self storage facilities;



   (F)   Outdoor advertising signs (billboards);



   (G)   Outdoor storage and assembly, except as otherwise permitted by
this chapter;



   (H)   Social services (including soup kitchens, charitable food
distribution centers, drug/alcohol treatment and rehab centers that serve
more than six persons) and emergency shelters;



   (I)   Swap meets;



   (J)   Thrift stores and secondhand stores; and



   (K)   Cannabis-related uses, including the sale or production of
products containing cannabis or cannabis components.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-105.4)  (Ord. No. 2101, 2313, 2463, 2587, 2626, 2864,
2929)



SEC. 16-150.  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Minimum lot area - No minimum, but dimensions shall be
sufficient to meet building regulations contained in chapter 14 of the code.



   (B)   Maximum building height - Forty-eight feet with up to an
additional 25% height increase allowed by special use permit.  Non-habitable
architectural features such as towers, flagpoles or turrets may exceed the
maximum height by 15 feet.



   (C)   Setbacks - None for commercial uses.  Mixed use/residential
use front setbacks shall be a minimum of ten feet unless an alternative
setback is established by the special use permit required for such uses. 
Special architectural features may project up to three feet beyond the
property or right-of-way line and shall be at least 12 feet above the highest
point of the publicly-owned land over which they project.  A license
agreement with the city is required for the projection.  No such feature
shall project into an adjacent privately-owned parcel or obstruct a vehicle
access or parking area.



   (D)   Build-to-line - First floors of commercial structures shall be
built to and parallel with the property or right-of-way line, whichever is
located at the back of the public sidewalk, except that front entry ways into
the first floor of the structure may be recessed.  Buildings on corner lots
may have an additional setback of 15 feet at the corner to provide
articulation of the facade or a corner entry.  These requirements shall
apply to all new buildings and to additions of 50% or more gross floor area
to an existing building, unless an arcade, colonnade, outdoor public
courtyard, outdoor plaza or outdoor café is included in the building design.



   (E)   Location of parking lot - If an automobile parking lot is
provided on-site for new commercial, residential or institutional buildings,
the parking lot shall be located behind the building.  If such location is
not feasible, the parking lot shall be located along the side of the
building, and no parking spaces shall be located closer than ten feet to the
public sidewalk on which the building fronts.



   (F)   Maximum building lot coverage - Up to 100% for commercial uses
provided all other requirements of the code are met, including but not
limited to on-site parking, refuse containment and landscaping.



   (G)   Interior yard space - For residential uses, interior yard
space shall equal not less than 15% of the lot area, with 15-foot minimum
dimensions.



   (H)   Residential density - Shall not exceed 39 units per acre.



   (I)   Minimum dwelling unit size - Four hundred fifty square feet in
net area.



   (J)   Parking requirements - The parking requirements of the code
apply to all of an existing building when an addition to the building exceeds
25% of existing floor area or 1,500 square feet, whichever is less, or when a
change of use of the building increases parking requirements by 25% or more.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-105.5)  (Ord. No. 2101, 2587)



SEC. 16-151.  OPERATIONAL STANDARDS



   (A)   All buildings fronting on A Street between Third Street and
Sixth Street shall maintain all street level windows facing A Street as
transparent and unobstructed by window coverings, such as shades, blinds and
curtains.



   (B)   Retail shop windows facing a public street shall have
decorative and attractive displays.  Stored products or the back side of
merchandise racks shall not be visible through such windows from a public
street.



(Ord. No. 2587)



SEC. 16-152.  DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS; SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.



   The following standards apply to buildings, structures and sites in the
CBD:



   (A)   Application of standards -



      (1)   All of the standards apply to new construction; to all
of a building that is remodeled so as to change 50 percent or more of a
building's front facade; to all of a structure or site that is remodeled to
change 50 percent or more of the structure or site; and to any addition to a
structure, building or site.



      (2)   If a building is remodeled so as to change less than 50
percent of the building's front facade, or if a structure or site is
remodeled so as to change less than 50 percent of the structure or site, the
remodeled parts of the building, structure or site are subject to all of the
standards; provided, however, that a remodeling project consisting solely of
changing the paint color of a building or structure shall be subject only to
the standards of subsection (C)(3) of this section.



      (3)   Changes to the exterior of a building, structure or site
for which a downtown design review permit is required, but which do not
involve new construction or remodeling, shall comply with all of the
standards, subject to the manager's authority to approve exceptions pursuant
to subsection (B) of this section.



      (4)   Any or all of the standards in the subsections below
shall also apply to unremodeled portions of a building, structure or site, as
the manager determines to be necessary in order to provide a consistent
“Early Oxnard” style for the building, structure or site.



   (B)   Exceptions to standards - The manager may approve exceptions
to the standards contained in subsections (C), (D), (F), (I) and (K) below,
as described in section 16-153.



   (C)   Architectural design standards -



      (1)   Building styles shall emulate styles present in downtown
Oxnard in the early and mid 1900's.  Permitted styles are Early Twentieth
Century Commercial, Spanish Revival, Classical Revival, Moderne, Art Deco,
Victorian, and Early Renaissance Revival.  Such styles are referred to in
this division as the “Early Oxnard” theme.



      (2)   Uniform architectural design shall be provided on a
building with full treatments for all building sides exposed to public view
in accordance with the theme architectural styles listed in subsection (C)(1)
above.



      (3)   Building colors shall comply with the following
standards:



         (a)   Primary exterior building colors shall be muted. 
Trim and detail colors shall provide a stronger contrasting accent.



         (b)   Light-colored walls shall be contrasted with a
darker or more intense trim color while darker-colored walls shall be
contrasted with light-colored trim.



         (c)   Bright and intense colors shall be used sparingly
and only for refined or delicate detailing.



         (d)   Building color shall be compatible with the
building's architectural style.  Colors that the manager determines to be
inconsistent with the building's architecture are not permitted.



         (e)   Brick, stone and copper shall be left in their
natural colors.



      (4)   Commercial structures shall have at least 70 percent of
the linear frontage of the first story in glazing.  A maximum of ten percent
tint is allowed on the glazing.  New office and security-oriented uses may
deviate from this standard as approved by a downtown design review permit. 
Building walls without openings are prohibited on the front facade adjacent
to a sidewalk.



      (5)   Building walls shall be of stucco, stone, brick,
clapboard, shingle or a combination.  Stucco shall be smooth sand finish. 
Different wall materials shall be combined only vertically, with lighter
materials above those that are more substantial.



      (6)   Visible roofs shall be clay tile, concrete tile, slate
or dimensional shingles consistent with the building's architectural style. 
Gutters shall be galvanized steel, copper, anodized aluminum or vinyl. 
Vinyl gutters shall be finished to match or compliment the building.  Flat
roofs shall be enclosed by parapet walls no less than 42 inches high on all
sides.  Parapets shall have profiled cornices, if appropriate to the
building's architectural style.



      (7)   At least one new pedestrian-oriented storefront element
shall be incorporated into all commercial buildings or sites, including but
not limited to special entryway architecture, recessed main entry, bulkheads,
transom windows, special building design details (e.g., tile, wood or stone
trim), special door design, pedestrian hanging signs, awnings, balconies,
terraces, fountains, sculpture, outdoor seating, decorative paving and public
plaza.



      (8)   Significant, authentic, historical architectural details
and building materials on existing buildings, as determined by the committee,
shall be preserved.  These features shall be incorporated into remodeling
projects and reflected in building additions.



      (9)   New multi-family residential structures shall be
designed with a courtyard open to the street.  The courtyard shall have
minimum dimensions of 25 feet by 50 feet unless an alternative design is
approved by the special use permit required for residential uses.  As an
alternative, a multi-family residential structure may be built without a
courtyard when a ten-foot setback is provided between the building and the
public sidewalk.  Garden walls and/or front yard patios shall be provided in
the front yard area and may encroach into the required ten-foot setback.



      (10)   Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened
from the view of abutting roadways, ground level residential areas and public
sidewalks.  Screening elements shall be integrated with main structural or
architectural features.



      (11)   Awnings shall have open ends, except for half
sphere/dome-shaped awnings, and shall be sized to match the opening. 
Awnings shall not project more than eight feet from the building facade. 
Rigid awning frames shall not be less than eight feet above the sidewalk.
Fabric valances may hang to within seven feet six inches of the sidewalk. 
Awnings shall be made of fabric, not hard plastic-type materials.  Awnings
shall have noncombustible frames and flame retardant coverings.  Awnings may
extend over public property no more than eight feet, but no portion shall
extend nearer than two feet to the face of the nearest curb line measured
horizontally.  A license agreement with the city is required for any
projection over the public right-of-way.



      (12)   Automobile and truck sales and service uses shall
provide a screen wall and/or landscaping a minimum of 20 inches high between
the sidewalk and any automobile parking or display areas.



   (D)   Landscaping -



      (1)   All landscaping shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with sections 16-641 and 16-642.  Vegetation sizes and types
shall be in accordance with adopted city guidelines.



      (2)   Commercial buildings, residential developments and
parking lots shall landscape a minimum of six percent of the lot area, which
may include a portion in decorative hardscape.



      (3)   The manager may credit a commercial building with up to
six percent of the required landscaping if the building incorporates features
which will enhance the building's pedestrian orientation and the “Early
Oxnard” theme.  Such features may include but are not limited to:



         (a)   Window boxes for flower planting;



         (b)   Theme glazing, such as stained glass, beveled
glass, arched window openings, and transom windows, in an historic context;



         (c)   Awnings;



         (d)   Enriched paving, such as brick, cobblestone or
decorative tile;



         (e)   Entryway planting;



         (f)   Interior plantings in atriums or common areas;



         (g)   Theme lighting (antique light standards and
lighting fixtures);



         (h)   Neon lighting used as architectural ornamentation
if consistent with and complementary to the building's architectural style;



         (i)   Urban sculpture of an appropriate scale;



         (j)   Outdoor terraces or public plazas;



         (k)   Fountains;



         (l)   Outdoor seating;



         (m)   Balconies;



         (n)   Special entryway architecture or recessed main
entry;



         (o)   Special building design details (tile, wood or
stone trim, etc.); and



         (p)   Special door design.



   (E)   Lighting -



      (1)   On-site lighting systems shall use theme-coordinated
decorative architectural standards and devices that provide down-lighting. 
Lighting shall be shielded from abutting public streets, residential areas,
and adjoining properties.  The manager or the planning commission may
approve up-lighting of architectural features that is appropriate to the
structure.



      (2)   Lighting levels at various locations, such as parking
lots and walkways, used from dusk to dawn shall be provided as required in
this chapter.



   (F)   Walls and fences -



      (1)   A minimum six-foot high masonry wall is required where
the CBD zone directly abuts a residential zone, unless an alley or street
separates the two zones.



      (2)   Where required or provided, walls and fences shall be
finished in textures and colors to match architectural features of the
primary structure.  Landscaping shall abut any exterior building wall having
no opening for loading or building entry.



      (3)   An opaque freestanding wall shall be built on the
required setback line or within eight feet thereof in order to mask new
parking areas from the street.  Parking lot walls shall be four to five feet
in height and made of materials matching or complimenting the adjacent
buildings.  A continuous maintained hedge may replace a street wall. 
Openings to allow vehicular and pedestrian access as well as views for
security patrols are required.  Openings may be gated.



      (4)   If a building is set back from the edge of the
right-of-way (sidewalk), a garden wall may be built on the property line or
within four feet thereof.  Garden walls shall be no more than 48 inches in
height, at least eight inches thick and capped with a pitched or round top. 
Garden walls shall be finished in stucco, brick, or stone matching the main
building.  Gates may be provided.



   (G)   Parking and access -



      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the code, the
number of required parking spaces shall be met by one or a combination of the
following methods:



         (a)   Within the subject property;



         (b)   On-street immediately adjacent and contiguous to
the property line;



         (c)   Public parking lots within 700 feet of the nearest
point of the subject property;



         (d)   Public parking structures within 1,000 feet of the
nearest point of the subject property;



         (e)   Off-site private parking within 500 feet of the
nearest point of the subject property.



      (2)   If an applicant proposes to meet the parking requirement
by using on-street and/or public parking facilities, the planning commission
shall review and determine the appropriate mix of parking compliance pursuant
to a special use permit application.  The applicant shall provide a parking
study in support of the application, addressing the following items:



         (a)   Description of the project, including setting,
required parking, demand of parking by type and special features of the
proposed project;



         (b)   Survey of existing public and private parking
within 1,200 feet of the proposed project;



         (c)   Description of the proposed mix of parking;



         (d)   Analysis of existing demand and survey use of
proposed off-site public parking facilities and on-street parking;



         (e)   Impact on existing public parking facilities and
on-street parking as a result of the proposed project and use of proposed
parking mix; and



         (f)   Analysis of the impact on the proposed project as
a result of use of public parking facilities and on-street parking.



      (3)   Tandem parking (pairs of on-site parking spaces located
one behind the other) for employees of a single business or for residents of
a single dwelling unit may be approved by the planning commission pursuant to
a special use permit application.



   (H)   Sidewalk cafés -



      (1)   Location requirements -



         (a)   A sidewalk café, where permitted, may be located
on the public right-of-way adjacent to the restaurant serving the café.  A
business license for a sidewalk café may be granted after review of the
application by appropriate city departments and issuance of an encroachment
permit or license agreement.



         (b)   All sidewalk cafés shall leave clear space for
pedestrian movement between the outer edge of the café and the curb line. 
Sidewalk cafés located at street intersections shall provide a 15-foot clear
space radial to the corner.  If pedestrian traffic is especially heavy, the
manager may require additional clear space to ensure adequate room for
pedestrian movements.



         (c)   No sidewalk café shall be located within 15 feet
of a bus stop or bus shelter.



      (2)   Physical design requirements -



         (a)   All furnishings of a sidewalk café including, but
not limited to, tables, chairs and decorative accessories, shall be readily
movable.



         (b)   No part of a sidewalk café may be permanently
attached to public space.  The person to whom the business license for the
café is issued shall repair any damage done by the café to public property.



         (c)   When a sidewalk café or the adjacent restaurant
is occupied, no exit door shall be locked, bolted or otherwise fastened or
obstructed so that the door cannot be opened from the inside.



         (d)   Chairs and tables shall be arranged so as to
provide for clear access to an exit.  No part of an aisle shall be used in
any way that will obstruct its use as an exit or that will constitute a
hazardous condition.



         (e)   Sidewalk cafés shall not be arranged so as to
restrict the use of emergency exits, fire escapes on adjacent buildings and
access to fire hydrants.



         (f)   Freestanding or table mounted shade umbrellas
shall be kept in good repair and may be used only where space permits.



         (g)   Freestanding lamps are not permitted.  Flashing
or moving lights are not permitted.  Table candles may be used.  Electric
wiring shall not be placed in pedestrian areas.



         (h)   Awnings shall be kept in good repair.



         (i)   Seating and accessories and other components of
the sidewalk café shall be maintained in a neat and safe manner.



         (j)   The height of a railing, fence, or planter
(including plantings) used to establish boundaries of seating areas shall be
at least 24 inches in height but not higher than 36 inches.



         (k)   Plank-style picnic tables with bench seating are
not permitted.



      (3)   Café operation requirements -



         (a)   Sidewalk cafés shall be operated and maintained
in accordance with the applicant's building plans approved by the manager and
the public works director.



         (b)   The person to whom the business license for the
café is issued shall remove all wrappings, litter and food and shall provide
thorough and sanitary cleaning each day after the café closes.



         (c)   Sidewalk cafés shall not operate earlier than
8:00 a.m. or later than 12:00 midnight.



   (I)   On-site advertising signs -



      (1)   Freestanding, portable, roof, cloth, paper or flashing
or moving signs are not permitted, including decorative plastic or cloth
banners or pennants displayed outdoors, other than those specifically
permitted as temporary signs.



      (2)   Sign design shall be pedestrian-oriented and contribute
to the “Early Oxnard” theme.  The lettering, location, size, number,
illumination, and color of signs shall be contemporary to the period in which
the building or structure was built and shall complement the building facade.



      (3)   The total amount of signage permitted on a building
shall be as provided in the sign ordinance for the C-2 general commercial
zone.  No more than 300 square feet of signage is permitted on any side of a
building.



      (4)   Canopies bearing signs are allowed, subject to the
following standards:



         (a)   For purposes of including signs on awnings in the
CBD zone, awnings shall be considered as canopies as defined in section
16-596.



         (b)   A building permit shall be obtained from the
development services department prior to installation of any awning.  A
license agreement with the city is also required if any portion of the awning
extends over the public right-of-way.



         (c)   Signs may cover no more than 20 percent of the
surface area of awnings on the ground floor level of a building.  Ten
percent of awnings on any floor above ground floor may be covered by signs. 
Awning signs shall be placed only on the awning valance, except as provided
in subdivision (d) below.  The total area of signs on awnings shall be
included when calculating the amount of sign area for the property in
accordance with the sign provisions of the code.



         (d)   Under awning pedestrian identification signs
perpendicular to the building and 5 inches by 12 inches in size are
permitted.  Such signs shall not be included in the total sign area.



      (5)   Wall signs are permitted if mounted on a building in a
single sign band, not to exceed two feet in height by any length.  Wall
signs shall be an attached panel, painted on the wall or individually mounted
letters or logos.  Wall signs shall not block or cover any significant
architectural features or details of the building.  Wall signs shall not be
translucent with interior lighting.  Can or cabinet signs and flat
plywood-type signs are prohibited.  Exterior lighting may be required unless
back-lighting such as neon is used to outline the letters or sign.  A
license agreement with the city is also required if any portion of the wall
sign extends over the public right-of-way.



      (6)   Hanging pedestrian signs are permitted if attached
perpendicularly to a facade or hanging under a canopy/awning or roof
projection.  A decorative hanging bracket shall be used if the sign is not
attached directly to the building facade.  Such signs may project up to
three feet from the building facade and be up to two feet in height. 
Hanging signs may project up to three feet into public right-of-way.  A
license agreement with the city is required if any portion of the sign
extends over the public right-of-way.



      (7)   Window signs that are permanently painted or applied to
the inside of windows are permitted limited to 20% of the window area on the
first floor and 10% of the window area on each floor above the first floor. 
Neon signs within the size limitations may be placed in windows, but may not
flash or blink.



      (8)   Ground signs are permitted if a building on the same lot
has at least 100 feet of frontage on a public street.  Ground signs shall be
set back 15 feet from the sidewalk and placed on a foundation or ornamental
wall.  Ground signs shall not be higher than 48 inches as measured from the
ground directly beneath the sign.



      (9)   Murals and/or painted art are permitted on building
walls and do not count toward the total amount of signage for a building if
no lettering or logos are included.



      (10)   Wall signs on the exterior of commercial buildings or
structures fronting on A Street may include up to nine square feet of neon
elements, but no other neon shall be placed on the building.



      (11)   Signs shall not include fluorescent colors.



      (12)   Signs shall conform to the color palette, materials,
lettering styles and fonts, border treatments and lighting options approved
by resolution of the city council.



      (13)   Temporary signs are permitted subject to the standards
that apply to temporary signs in the C-2 zone.



      (14)   Applications for sign permits shall comply with
provisions of sections 16-15, 16-153 and 16-600 and the following additional
items are required:



         (a)   Color rendering of the sign;



         (b)   A full rendering or color photograph showing the
sign location outlined on the building to scale;



         (c)   The size and dimensions of the sign and the
materials to be utilized;



         (d)   A statement of whether the sign will be
illuminated, and if so, whether illumination will be direct or indirect.  A
drawing of the lighting fixture shall also be provided;



         (e)   Samples of materials to be used; and



         (f)   Drawings of electrical connections for the sign.



      (15)   Approval or denial of an application for a new sign
permit or modification of an existing sign shall be based on the following
factors:



         (a)   The sign's compatibility with the building use and
architectural style and with other buildings and uses in the vicinity;



         (b)   The sign's compliance with the code;



         (c)   The sign's compliance with the provisions of any
redevelopment or area plan adopted for the area; and



         (d)   The sign's contribution to the CBD's
pedestrian-orientation and Early Oxnard theme.



   (J)   Refuse enclosures and containment -



      (1)   All uses on individual lots shall provide refuse
containers and enclosures in accordance with adopted public works department
standards.  All solid masonry or concrete enclosures shall be finished in
textures and colors to match the major architectural features of the primary
structure.



      (2)   All refuse containment areas shall be maintained in a
sanitary manner, and enclosures and gates shall be maintained in good
condition.  Refuse containers shall be stored within the enclosure at all
time.



      (3)   Unless a business is located on A Street between Third
and Sixth Streets and a communal dumpster is provided by the city, a trash
enclosure shall be provided where none exists, under any of the following
circumstances:



         (a)   A significant change of use occurs that increases
trash production over the previous on-site use;



         (b)   Fifty percent or more of the exterior of a
building is remodeled or a private parking lot is modified;



         (c)   The square footage of an existing building is
increased by 50 % or more; or



         (d)   A new building is constructed.



   (K)   Loading and outdoor storage areas -



      (1)   Loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with
article X, if structures are larger than 5,000 square feet.



      (2)   If entries of docks are provided exclusively for loading
and unloading purposes, such loading dock areas, ramps, and entries shall be
screened by a solid wall or fence and landscaping from any public roadway or
residential area.  Such wall or fence shall not be less than eight feet in
height.



      (3)   Solid screening and enclosure walls or fences shall be
constructed of materials, textures and colors to match or complement the
architectural features of the primary structure.



      (4)   All loading areas or spaces shall be a minimum of 50
feet from any residential



zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-105.6)  (Ord. No. 2101, 2587)



SEC. 16-153.  DOWNTOWN DESIGN REVIEW PERMITS.



   (A)   No person shall make any change to the exterior of a building
or to property for which this chapter does not require a special use permit
or other zoning permit until such person has obtained a major or minor
downtown design review permit or an over the counter downtown design review
permit.  Such changes include, but are not limited to, repainting or
changing exterior finishes; installing new doors or windows; installing new
roof material, gutters or roof screening for equipment; constructing new
buildings or structures; constructing additions to existing buildings or
structures; installing site improvements such as lighting, landscaping,
parking areas, trash enclosures and fences; instituting outdoor commercial
uses such as sidewalk cafés or installing outdoor vending machines;
installing new signs and changing existing signs.



   (B)   An application for a special use permit in the CBD that
involves exterior changes to a building or site shall serve as an application
for a downtown design review permit.



   (C)   A major downtown design review permit is required for new
parking lots and all changes to the exterior of a building or structure that
require a building permit unless only one of the following actions is
proposed: new sign or copy change to previously approved sign; new or
renovated trash enclosure; adding or changing exterior theme lighting to a
building; adding or changing screen fencing or walls; adding an outdoor café
area or an outdoor vending machine; adding or changing awnings; or adding one
or more pedestrian-oriented elements described in section 16-152.



   (D)   A minor downtown design review permit is required for the
changes listed in subsection (A) that do not require a major downtown design
review permit and for all other changes to the exterior of a building or
property that do not require a building permit or an over-the-counter
downtown design review permit.



   (E)   An over-the-counter downtown design review permit is required
for changes to the exterior of a building or property that are consistent
with design criteria adopted by the city council by resolution.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-105.7)  (Ord. No. 2101, 2587)



SEC. 16-154.  DECISION BY PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES MANAGER.



   (A)   The manager shall determine applications for over-the-counter
downtown design review permits.



   (B)   After receiving a recommendation from the committee, the
manager shall determine applications for major and minor downtown design
review permits that do not include a special use permit application.



   (C)   Applications for downtown design review permits shall be made
on forms prescribed by the manager.  The applicant shall furnish a
description of the property for which the downtown design review permit is
sought and a map or site plan showing the exterior boundaries of the area and
the building or structure subject to the permit.  For sign applications, the
applicant shall furnish the items specified in section 16-152(I)(14).  The
manager may require the applicant to show elevations and perspective drawings
of the proposed improvements or building plans, and to provide other
supporting data including proposed colors and materials.  The manager shall
not accept an application unless it is accompanied by the application fee set
by resolution of the city council.



   (D)   The manager shall refer to the committee for recommendation
all accepted applications for major and minor downtown design review permits
and for special use permits for property located in the CBD.



   (E)   The manager may also refer to the development advisory
committee for recommendation all accepted applications for major downtown
design review permits and for special use permits for property located in the
CBD.



   (F)   The manager shall deny applications for major and minor
downtown design review permits that do not meet the standards of the CBD
zone; provided, however, that the manager may approve exceptions of less than
25% to standards contained in subsections 16-152(C), (D), (F), (I) and (K) if
the committee so recommends and if the manager finds that the proposed
project incorporates design characteristics and pedestrian-oriented elements
in excess of, and consistent with, other standards in section 16-152.  If
the manager approves an application for a major or minor downtown design
review permit, the manager may impose thereon conditions designed to ensure
that the project complies with adopted city standards and any exceptions
thereto.



   (G)   The manager shall determine applications for major and minor
design review permits within the time prescribed by State law and with such
public notice as is required by State law.  The manager shall issue a
written decision on each application.  Not later than ten days after issuing
a decision, the manager shall mail a copy of the decision to the applicant at
the address appearing on the application.  The decision shall include a
statement of the applicant's right to request that the director review the
manager's decision and the manner in which such a request may be made.



   (H)   Within ten days of the date the decision is mailed to the
applicant, the applicant or any owner of property or a business located
within 300 feet of the project site may request that the director review the
manager's decision by filing with the manager a written request that
specifies the grounds for review and the relief requested.  The manager
shall not accept such a request unless it is timely and is accompanied by the
review fee set by resolution of the city council.



   (I)   The manager's decision as to an application for a downtown
design review permit is effective on issuance; provided, however, that if a
request for review is filed as described above, the decision shall be stayed
pending the decision.



   (J)   The director's decision shall be final and may not be appealed.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-105.8)  (Ord. No. 2101, 2587)



SEC. 16-155.  DOWNTOWN DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE.



   (A)   The committee shall consist of five members appointed by the
city council by majority vote.  One such member shall be a licensed
architect, and one such member shall own a business or real property in the
CBD zone.  All members shall serve at the pleasure of the city council.



   (B)   The committee shall adopt by-laws governing its meetings and
procedures.  The by-laws shall provide that a quorum of the committee is two
members.



   (C)   The committee shall consider each application for a downtown
design review permit or special use permit that the manager refers to the
committee, and shall make a written recommendation thereon to the manager,
stating the reasons for the recommendation.  If the committee does not make
such a recommendation to the manager within 20 days of the date that the
manager referred the application to the committee, the committee will be
deemed to have waived making a recommendation, and the manager shall
determine the application without taking into consideration a recommendation
from the committee.



(Ord. No. 2587, 2681)



DIVISION 11.  C-M COMMERCIAL AND LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE



SEC. 16-160.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this division is to provide a zone for selected
commercial retail sales and services, for light manufacturing, including
warehousing, distributing, storage and wholesale activities, with development
standards suitable for commercial and industrial districts, as well as
permanent and temporary emergency shelters and emergency shelters for
families, supportive and transitional housing and farmworker housing pursuant
to statutory requirements.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-86.1)  (Ord. No. 1503, 2864)



SEC. 16-161.  BASIC PROVISIONS.



   (A)   C-M zoning districts may be created in areas shown by the
general plan as either general commercial or light industrial. C-M districts
shall be in contiguous increments of not less than five acres, exclusive of
streets.



   (B)   All commercial and manufacturing activities in the C-M zone
shall be conducted totally within a building.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-86.2)  (Ord. No. 1503)



SEC. 16-162.  USES PERMITTED.



   The following uses are permitted in the C-M Commercial and Light
Manufacturing Zone:



   (A)   Retail stores -



      (1)   Automobile service stations;



      (2)   Automobile and truck sales with incidental repair and
service;



      (3)   Boat sales with incidental repair and service;



      (4)   Building supplies, new;



      (5)   Electrical supply;



      (6)   Equipment sales;



      (7)   Farm equipment sales with incidental repairs and service;



      (8)   Feed sales;



      (9)   Ice storage with a maximum ten-ton capacity;



      (10)   Harness shop;



      (11)   Mobile home sales;



      (12)   Motorcycle shop with incidental repairs and service;



      (13)   Plumbing supply;



      (14)   Secondhand goods sale with all goods, except vehicles,
displayed, sold or stored within an enclosed building;



      (15)   Tire sales; and



      (16)   Theaters, drive-in.



   (B)   Services -



      (1)   Adult motels;



      (2)   Appliance repairs;



      (3)   Auction houses;



      (4)   Automotive:



         (a)   Body and fender shop;



         (b)   Painting;



         (c)   Reconditioning;



         (d)   Repairs;



         (e)   Tire recapping, retreading and rebuilding; and



         (f)   Upholstering.



      (5)   Blueprinting and photocopying;



      (6)   Boat repairs;



      (7)   Carpet and rug cleaning plants;



      (8)   Cleaning and dyeing plants;



      (9)   Emergency shelters for families;



      (10)   Emergency shelters, temporary;



      (11)   Employment agencies;



      (12)   Farm equipment service;



      (13)   Ice and food product dispensing machines if outside a
building;



      (14)   Laundry, commercial;



      (15)   Newspaper publishing;



      (16)   Offices for any contracting, manufacturing, processing,
fabrication, wholesaling or distribution facility;



      (17)   Printing shop, lithographing, publishing;



      (18)   Radiator shop;



      (19)   Radio or television broadcasting station;



      (20)   Radio and television repair;



      (21)   Refrigeration and air conditioning repair and service;



      (22)   Taxidermist;



      (23)   Veterinarian provided all kennels are inside the
building; and



      (24)   Wholesaling and warehousing (including storage garage).



   (C)   Manufacturing -



      (1)   Assembly or repair of small electrical and electronic
equipment;



      (2)   Book binding;



      (3)   Bottling plants;



      (4)   Cabinet or carpenter shops;



      (5)   Ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay
and fired in kilns only using electricity or gas;



      (6)   Custom furniture shops;



      (7)   Furniture upholstery shops, custom retail work;



      (8)   Laboratories, research only;



      (9)   Light hand assembly of previously prepared components:



         (a)   Fishing rod manufacturing; and



         (b)   Garment and drapery manufacturing, etc.



      (10)   Light metal fabrication, i.e., sheet metal, wrought
iron, etc.;



      (11)   Jewelry manufacturing;



      (12)   Machine shops having no punch presses over five tons or
drop hammers;



      (13)   Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or
treatment of products such as:



         (a)   Bakery goods;



         (b)   Candy;



         (c)   Cosmetics;



         (d)   Dairy products;



         (e)   Drugs;



         (f)   Fruit and vegetables (packaging only and excluding
odiferous processes);



         (g)   Honey extraction;



         (h)   Perfume; and



         (i)   Toiletries.



      (14)   Manufacturing and maintenance of electric neon signs;



      (15)   Rubber and metal stamps; and



      (16)   Welding shops.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-86.3)  (Ord. No. 1503, 2313, 2864)



SEC. 16-163.  RELATED USES.



   The following uses are permitted only on approval of a special use
permit as provided in sections 16-530 through 16-553:



   (A)   Adult day care facilities;



   (B)   Bars;



   (C)   Caretaker’s residence provided in connection with an
industrial use;



   (D)   Children’s day care facility serving more than 15 children;



   (E)   Churches;



   (F)   Emergency shelters, permanent;



   (G)   Farmworker housing;



   (H)   Mini-warehouses subject to the development standards stated in
the special use permit;



   (I)   Motels;



   (J)   Pawnshops;



   (K)   Restaurants;



   (L)   Retail lumber yard, including incidental mill work but not
including planing mill, with any outdoor storage areas determined by the
special use permit approval body;



   (M)   Supportive housing;



   (N)   Transitional housing; and



   (O)   Wholesale meat cutting and packing, provided there shall be no
slaughtering, fat rendering or smoke curing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-86.4)  (Ord. No. 1503, 1564, 2847, 2864)



SEC. 16-164.  PROHIBITED USES.



   The following uses are prohibited in the C-M zone:



   (A)   Residential uses, except as permitted in sections 16-162 and
16-163. Existing residential uses shall be considered to be nonconforming
uses;



   (B)   Conversion of dwellings to commercial manufacturing uses;



   (C)   Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses at the
same time on a lot or in any structure thereon;



   (D)   Trailer parks or mobile home parks that rent to transients;



   (E)   Advertising structures other than those permitted in article
IX of this chapter;



   (F)   Cannabis-related uses, including manufacturing, compounding,
processing, packaging and/or treatment of products containing cannabis or
cannabis components; and



   (G)   Any commercial use not specifically permitted by sections
16-162 or 16-163.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-86.5)  (Ord. No. 1503, 2864, 2929)



SEC. 16-165.  LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Every building in a C-M zone shall be so constructed,
machinery and equipment shall be so installed and maintained, and activities
shall be so conducted, that all noise, vibrations, dust, odor and other
objectionable factors shall be confined or reduced to the extent that no
annoyance or injury will result to persons residing in the vicinity. 
Whenever there is any difficulty in determining the application of these
provisions to any specific case, the building official shall make such
determination.



   (B)   Open storage of materials and equipment shall be permitted in
a C-M zone only when incidental to the use of an office, store, or
manufacturing building located on the front portion of the same lot and
provided that:



      (1)   Storage is located on the rear one-half of the lot and
is confined to an area not to exceed 3,000 square feet;



      (2)   Storage is completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence
with necessary solid gates, not less than six feet in height; and



      (3)   No material is stored to a height greater than that of
the wall or fence enclosing the storage area.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-86.6)  (Ord. No. 1503)



SEC. 16-166.  HEIGHT PERMITTED.



   No building in a C-M zone shall exceed two stories or 35 feet in
height, provided, however, that multi-story structures exceeding 35 feet may
be permitted if approved by a special use permit issued as provided in
sections 16-530 through 16-553.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-86.7)  (Ord. No. 1503)



SEC. 16-167.  LOT AREA.



   Commercial and light manufacturing lots created after January 1, 1974,
shall have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-86.8)  (Ord. No. 1503)



SEC. 16-168.  FRONT YARD.



   Lots in the C-M zone having frontage on one side of the street between
two intersecting streets need no front yard.  If a lot having frontage on
one side of the street between two intersecting streets is located in the C-M
zone and R zone, the front yard requirement for the R zone shall apply to the
C-M zone.  If a front yard is required in the C-M zone, the yard shall be
landscaped and maintained, except for approved driveways and walkways and no
parking shall be permitted in this area.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-86.9)  (Ord. No. 1503)



SEC. 16-169.  SIDE YARD.



   If a lot in a C-M zone abuts upon the side of a lot in an R zone, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet.  If a reversed corner lot
rears upon a lot in an R zone, the side yard on the street side of the
reversed corner lot shall be not less than 50 percent of the front yard
required on the lots in the rear of such corner lot.  In all other cases, a
side yard for a C-M building shall not be required.  If a street side yard
is required in the case of a reversed corner lot, the area shall be
landscaped and maintained except for approved driveways and walkways and no
parking shall be permitted in this area.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-86.10)  (Ord. No. 1503)



SEC. 16-170.  REAR YARD.



   A rear yard of not less than 20 percent of the depth of the lot shall
be provided in a C-M zone; provided that such rear yard need not exceed 20
feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-86.11)  (Ord. No. 1503)



DIVISION 12.  BRP BUSINESS AND RESEARCH PARK ZONE



SEC. 16-175.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The BRP Business and Research Park Zone is intended to provide areas
for a limited group of professional, administrative and high technology
research and manufacturing uses along with limited commercial activities
intended to support such uses.  Such uses shall be integrated into campus
business/research park environments that are oriented toward major
transportation elements such as freeways, expressways, airports, and harbors,
and shall be developed to high property and development design standards. 
The Business and Research Park Zone designation may be applied to any area
designated as specialized commercial or limited industrial in the general
plan and in proximity to the major transportation elements cited herein. 
The Business and Research Park Zone also may be applied to other areas with a
general plan industrial land use category when the sites are located in
proximity to such major transportation elements.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-5.3.1)  (Ord. No. 1996, 2129)



SEC. 16-176.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following description of permitted uses is illustrative of the
types of uses which shall be permitted in a BRP zone and is not intended to
be exclusive:



   (A)   Services -



      (1)   Research, development, and clinical laboratories and
uses including associated incidental out-patient clinics;



      (2)   Printing, photocopying, and blueprinting services;



      (3)   Photographic studios and services;



      (4)   Administrative, financial, professional, medical, and
general office services;



      (5)   Restaurants and delicatessens;



      (6)   Business furniture, supplies, and equipment sales;



      (7)   Computer and business machine sales and service;



      (8)   Stationery and card sales;



      (9)   Florists;



      (10)   Medical products sales;



      (11)   Distribution, warehousing and wholesaling;



      (12)   Aircraft sales;



      (13)   Trade schools, public and private schools and colleges;



      (14)   Automobile rental agencies;



      (15)   Adult motels;



      (16)   Adult day care facilities; and



      (17)   Similar uses as determined by the director.



   (B)   Manufacture and assembly - Manufacture, fabrication, testing
and assembly of components, systems, devices, and consumer goods, including
but not limited to:



      (1)   Electrical and electronic instruments, devices and
components;



      (2)   Ceramics, glass and jewelry;



      (3)   Light metal consumer appliances, garments and products;



      (4)   Plastic, ceramic and fabric products;



      (5)   Precise instruments; and



      (6)   Similar uses as determined by the director.



   (C)   Other uses -



      (1)   Industrial medical facilities;



      (2)   Employee recreation and food service facilities;



      (3)   Agricultural uses;



      (4)   Day care facilities for the children of employees on the
site; and



      (5)   Community park.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-5.3.2)  (Ord. No. 1996, 2313, 2377)



SEC. 16-177.  RELATED USES.



   The following uses are permitted only on approval of a special use
permit as provided in sections 16-530 through 16-553:



   (A)   Drive-through services;



   (B)   On-site alcohol sales;



   (C)   On-site caretaker residence;



   (D)   Automobile service stations;



   (E)   Public utility and municipal facilities;



   (F)   Convenience markets and drugstores;



   (G)   Ambulance service;



   (H)   Motels, hotels, and convention facilities;



   (I)   Hospitals and private emergency medical facilities;



   (J)   Children's day care facility serving more than 15 children;



   (K)   Uses otherwise permitted which may require incidental outdoor
storage;



   (L)   Commercial, service, research and manufacturing uses which are
compatible with enumerated conditionally permitted uses and which are
consistent with the intent of this zone district, unless specifically
prohibited by section 16-178;



   (M)   (1)   Specialized commercial retail centers oriented toward
major transportation elements such as freeways, expressways, and other major
transportation corridors.  Specialized commercial uses include promotional,
discount, factory outlet, and off-price shopping centers, as well as centers
that are tourist-oriented or oriented to other specialized markets. 
Specialized commercial uses may also include general commercial uses in
special or unique settings.



      (2)   An application for a special use permit for a use
described in subdivision (M)(1) shall not be deemed complete until the
application is reviewed by the city council for the purpose of providing
preliminary suggestions and recommendations about the project to the
applicant.  Such an application shall be scheduled for such review by the
city council within 15 days of the date that both the site plan and building
elevations are determined by city staff to be adequate.



   (N)   Churches.



   (O)   Residential care facilities for the elderly when compatible
with the surrounding land uses.



   (P)   Senior and/or senior assisted living residential facility.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-5.3.3)  (Ord. No. 1996, 2282, 2335, 2878, 2896)



SEC. 16-178.  PROHIBITED USES.



   The following uses are prohibited in the BRP Zone:



   (A)   Residential uses other than caretakers and senior and/or
senior assisted living residential facility;



   (B)   Commercial retail sales other than those permitted or
conditionally permitted in this district;



   (C)   Mini-warehouses;



   (D)   Manufacturing processes involving explosive or hazardous
materials;



   (E)   Outdoor storage or assembly;



   (F)   Outdoor advertising signs (billboards);



   (G)   Scrap metal processing facility;



   (H)   Automobile or truck service not in conjunction with an
automobile service station; and



   (I)   Cannabis-related uses, including the growing of cannabis and
the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging and/or treatment of
products containing cannabis or cannabis components.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-5.3.4)  (Ord. No. 1996. 2896, 2929)



SEC. 16-179.  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Minimum lot area:  20,000 square feet.



   (B)   Minimum lot width:



      (1)   Interior lots:  100 feet.



      (2)   Corner lots:  150 feet.



   (C)   Minimum lot depth:  150 feet.



   (D)   Maximum building height:  35 feet (additional by CUP).



   (E)   Front yard setback:  30 feet, 40 feet when abutting a
thoroughfare.



   (F)   Side yard setback:  equal to height of building unless
otherwise permitted by a CUP.



   (G)   Rear yard setback:  20 feet.



   (H)   Minimum setback from residential zone:  100 feet.



   (I)   Maximum building lot coverage:  40 percent.



   (J)   Minimum zoning district size composed of contiguous lots,
exclusive of streets:  20 acres.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-5.3.5)  (Ord. No. 1996)



SEC. 16-180.  DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS/SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Architectural design standards -



      (1)   Metal buildings shall not be permitted.



      (2)   A minimum of two types of building texture or materials,
exclusive of window glazing and frames, shall be provided on all building
elevations having exposure to public streets or residential areas.



      (3)   All roof structure and mechanical equipment shall be
completely screened from abutting public roadways and residential areas.
Screening elements shall be integrated with main structural and architectural
features of the structure.



   (B)   Site design standards -



      (1)   No parking areas shall be permitted within 20 feet of
any residential zone.



      (2)   The minimum dimension of the landscape area along any
street shall be 30 feet.  An average of 30 feet may be approved by site plan
review.



      (3)   All activities shall be conducted within a building
except as otherwise permitted by a conditional use permit.



   (C)   Landscaping - All landscaping shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.  Vegetation
sizes and types shall be in accordance with the adopted guidelines for
commercial and industrial projects.  In addition to these requirements, the
following shall apply:



      (1)   All parking areas shall be screened from public streets
by a minimum 36-inch high landscape berm or a combination of a 36-inch high
wall and landscaping.



      (2)   All backflow prevention systems shall be screened by
landscaping.



      (3)   A minimum of 15 percent of the lot area shall be
landscaped in addition to any required parking lot landscaping.



   (D)   Utility service and structure -



      (1)   Where required by the code, all off-site utility service
shall be placed underground.  All on-site utility service shall be placed
underground.



      (2)   All aboveground utility structures shall be screened on
all sides by landscaping or a structural element which matches the
architectural features of the primary structure.



   (E)   Lighting - All on-site lighting systems shall use
architectural standards and devices that provide down-lighting and lighting
that is shielded from abutting public streets, residential areas, or
adjoining properties.



   (F)   Walls and fences -



      (1)   A minimum six-foot high wall shall be required where any
BRP zone directly abuts a residential zone.  Such a wall may be required on
a residential property line where a BRP zone lies across a public roadway
from a residential zone.



      (2)   Where required or provided, walls and fences shall be
finished in textures and/or colors to match architectural features of the
primary structure.  Landscaping shall abut any exterior building wall where
there is no penetration for loading or building entry.



   (G)   Parking and access -



      (1)   The quantity and size of vehicle parking spaces and the
provision of on-site circulation for uses in the BRP zone shall be in
accordance with this chapter.



      (2)   Curb cuts and site access shall be in accordance with
adopted standards.



      (3)   Parking for marked service vehicles related to the
on-site uses shall be provided in addition to and exclusive of required
employee parking.



   (H)   On-site advertising signs - The placement and size of building
and monument signs shall be in accordance with the code.  Where freestanding
signs are permitted by the code, a monument sign of no more than six feet in
height shall be allowed.



   (I)   Refuse enclosures and containment -



      (1)   All uses on individual lots shall provide refuse
containers and enclosures in accordance with adopted public works department
standards.  All solid masonry or concrete enclosures shall be finished in
textures and/or colors to match the major architectural features of the
primary structure.



      (2)   (a)   The storage of combustible materials shall not
occur within 20 feet of any lot line and shall be separate from the storage
of normal refuse.



         (b)   Access to such storage areas shall be subject to
the approval of the fire department.



      (3)   All refuse containment areas shall be maintained in a
sanitary manner and enclosures and gates shall be maintained in good
condition.



   (J)   Loading and outdoor storage areas -



      (1)   Loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with this
chapter.



      (2)   (a)   Where entries or docks are provided exclusively
for loading and unloading purposes such loading dock areas, ramps, and
entries shall be screened from any public roadway or residential area by a
solid wall, or fence and landscaping.



         (b)   Such wall or fence shall not be less than eight
feet in height.



      (3)   Where permitted, outdoor storage areas shall be enclosed
by a solid wall, or fence and landscaping of not less than eight feet in
height.



      (4)   Solid screening and enclosure walls or fences shall be
constructed of materials, textures and colors to match or compliment the
architectural features of the primary structure.



      (5)   All loading areas or spaces shall be a minimum of 50
feet from any residential zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-5.3.6)  (Ord. No. 1996)



SEC. 16-181.  DEVELOPMENT DESIGN REVIEW.



   Prior to the issuance of building permits for buildings or structures
for uses which do not require a special use permit or other zoning permit as
required by this chapter, an administrative permit for development design
review shall be approved by the director pursuant to section 16-525.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-5.3.7)  (Ord. No. 1996)



SEC. 16-182.  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   All development within the BRP zone shall comply with provisions
regarding performance standards for the conduct and operation of uses within
the zone as set forth in sections 16-203 through 16-214.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-5.3.8)  (Ord. No. 1996)



DIVISION 13.  M-L LIMITED MANUFACTURING ZONE



SEC. 16-185.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The M-L Limited Manufacturing zone is intended to provide
areas suitable for adult businesses, permanent and temporary emergency
shelters and emergency shelters for families to provide housing pursuant to
statutory requirements, and for the development and protection of restricted
manufacturing uses and activities involving a high level of performance and
site development. Uses may include adult businesses, unobtrusive
administrative, wholesaling, warehousing and manufacturing activities and
scientific research offices and laboratories, including certain accessory
facilities necessary to serve the employees of such uses located in the zone.
The development and performance standards of this division will enhance views
from major transportation routes and assure a high-quality environment
compatible with surrounding and abutting residential zones.



   (B)   Manufacturing uses shall be limited to the fabrication,
assembly, compounding, processing or packaging of materials in a processed
form that do not, in their maintenance, assembly or packaging, create
obnoxious or offensive smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, vibration, soot or
lighting.



   (C)   In order to avoid reduction of the city’s industrial base
and to protect industrial land and improvements from encroaching upon
incompatible uses or uses more properly suited to other districts,
residential and commercial uses except as provided herein, are not permitted
in the limited manufacturing zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-87)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2313, 2864)



SEC. 16-186.  SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   No new development or substantial enlargement of any existing
structure shall be permitted in the M-L zone until the commission has granted
a special use permit as provided in section 16-530 through 16-553. 
“Substantial” shall mean any enlargement which increases the existing
floor space by more than 25 percent, or by 20,000 square feet, whichever
amount is less.



   (B)   An application for a special use permit shall include:



      (1)   A site plan of the property showing all property lines,
existing and proposed building locations, parking areas, sign locations,
trash enclosures, walls, landscaped areas and plant screening areas.  The
site plan shall be properly dimensioned and shall include the topography of
the property and topographic features within 50 feet of all property boundary
lines, easements, abutting streets, highways and freeways, and any other
additional data necessary to determine compliance with the requirements of
this zone.



      (2)   Elevation plans for all structures, including buildings,
signs and walls or solid fences, showing the height and lateral dimensions,
complete floor plans, including room labeling and dimensions, and a
material/color board, showing color samples and material samples of the
exterior of all structures including roofing, window glass and signs.



      (3)   A landscape plan showing the location and dimensions of
all landscaped or planted areas.  The landscape plan shall include the
design or method for watering and shall identify all plant species, including
size and spacing of plants.  Where landscaped areas serve as screening,
these areas shall be clearly identified.



      (4)   If the structure is to be occupied by an industrial use,
a full description of the nature and extent of the proposed use, including
plans describing the proposed treatment of noise, air pollution, sewage and
industrial waste.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-88)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2313)



SEC. 16-186.1.  RELATED USE – SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   The following uses may be permitted in this zone subject to
the approval of a special use permit:  Commercial recreation activities in
freestanding structures or as a freestanding use.



   (B)   A church use shall be allowed in the M-L zone if the
commission has granted a special use permit as provided in sections 16-530
through 16-553.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-89.1.1)  (Ord. No. 2718)



SEC. 16-187.  APPEARANCE.



   In considering an application for a special use permit, the approval
body may require certain designs, textures, colors or architectural
treatments for any building or structures, which in its judgment produce a
harmonious, pleasing and desirable appearance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-88.1)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-188.  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   The following uses illustrate the types of uses permitted in
existing structures in the M-L zone.  Uses listed that do not reasonably
comply with the performance standards of this zone are not permitted.  A
special use permit is required for substantial expansion of any of these uses
or development of these uses in a new structure pursuant to section 16-186
above.



   (B)   The following uses and activities, except for agricultural
crops, shall be within an enclosed building, unless otherwise approved by a
special use permit pursuant to sections 16-530 through 16-553:



      (1)   Adult businesses, as defined in section 16-336, except
adult motels;



      (2)   Agricultural, limited to growing of crops;



      (3)   Adult day care facilities;



      (4)   Farmworker employee housing with up to twelve units or
thirty-six beds in compliance with Health and Safety Code Section 17008(a) in
connection with an agricultural workplace and provided by the employer, or
Health and Safety Code Section 17008(b) for all other situations; or, with
thirteen or more units or thirty-seven or more beds with approval of a
special use permit.



      (5)   Emergency shelters, permanent and temporary, and
emergency shelters for families, except that no special use permit otherwise
required by section 16-186 shall be required for such emergency shelter uses;



      (6)   Manufacturing or fabrication of products, components,
devices, equipment, systems and parts, such as the following:



         (a)   Ceramic products (not including bricks, building
drain or tile);



         (b)   Communication transmission and reception equipment;



         (c)   Control equipment and systems;



         (d)   Data processing equipment and systems;



         (e)   Electrical appliances;



         (f)   Electronic instruments, devices and components;



         (g)   Glass molding, edging, beveling and silvering;



         (h)   Graphics and art equipment;



         (i)   Jewelry, including products from precious or
semiprecious stones or metals;



         (j)   Medical or dental equipment;



         (k)   Metering instruments;



         (l)   Optical devices, equipment and systems; and



         (m)   Photographic equipment and systems.



      (7)   Precision machine shops for producing parts,
accessories, assemblies or components; precision machine shops for
manufacturing, processing, assembling and packaging of products such as:



         (a)   Business machine equipment;



         (b)   Home appliances;



         (c)   Measurement and control devices;



         (d)   Phonograph records and prerecorded audiovisual
tape;



         (e)   Radio and television equipment;



         (f)   Scientific, optical, medical and dental products;
and



         (g)   Sound equipment and supplies, accessories and
products of similar character.



      (8)   Printing and publishing facilities;



      (9)   Product assembly plants and production facilities
primarily engaged in final or partial assembling of packaging of
premanufactured, treated or fabricated components, materials or products;



      (10)   Public service uses, such as electrical distribution
substations, telephone exchanges or communications buildings, post offices,
fire and police stations, local water and natural gas service facilities, and
broadcasting studios;



      (11)   Research and development, experimental or developmental
laboratories, or computer services;



      (12)   Warehousing and distribution facilities, including
mini-warehouses, for the storage of goods or products; and



      (13)   Other similar uses which the director finds are
consistent with the purposes and intent of this zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-89)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2313, 2335, 2718, 2864, 2928)



SEC. 16-189.  CHANGE OR MINOR EXPANSION OF EXISTING USE.



   (A)   An existing use may not be changed to a listed permitted use
to be located in an existing structure until the director determines that the
proposed use is compatible with the M-L zone.  All uses shall be subject to
the performance standards of this division.  However, this subsection (A)
shall not apply to adult businesses or to the change of an existing use to an
adult business to be located in an existing structure.



   (B)   Minor expansion (less than 25 percent) of an existing
structure or minor modification of a legally established use whose expanded
or altered sphere of activity may include uses or operations normally
considered light manufacturing or heavy manufacturing types of uses or
operations, may be permitted if reviewed and approved by the director and the
use or operation after expansion or modification meets the performance
standards established in this division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-89.1)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2313)



SEC. 16-190.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   The following accessory uses are permitted in the M-L zone:



   (A)   Administrative, executive and/or corporate offices which are a
part of a predominantly industrial operation, including governmental offices
and facilities;



   (B)   Cafeterias operated in conjunction with permitted uses for the
convenience of persons employed on the premises;



   (C)   Dwelling unit, one per establishment, for a security or
maintenance person and such person's family, when located on the premises
where such person is employed in such capacity. Except as set forth in
subsection (G), below, no other residential uses are allowed.



   (D)   Employees' recreation facilities and play areas;



   (E)   Employees' children's day care facility, that may serve more
than 15 children;



   (F)   Limited repair operations for products described as permitted
uses and commercial sales and service incidental to a permitted use, provided
such operations are housed as a part of the building or buildings comprising
the basic operation; and



   (G)   Dwelling unit, one per work/live unit that is part of a
work/live development, with a special use permit. Such dwelling unit shall
comply with the following:



      (1)   Each dwelling unit shall meet the requirements for
“efficiency dwelling units”, as set forth in the 1997 Uniform Building
Code at section 310.7 and shall have a maximum superficial floor area that
does not exceed 319 square feet.



      (2)   Each dwelling unit shall have at least one designated
garage parking space for the exclusive use of the resident of the work/live
unit. The work/live development shall also meet the other parking
requirements of sections 16-615 through 16-653 of this code.



      (3)   Each occupied unit shall have an active business license
at all times.



      (4)   The developer shall record a notice of land use
restrictions with the county recorder, or record some other instrument to the
satisfaction of the city attorney, that restricts non-residential uses within
the work/live development to those that do not pose an undue risk to the
health, safety, and welfare of residents, as determined by the planning and
environmental services manager.



      (5)   The planning commission shall determine that the
location of the work/live development is adequately served by
residentially-oriented public and private services so that the quality of
life for the work/live residents is similar to that of the majority of city
residents.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-89.2)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2727)



SEC. 16-191.  PROHIBITED USES.



   The following uses are expressly prohibited in the M-L zone:



   (A)   Commercial retail uses, except for the adult businesses
referred to in section 16-188;



   (B)   Multiple-family dwellings and motels;



   (C)   Single-family dwellings, except as provided in this division;



   (D)   Radio, television and microwave transmission towers;



   (E)   Goods or products that are hazardous, toxic or obnoxious, and
obnoxious industrial uses that adversely affect the environment or exhibit an
unusual degree of hazard; and



   (F)   Cannabis-related uses, including the growing of cannabis and
the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging and/or treatment of
products containing cannabis or cannabis components.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-89.3)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2313, 2929)



SEC. 16-192.  INDUSTRIAL SERVICE CENTERS.



   (A)   Purpose - Limited commercial services within existing or
proposed industrial areas to meet the daily needs of industrial employees
within their work area in the restricted amount of time available during the
journey to work, breaks or lunch periods.



   (B)   Location and size - Locational criteria for establishing
industrial service centers are as follows:



      (1)   Such centers shall not be located within ½-mile of
existing commercial services;



      (2)   An industrial service center shall be centrally located
in an industrial area, or at a location convenient to industrial employees by
means of vehicular and pedestrian traffic from all portions of the industrial
area which it is proposed to serve; and



      (3)   An industrial service center shall be a minimum of one
and a maximum of five acres in size.  The total area of all industrial
service centers in an industrial area shall not exceed 5% of the designated
industrial area unless special circumstances and benefits are shown.



   (C)   Survey -



      (1)   An application for an industrial service center shall
include an objective market survey of the area shall to determine if there is
evidence to support the findings required under subsection (D).  The survey
shall be conducted by a consultant selected by the director.  The applicant
shall make a cash deposit in an amount determined by the director.  The
survey shall be submitted to the special use permit approval body.



      (2)   The survey shall address the ability of an existing or
proposed industrial area to support an industrial service center.



      (3)   A questionnaire shall be prepared and distributed to a
cross-section of employees to reflect the needs and desires of the employees
of the industrial area where an industrial service center is proposed.



   (D)   Findings - In order to grant a special use permit for an
industrial service center, the approval body must find that:



      (1)   The proposed services will assist in meeting the daily
needs of employees within their work area;



      (2)   The proposed services will be subordinate to the primary
purpose of the adjacent industrial zone;



      (3)   The proposed commercial uses will not conflict with the
commercial service uses of neighboring commercial zones; and



      (4)   The proposed location of the industrial service center
has the necessary industrial improvements to support the center.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-89.4)  (Ord. No. 1922, 1941)



SEC. 16-193.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; GENERAL.



   Development standards are required for the purpose of achieving an
orderly arrangement of land, buildings and other structures and providing
necessary amenities for industry.  Development standards are designed to
achieve compatibility among the variety of operations and activities
functioning within the industrial district, create a desirable working
environment for the industrial labor force, and to effect a harmonious
relationship with surrounding nonindustrial properties and the community in
general.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-90)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-194.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; DIVISION OF PROPERTY.



   The development of all industrial uses permitted in the M-L zone shall
take place on legally constituted building sites of record.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-90.1)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-195.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; LOT AREA AND WIDTH.



   (A)   Minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet, exclusive of any
public right-of-way dedicated for road purposes or proposed road purposes.



   (B)   Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet, excepting corner lots,
which shall be 150 feet.



   (C)   Minimum lot depth, measured at right angles to the front
property line, shall be 150 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-90.2)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-196.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; BUILDING HEIGHT LIMIT.



   All buildings and structures shall be limited to a height of 35 feet
except that height limits may be increased one foot for each additional one
foot increase to all of the required building setbacks.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-90.3)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-197.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Front yard setback -



      (1)   All buildings or structures on property adjacent to a
public road shall be set back not less than 20 feet from the property line,
or 30 feet when adjacent to designated thoroughfares, minor thoroughfares, or
the proposed property line, if future public road dedication is required,
whichever is greater.



      (2)   Uses permitted in any required front yard setback area
shall be limited to pedestrian walks, vehicular access drives, meter pits,
signs and utility manholes.



   (B)   Side yard setback -



      (1)   Side yards on interior property lines shall be not less
than the height of the building, except that minimum side yards of 50 feet
shall be required whenever a lot or parcel of land in the M-L zone abuts a
lot or parcel of land in a residential zone or abuts any alley which
separates a M-L zone from any residential zone.  The side yard adjacent to
the public street shall meet the front yard setback requirements.



      (2)   A common building wall with a zero setback (except as
required in subsection (B)(1) above), may be established by a development
plan, which shall provide documentation describing the exchange and
recordation of necessary documents to insure adequate access, parking and
easements to serve the development.



   (C)   Rear yard setback - A rear yard shall be not less than the
height of the building, except that a minimum rear yard of 50 feet shall be
required whenever a lot or parcel of land in the limited manufacturing zone
abuts a lot or parcel in a residential zone or abuts any alley which
separates a limited manufacturing zone from any residential zone.



   (D)   Limitations - Uses permitted in any required side or rear
setback area shall be limited to signs, landscaping, parking, loading and
recreation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-90.4)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-198.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; MAXIMUM COVERAGE.



   The ground floor area of buildings and structures shall not exceed 50%
of the total area of the premises.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-90.5)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-199.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; WALLS.



   (A)   The placement, design and detail of walls shall be included
and indicated on any required project plan.



   (B)   A six-foot solid decorative masonry wall or other type of
visual buffering such as landscaping, architectural treatment, or a
combination thereof, shall be provided and maintained on the boundary of the
M-L zone which abuts or is across a public street or alley from a residential
zone.  Such wall or visual buffering shall be placed in the location shown
on the approved project plan to provide the necessary screening from the
public right-of-way.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-90.8)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-200.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; ACCESS.



   Access to property shall typically be provided from dedicated
industrial collector streets 74 feet in width, to provide access from a major
thoroughfare or private street.  A master circulation plan must be submitted
and approved in compliance with adopted city policies.  Curb cuts to the
property shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width, except as otherwise approved
by a master circulation plan, and shall be located in conformance with the
adopted city curb cut policies.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-90.9)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-201.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   (1)   The landscaping requirements are intended to enhance
and conserve property values by encouraging a pleasant and attractive
environment. 



      (2)   Landscaped areas shall be considered to be areas of
lawn, trees, planter boxes, shrubs, or other planted areas.  Courtyards,
water ponds, fountains, decks, kiosks, walkways and similar items which may
be permitted as part of the landscaped area in the discretion of the
commission.



   (B)   All landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
following standards:



      (1)   A landscape plan shall be required.



      (2)   The entire required front yard setback shall be
landscaped, with the exception of that area provided for vehicles or
pedestrian access.



      (3)   When the development is either behind or beside a
residential zone, or abuts an alley across from residential zone, or abuts
developed residential property, there shall be a landscaped area adjacent to
that residential or developed property line.  The landscaped area shall have
a depth of not less than 15 feet.  Plant materials used for screening
purposes shall consist of compact evergreen plants, together with evergreen
trees.  They shall be of a kind or used in such a manner so as to provide an
opaque screen within 18 months after initial installation.



      (4)   All parking lot landscaping shall be in conformance with
this code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-90.10)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-202.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; UNDERGROUND UTILITIES, LIGHTING, TRASH
ENCLOSURES, TANKS, TRANSFORMERS, ETC.



   (A)   All trash enclosures, lighting, utility lines, including, but
not limited to, electric, communication, street lighting and cable
television, shall be installed in accordance with this code.



   (B)   Appurtenances and associated equipment, including, but not
limited to, tanks, air conditioning units, surface-mounted transformers,
pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, meter cabinets and concealed ducts in an
underground system, may be placed above ground if approved as part of the
project plan and provided that such facilities are adequately screened by
landscaping or other means.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-90.11)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-203.  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS; GENERAL.



   (A)   The maximum permitted levels of operational characteristics
resulting from uses of property shall be called performance standards. 
Continued compliance with the performance standards shall be required of all
uses, except for the adult businesses referred to in section 16-188 and
except as otherwise provided for in this division.



   (B)   Land or buildings shall not be used or occupied in any manner
so as to create any dangerous, noxious, injurious or otherwise objectionable
fire, explosion or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, odor, or
other form of air pollution; electrical disturbance; glare; liquid or solid
refuse or wastes; or other dangerous or objectionable substance, condition,
or element in such a manner or such amount as to adversely affect the
environment or surrounding community as measured from the property line.



   (C)   More restrictive performance standards or regulations enacted
by an authorized governmental agency having jurisdiction of such matters
shall take precedence over the provisions of these regulations.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-91)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2313)



SEC. 16-204.  EXCEPTIONS.



   These regulations do not apply to unexpected brief periods where these
standards are exceeded based upon a reasonable cause, such as equipment
testing, breakdown of equipment, modification or cleaning of equipment, or
other similar reason, when it is evident that such cause was not reasonably
preventable.  These regulations shall not apply to the operation of motor
vehicles or other transportation equipment unless otherwise specified.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-91.1)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-205.  NOISE.



   Baffling or muffling devices or other precautionary means shall be
employed with processes or operations causing objectionable noise
characteristics to prevent their being objectionable when measured at the
property line during normal operation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-91.2)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-206.  SMOKE AND PARTICULATES.



   Visible emissions of smoke shall not exceed Ringlemann No. 1 on the
Ringlemann Chart of the U.S. Bureau of Mines, except for exhausts emitted by
motor vehicles or other transportation facilities.  This requirement shall
also be applicable to the disposal of trash and waste materials.  Windborne
dust, dirt, fly ash, airborne solids, sprays and mists (except water vapor)
originating from any use will not be permitted.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-91.3)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-207.  TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER.



   Toxic gases or noxious matter which can cause any damage to health, to
animals, vegetation or other forms of property, or which can cause any
excessive soiling beyond the lot lines of the use shall not be emitted.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-91.4)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-208.  ODIFEROUS MATTER.



   Operations, processes or products shall not emit odors that are
detectable at any point beyond the property line.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-91.5)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-209.  GLARE OR HEAT.



   Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within
an enclosed or screened area in such a manner that the glare or heat emitted
will not be discernable from the property line.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-91.6)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-210.  VIBRATION.



   Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration generated by
the use is not harmful or injurious to the use of the surrounding
properties.  No vibration shall be permitted which is perceptible without
instruments at any point along the property line on which said use is located.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-91.7)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-211.  ELECTRICITY AND RADIOACTIVITY.



   (A)   No activity shall be permitted which causes electrical
disturbances affecting the operation of any equipment located beyond the
property line of such activity.  In no event shall radioactivity, when
measured at each lot line, be in excess of 2.7 x 10.11 microcuries per
milliliter of air at any moment of time.



   (B)   Radio and television transmitters shall be operated at the
regularly assigned wave lengths (or within the authorized tolerances thereof)
as assigned by the appropriate governmental agency.  Subject to such
exception, such transmitters shall be suitably wired, shielded and controlled
so that in operation they shall not emit any electrical impulses or waves
beyond the lot lines which shall adversely affect the operation and control
of any domestic household equipment or any other electronic devices and
equipment.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-91.8)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-212.  LIQUID AND SOLID WASTES.



   Liquid or solid wastes discharged from the premises shall be properly
treated prior to discharge so as not to contaminate or pollute any
watercourse or groundwater supply or interfere with bacterial processes in
sewage treatment.  Such operations shall comply with authorized governmental
health and safety regulations of agencies having jurisdiction over such
disposal activities.  The disposal or dumping of solid wastes, such as slag,
paper or fiber wastes, or other industrial wastes, shall not be permitted on
any premises unless otherwise provided for in this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-91.9)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-213.  FIRE AND EXPLOSIVE HAZARDS.



   (A)   All activities involving the use or storage of combustible,
flammable or explosive materials shall be in compliance with nationally
recognized standards, and shall be provided with adequate firefighting and
fire-suppression equipment and devices in compliance with the current edition
of the National Fire Protection Association regulations. 



   (B)   Burning of waste materials in open fires is prohibited.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-91.10)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-214.  MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.



   All mechanical equipment or electrical equipment shall be completely
screened behind a permanent structure or landscaping, and all rooftop
mechanical equipment shall be placed behind a permanent parapet wall or be
completely screened from all view.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-91.11)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-215.  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made for
any new use, except for the adult businesses referred to in section 16-188 or
expansion of land or buildings permitted in section 16-189.  The building
official may issue the certificate only after approval of the new buildings
and use by the director.



   (B)   Any subsequent modification, change or changes in the use
permitted by a certificate of occupancy shall occur only after the holder of
such certificate has obtained an amendment from the building official and
director allowing such change or changes.



   (C)   A certificate of occupancy for a use of the land in the M-L
zone may be revoked by the city council after a public hearing, if the city
council finds that the holder of the certificate has failed to comply with
the approved special use permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-92)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2313)



DIVISION 14.  M-1 LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE



SEC. 16-220.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The M-1 Light Manufacturing Zone is intended to provide areas
suitable for adult businesses and for manufacturing and related service uses
and activities that can be made compatible with each other and with
surrounding uses and activities by conformance to the development and
performance standards of this division.



   (B)   Industrial uses in the zone shall be limited to those that
conduct fabrication, manufacturing, assembly or processing of materials
(including agricultural produce) primarily within a building.  The
development and performance standards of this division will limit the
creation of smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound and vibration that might be
detrimental to health, safety and welfare.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-94)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2313)



SEC. 16-221.  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   The following uses are illustrative of the types of uses that
are permitted in the light manufacturing zone.  Uses listed that do not
reasonably comply with the performance standards of this zone are not
permitted.



   (B)   Storage and ancillary activities may be conducted outside if
adequately screened from view and approved by a special use permit.



   (C)   The following uses and activities, except for agricultural
crops, shall be conducted within an enclosed building unless otherwise
approved by a special use permit:



      (1)   M-L uses - Any use permitted in the M-L (Limited
Manufacturing) zone.



      (2)   Manufacturing -



         (a)   Aircraft modification, storage, repair and
maintenance;



         (b)   Automobile assembly or repair, including engine
overhaul, body and fender work, transmission and radiator repair, painting
and upholstering;



         (c)   Boat building and repair;



         (d)   Bookbinding;



         (e)   Bottling plants;



         (f)   Ceramic products, using only previously pulverized
clay and fired in a kiln using only electricity or gas;



         (g)   Garments;



         (h)   Machinery and shop (no punch presses over 20 tons
or drop hammers), including:



            (i)   Blacksmith shops;



            (ii)   Cabinet or carpenter shops;



            (iii)   Electric motor rebuilding;



            (iv)   Machine shops;



            (v)   Sheet metal shops;



            (vi)   Welding shops; and



            (vii)   Manufacturing, compounding, assembly or
treatment of articles or merchandise from previously prepared metals.



         (i)   Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging
or treatment of such products as:



            (i)   Bakery goods;



            (ii)   Candy;



            (iii)   Cosmetics;



            (iv)   Dairy products;



            (v)   Drugs;



            (vi)   Food products (excluding fish and meat
products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast and the rendering of fats and oils);



            (vii)   Fruits and vegetables (packing only);



            (viii)   Honey extraction plant;



            (xi)   Perfume; and



            (x)   Toiletries.



         (j)   Manufacturing, compounding assembly or treatment
of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials:



            (i)   Canvas;



            (ii)   Cellophane;



            (iii)   Cloth;



            (iv)   Cork;



            (v)   Felt;



            (vi)   Fiber;



            (vii)   Fur;



            (viii)   Glass;



            (ix)   Leather;



            (x)   Paper, no milling;



            (xi)   Precious or semiprecious stones or metals;



            (xii)   Plaster;



            (xiii)   Plastic;



            (xiv)   Shells;



            (xv)   Textiles;



            (xvi)   Tobacco;



            (xvii)   Wood; and



            (xviii)   Yarn.



         (k)   Manufacturing and maintenance of electric or neon
signs;



         (l)   Novelties;



         (m)   Petroleum bulk plants;



         (n)   Planing mills;



         (o)   Printing shops, lithographing, publishing;



         (p)   Lumber;



         (q)   Rubber and metal stamps;



         (r)   Shoes;



         (s)   Stone monuments;



         (t)   Indoor storage, including:



            (i)   Contractor's storage;



            (ii)   Draying and freight;



            (iii)   Feed and fuel;



            (iv)   Machinery rental;



            (v)   Motion picture studio storage;



            (vi)   Transit storage;



            (vii)   Trucking terminal, except freight
classification; and



            (viii)   Impounded or salvaged vehicles, which may
be associated with a towing service business.



         (u)   Textiles;



         (v)   Wholesaling and warehousing.



      (3)   Processing -



         (a)   Creameries;



         (b)   Laboratories;



         (c)   Blueprinting and photocopying;



         (d)   Laundries;



         (e)   Carpet and rug cleaning plants;



         (f)   Cleaning and dyeing plants; and



         (g)   Tire retreading, recapping and rebuilding.



      (4)   Fabrication -



         (a)   Rubber, fabrication of products made from finished
rubber;



         (b)   Assembly of small electrical and electronic
equipment; and



         (c)   Assembly of plastic items made from finished
plastic.



      (5)   Service uses -



         (a)   Equipment rental or sale;



         (b)   Farm equipment sales and service;



         (c)   Ice and cold storage plants or frozen food lockers;



         (d)   Kennels, including animal hospitals and shelters;
and



         (e)   Towing service businesses, including tow truck
parking lot and tow truck service.



      (6)   Public service uses -



         (a)   Communication equipment buildings;



         (b)   Electrical transmission and distribution
substations;



         (c)   Public utility service yards with incidental
buildings;



         (d)   Fire and police stations;



         (e)   Water and natural gas service facilities;



         (f)   Radio and television broadcasting studios and
facilities; and



         (g)   Off-street parking.



      (7)   Other uses -



         (a)   Adult businesses, as defined in section 16-336,
except adult motels;



         (b)   Agriculture, limited to growing of crops;



         (c)   Corporate training and professional development
facilities including ancillary outdoor activities;



         (d)   Offices incidental to and directly related to and
serving a permitted use; and



         (e)   Other similar uses that the planning and
environmental services manager finds to be consistent with the purpose and
intent of this zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-95)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2313, 2580, 2644, 2680)



SEC. 16-222.  CHANGE OR MINOR EXPANSION OF EXISTING USE.



   (A)   An existing use may not be changed to a permitted use to be
located in an existing structure until the planning and environmental
services manager determines that the proposed use is compatible with the
zone.  All uses shall be subject to the performance standards of this
division. However, this subsection (A) shall not apply to adult businesses or
to the change of an existing use to an adult business to be located in an
existing structure.



   (B)   Minor expansion (less than 25%) of an existing structure or
minor modification of a legally established use, when the expanded or altered
sphere of activity may include uses or operations normally considered to be
of the heavy manufacturing type, shall be permitted provided the planning and
environmental services manager determines that the use or operation after
expansion or modification meets the performance standards of this division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-95.1)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2580)



SEC. 16-223.  SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   No new development of structures or outdoor uses or
substantial enlargement of any existing structure is permitted in the light
manufacturing zone until the planning commission has granted a special use
permit in accordance with this chapter.  “Substantial” means any
enlargement that increases existing floor space by more than 25%, or by
20,000 square feet, whichever amount is less.



   (B)   The applicant for a special use permit for such purposes shall
submit the following documents and information, together with any additional
documents and information required by the planning and environmental services
manager:



      (1)   A site plan of the property, showing all property lines,
existing and proposed building locations, parking areas, sign locations,
trash enclosures, walls, landscaped areas and plant screening areas.  The
site plan shall be properly dimensioned and shall include the topography of
the property and topographic features within 50 feet of all property boundary
lines, easements, abutting streets, highways and freeways.



      (2)   Elevation plans for all structures, including buildings,
signs, walls and solid fences, showing the height and lateral dimensions.



      (3)   Complete floor plans for all structures, including room
labeling and dimensions.



      (4)   A materials and colors board containing materials and
color samples of the exterior of all structures, including roofing, window
glass and signs.



      (5)   A landscape plan showing the location and dimensions of
all landscaped or planted areas, including the design or method for watering,
and identifying all plant species, including size and spacing of plants. 
Landscaped areas serving as screening shall be clearly identified.



      (6)   If a structure is to be occupied by an industrial use, a
full description of the nature and extent of the proposed use, including
plans describing the proposed treatment of noise, air pollution, sewage and
industrial waste.



      (7)   If outdoor storage of impounded or salvaged vehicles is
proposed, a plan for clean-up, containment and removal of any hazardous
fluids or materials that may leak from vehicles shall be provided.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-96)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2313, 2580)



SEC. 16-224.  APPEARANCE.



   In granting a special use permit, the commission may require certain
designs, textures, colors, architectural treatments or landscaping for any
building or structure in order to produce a harmonious, pleasing and
desirable appearance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-96.1)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2313, 2580)



SEC. 16-225.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   The following are accessory uses permitted in the light manufacturing
zone:



   (A)   Dwelling units, limited to one per establishment, for security
or maintenance personnel and their families, when located on the premises
where such personnel are employed in such capacity.  No other residential
use shall be permitted;



   (B)   Employees' recreation facilities and play areas;



   (C)   Cafeterias, when operated in conjunction with permitted uses,
for the convenience of persons employed on the premises;



   (D)   Employees’ children’s day care facility serving more than
15 children;



   (E)   Commercial sales and services, providing such activities are
incorporated as part of the primary industrial use and housed within the same
building or buildings as the basic operation; and



   (F)   Wine tasting and café use, in conjunction with a wine
manufacturing facility, with approval of a special use permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-96.2)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2644)



SEC. 16-226.  PROHIBITED USES.



   The following uses are expressly prohibited in the light manufacturing
zone:



   (A)   Single-family dwellings, except as provided in section 16-225;



   (B)   Multiple-family dwellings, hotels and motels;



   (C)   Commercial retail uses, except for the adult businesses
referred to in section 16-221 and except as provided in section 16-223;



   (D)   Obnoxious industrial uses, which adversely affect the
environment or which exhibit an unusual degree of hazard;



   (E)   Off-site nonaccessory signs or billboards;



   (F)   Work/live uses; and



   (G)   Cannabis-related uses, including the growing of cannabis and
the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging and/or treatment of
products containing cannabis or cannabis components.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-96.3)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2313, 2727, 2929)



SEC. 16-227.  INDUSTRIAL SERVICE CENTERS.



   Industrial service centers may be established pursuant to the
provisions of section 16-192.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-96.4)  (Ord. No. 1922, 1941)



SEC. 16-228.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS REQUIRED.



   Development standards are required for the purpose of achieving an
orderly arrangement of land, buildings and other structures and providing
necessary amenities for industry which exhibit attractive and pleasant
characteristics.  Development standards are designed to achieve
compatibility among the variety of operations and activities functioning
within the industrial district, to create a desirable working environment for
the industrial labor force, and to effect a harmonious relationship with
surrounding nonindustrial properties and the community in general.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-97)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-229.  BUILDING SITES.



   The development of all industrial uses permitted in the M-1 zone shall
take place on legally constituted building sites of record within the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-97.1)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-230.  LOT AREA AND WIDTH.



   (A)   Minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet, exclusive of any
public right-of-way dedicated for road purposes or proposed road purposes.



   (B)   Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet, except corner lots, which
shall be 150 feet.



   (C)   Minimum lot depth, measured at right angles to the front
property line, shall be 150 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-97.2)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-231.  BUILDING HEIGHT LIMIT.



   All buildings and structures shall be limited to a height of 55 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-97.3)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-232.  MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Front yard setback -



      (1)   All buildings or structures on property adjacent to a
public road shall be set back not less than 10 feet from the property line,
or 20 feet when adjacent to designated thoroughfares, minor thoroughfares, or
the proposed property line, if future public road dedication is required,
whichever is greater.



      (2)   Pedestrian walks, vehicular access drives, meter pits,
signs and utility manholes may be located in any required front yard.



   (B)   Side yard setback -



      (1)   No side yard setback shall be required along interior
property lines where the abutting zoning is M-1 or M-2.  Whenever a lot or
parcel of land in the light manufacturing zone abuts a lot or parcel of land
in a residential zone or abuts an alley which separates a light manufacturing
zone from any residential zone, the setback requirement for the residential
zone shall apply.  The side yard adjacent to a public street shall meet the
front yard setback requirements.



      (2)   A common building wall with a zero setback may be
established by a project plan which shall provide documentation describing
the exchange and recordation of necessary documents to ensure adequate
access, parking, and easements to serve the development.



   (C)   Rear yard setback - A rear yard shall be not less than the
height of the building, except that a minimum rear yard of 30 feet shall be
required whenever a lot or parcel of land in the light manufacturing zone
abuts a lot or parcel in a residential zone or abuts an alley which separates
a light manufacturing zone from any residential zone.



   (D)   Uses permitted in required setback areas - Uses permitted in
any required front setback area shall be limited to signs and landscaping. 
Uses permitted in any other required setback area shall be limited to signs,
parking, landscaping, recreational, loading and outside storage uses, where
such storage is adequately screened and approved by a special use permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-97.4)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-233.  MAXIMUM COVERAGE.



   The ground floor area of buildings and structures shall not exceed 70
percent of the total area of the premises.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-97.5)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-234.  WALLS.



   (A)   The placement, design and detail of walls shall be included
and indicated on any required project plan.



   (B)   A six-foot solid decorative masonry wall or other type of
visual buffering, such as landscaping, architectural treatment, or
combination thereof, shall be provided and maintained on the boundary of the
light manufacturing zone which abuts or is across a public street or alley
from a residential zone.  On the front or side front portion of the
property, the wall or visual buffering shall be placed in a location as shown
on the approved project plan to provide the necessary screening from the
public right-of-way.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-97.8)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-235.  ACCESS.



   (A)   Access to property shall typically be provided from dedicated
industrial collector streets 74 feet in width, to provide access from a major
thoroughfare or private street.  A master circulation plan must be submitted
and approved in compliance with adopted city policies.



   (B)   Curb cuts to the property shall be a minimum of 30 feet in
width, except as otherwise approved by a master circulation plan, and shall
be located in conformance with the adopted city curb cut policies.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-97.9)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-236.  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   The purpose of the landscaping requirements shall be to
enhance, conserve and stabilize property values by encouraging a pleasant and
attractive environment.  Landscaped areas shall be considered those areas of
lawn, trees, planter boxes, shrubs or other plants.  Courtyards, water
ponds, fountains, decks, kiosks, walkways and similar areas may be permitted
as part of the landscaped area in the discretion of the commission.



   (B)   All landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
following standards:



      (1)   A landscape plan shall be required.



      (2)   The entire front yard setback shall be landscaped, with
the exception of that area provided for vehicles or pedestrian access.



      (3)   When the industrial development is either behind or
beside a residential zone, or where the light manufacturing zone abuts an
alley or developed property, there shall be a landscaped area adjacent to
that residential or developed property line.  The landscaped area shall have
a depth of not less than ten feet.  Plant materials used for the screen
shall consist of compact evergreen plants, together with evergreen trees. 
They shall be of a kind or used in such a manner so as to provide an opaque
screen within 18 months after initial installation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-97.10)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-237.  UNDERGROUND UTILITIES, LIGHTING, TRASH ENCLOSURES.



   (A)   All trash enclosures, on-site lighting, and utility lines,
including, but not limited to, electric, communication, street lighting and
cable television, shall be installed in accordance with this code.



   (B)   Appurtenances and associated equipment, including, but not
limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes,
meter cabinets and concealed ducts in an underground system, may be placed
above ground if approved as part of the project plan and provided that such
facilities are adequately screened by landscaping or other means.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-97.11)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-238.  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   The maximum permitted levels of operational characteristics
resulting from uses of property shall be called performance standards. 
Continued compliance with the performance standards shall be required of all
uses, except for the adult businesses referred to in section 16-221 and
except as otherwise provided for in this division.



   (B)   Land or buildings shall not be used or occupied in any manner
so as to create any dangerous, noxious, injurious, or otherwise objectionable
fire, explosion or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, odor, or
other form of air pollution; electrical disturbance; glare; liquid or solid
refuse or wastes; or other dangerous or objectionable substance, condition or
element in such a manner or such amount as to adversely affect the
environment or surrounding community.



   (C)   More restrictive performance standards or regulations enacted
by an authorized governmental agency having jurisdiction of such matters
shall take precedence over the provisions of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-98)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-239.  APPLICABILITY OF DIVISION 13.



   All of the performance standards for the limited manufacturing zone, as
set forth in division 13, article III of this chapter, shall also apply to
the M-1 zone, and such standards are incorporated in this section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-98.1)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-240.  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made for
any new use, except the adult businesses referred to in section 16-221 or
expansion of land or buildings permitted in section 16-222.  The building
official may issue the certificate only after approval of the new buildings
and uses by the director.  Any subsequent modification, change or changes in
the use permitted by a certificate of occupancy shall occur only after the
holder of such certificate has obtained an amendment from the building
official and director allowing such change or changes.



   (B)   A certificate of occupancy for a use of the land in the M-1
zone may be revoked by the city council after a public hearing, if the city
council finds that the holder of the certificate has failed to comply with
the approved special use permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-99)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2313)



DIVISION 15.  M-2 HEAVY MANUFACTURING ZONE



SEC. 16-245.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses only are permitted in the M-2 Heavy Manufacturing
Zone; provided, however, that commercial uses are not permitted:



   (A)   Any use listed in subsections 16-221(C)(1) through (4),
pertaining to the M-1 zone, subject to restrictions and requirements placed
on such uses in the M-1 zone;



   (B)   Acetylene gas manufacture or storage;



   (C)   Acid manufacture;



   (D)   Advertising signs as permitted in article IX of this chapter;



   (E)   Alcohol manufacture;



   (F)   Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture;



   (G)   Asphalt manufacture or refining;



   (H)   Blast furnace or coke oven;



   (I)   Bulk storage and distribution of flammable liquids and
liquefied gases;



   (J)   Boiler works;



   (K)   Brick, tile or terra cotta manufacture;



   (L)   Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture;



   (M)   Concrete products manufacture;



   (N)   Cotton gin or oil mill;



   (O)   Distillation of bones;



   (P)   Drop forge industries, including manufacturing forging with
power hammers;



   (Q)   Explosives, manufacture or storage;



   (R)   Fat rendering;



   (S)   Fertilizer manufacture;



   (T)   Fish smoking, curing or canning;



   (U)   Freight classification yard;



   (V)   Garbage, offal or deal animal reduction or dumping;



   (W)   Gas manufacture;



   (X)   Glue manufacture;



   (Y)   Industrial condominiums, as provided in section 16-395;



   (Z)   Iron, steel, brass or copper foundry or fabrication plant;



   (AA)   Junk/scrap storage and sales;



   (BB)   Lampblack manufacture;



   (CC)   Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture;



   (DD)   Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine and varnish manufacture;



   (EE)   Paper and pulp manufacture;



   (FF)   Petroleum refining;



   (GG)   Plastic manufacture;



   HH)   Potash works;



   (II)   Pyroxylin manufacture;



   (JJ)   Quarry or stone mill;



   (KK)   Railroad repair shops;



   (LL)   Rock crusher or distribution of rock, sand or gravel;



   (MM)   Rolling mills;



   (NN)   Rubber or gutta-percha manufacture or treatment;



   (OO)   Salt works;



   (PP)   Scrap metal processing facility;



   (QQ)   Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores;



   (RR)   Soap manufacture;



   (SS)   Soda and compound manufacture;



   (TT)   Steam electric generating stations operated by gas or fuel
oil;



   (UU)   Stock feeding pens;



   (VV)   Stockpens or slaughter of animals;



   (WW)   Storage or baling of rags, paper, iron or junk;



   (XX)   Stove or shoe polish manufacture;



   (YY)   Tannery;



   (ZZ)   Tar distillation or tar products manufacture;



   (AAA)   Used car junk areas;



   (BBB)   Wool pulling or scouring;



   (CCC)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any
of the above uses, when located on the same lot; and



   (DDD)   Other similar uses that the planning and environmental
services manager finds to be consistent with the purpose and intent of this
zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-100)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2580, 2864)



SEC. 16-246.  SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   No new development of structures or outdoor uses or
substantial enlargement of any existing structure is permitted in the heavy
manufacturing zone until the commission grants a special use permit. 
“Substantial” means any enlargement that increases the existing floor
space by more than 25 percent, or by 20,000 square feet, whichever amount is
less.



   (B)   Non-accessory signs and billboard signs, as defined in this
chapter, are not permitted in the heavy manufacturing zone until the
commission grants a special use permit approving the location.



   (C)   The applicant for a special use permit shall provide the
following documents and information, together with any additional documents
and information required by the planning and environmental services manager:



      (1)   A site plan of the property, showing all property lines,
existing and proposed building locations, parking areas, sign locations,
trash enclosures, walls, landscaped areas and plant screening areas.  The
site plan shall be properly dimensioned and shall include the topography of
the property and topographic features within 50 feet of all property boundary
lines, easements, abutting streets, highways and freeways;



      (2)   Elevation plans for all structures, including buildings,
signs, walls and solid fences, showing the height and lateral dimensions;



      (3)   Complete floor plans for all structures, including room
labeling and dimensions;



      (4)   A materials and colors board containing materials and
color samples of the exterior of all structures, including roofing, window
glass and signs;



      (5)   A landscape plan showing the location and dimensions of
all landscaped or planted areas, including the design or method for watering,
and identifying all plant species, including size and spacing of plants. 
Landscaped areas serving as screening shall be clearly identified;



      (6)   If a structure is to be occupied by an industrial use, a
full description of the nature and extent of the proposed use, including
plans describing the proposed treatment of noise, air pollution, sewage and
industrial waste; and



      (7)   If outdoor storage of impounded or salvaged vehicles is
proposed, a plan for clean-up, containment and removal of any hazardous
fluids or materials that may leak from vehicles shall be provided.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-101)  (Ord. No. 1867, 2580)



SEC. 16-247.  HEIGHT PERMITTED.



   No building shall exceed a height at the street line of eight stories
or 100 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-102)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-248.  FRONT YARD.



   Where all the frontage on one side of the street between two
intersecting streets is located in an M-2 zone, no front yard shall be
required.  Where frontage on one side of the street between two intersecting
streets is located in an M-2 zone and an R zone, the front yard requirement
in the R zone shall apply to the M-2 zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-102.1)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-249.  SIDE YARD.



   Where a lot in an M-2 zone abuts the side of a lot in any R zone, there
shall be a side yard of not less than five feet.  In all other cases, a side
yard for a commercial or industrial building shall not be required.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-102.2)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC. 16-250.  REAR YARD.



   No rear yard shall be required except where an M-2 zone abuts an R
zone, in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-102.3)  (Ord. No. 1867)



SEC.  16-251.  CANNABIS USES PROHIBITED.



   All cannabis-related uses, including the growing of cannabis and the
manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging and/or treatment of
products containing cannabis or cannabis components, are prohibited in the
M-2 Heavy Manufacturing Zone.



(Ord. No. 2929)



DIVISION 16.  C-R COMMUNITY RESERVE ZONE



SEC. 16-255.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this C-R Community Reserve Zone is to provide a district
of predominantly open land uses which in the public interest should retain
this character.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-103)  (Ord. No. 894, 1401)



SEC. 16-256.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted in this zone:



   (A)   Agriculture, plant husbandry, forestry, the growing of plant
cover and the sale of produce and plants raised on the premises;



   (B)   Grazing of livestock, provided that the principal food supply
of the livestock shall be growing forage cropped on the premises and the
livestock are not fed garbage or refuse;



   (C)   Corrals or similar places to gather animals located at least
100 feet from the nearest lot line and at least 50 feet from a public
right-of-way;



   (D)   Keeping domesticated farm animals incidental to the operation
of a permitted use, including the raising of rabbits, poultry, pigeons or
other fowl provided that pens, hutches, coops or other structures for the
keeping of such animals are located on the lot in accordance with regulations
contained in this section governing location of such structures for livestock.



   (E)   Recreation facilities of a primarily open nature such as
parks, playgrounds, aquatic parks, and golf courses;



   (F)   Accessory buildings, including other uses customarily
incidental to a permitted use;



   (G)   Off-street parking, as provided herein;



   (H)   Adult day care facility serving no more than six adults, per
ownership parcel, subject to the minimum standards for single-family
residences stated above;



   (I)   Child care center serving no more than six children, per
ownership parcel, subject to the minimum standards for single-family
residences stated above;



   (J)   Congregate living health facilities of no more than six beds;



   (K)   Large family day care home that the Planning Manager finds to
comply with the standards set out in section 16-440, per ownership parcel,
subject to the minimum standards for single-family residences stated above;



   (L)   Residential care facility for the elderly serving no more than
six persons, subject to the minimum standards for single-family residences
stated above; and



   (M)   Small residential health or care facility that conforms to
city ordinances restricting building heights, setbacks, lot dimensions,
placement of signs and other matters applicable to single-family dwelling of
the same type in the same zone, and that provide services to no more than six
persons, or to no more than eight children in the case of a small family day
care home.



   (N)   Farmworker employee housing with up to twelve units or
thirty-six beds in compliance with Cal. Health and Safety Code Section
17008(a) in connection with an agricultural workplace and provided by the
employer, or Cal. Health and Code Section 17008(b) for all other situations;
or, with thirteen or more units or thirty-seven or more beds with approval of
a special use permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-103.1)  (Ord. No. 894, 1126, 1270, 1401, 1713, 2671, 2928)



SEC. 16-257.  RELATED USES



   The following uses shall be permitted only on approval of a special use
permit as provided in sections 16-530 to 16-553:



   (A)   Agricultural processing of a temporary or seasonal nature;



   (B)   Cemeteries;



   (C)   Congregate living health facilities of seven to 15 beds;
except that such facilities shall not be allowed in the airport hazard
overlay zone;



   (D)   Churches;



   (E)   Oil drilling sites;



   (F)   Private or parochial schools, including asylums and other
schools of a correctional nature;



   (G)   Public schools-elementary, junior high, high school and
colleges;



   (H)   Public utility structures;



   (I)   Quarries;



   (J)   Riding academies;



   (K)   Rod and gun clubs;



   (L)   Summer camps;



   (M)   Swap meet, provided that the use is incidental to a primary
use, such as a school, church or similar institutional use.



   (N)   Police or fire stations;



   (O)   Signs, as permitted in article IX of this chapter;



   (P)   One single-family residence per lot;



   (Q)   Farmworker housing;



   (R)   Mobile homes used as temporary housing for a caretaker or
ranch foreman on parcels of not less than 40 acres, where an employee is on
the property for a substantial portion of each day for vital functions, or
protection from vandalism;



   (S)   Sale of agricultural products grown off the premises; and



   (T)   Similar uses of an open or temporary use.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-103.2)  (Ord. No. 1713, 1788, 2561, 2671, 2864, 2873)



SEC. 16-258.  PROHIBITED USES



   The following uses are expressly prohibited in the C-R zone:



   (A)   Feed lots; and



   (B)   Cannabis-related uses, including the growing of cannabis and
the sale of cannabis and any products containing cannabis or cannabis
components.



(Ord. No. 2929)



SEC. 16-259.  INDUSTRIAL SERVICE CENTERS.



   Industrial service centers may be established pursuant to the
provisions of section 16-192.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-103.3)  (Ord. No. 1922, 1941)



SEC. 16-260.  HEIGHT PERMITTED.



   Two stories in height shall be permitted, not to exceed 25 feet, except
as otherwise provided in this chapter.  Additional height may be permitted
on approval of a special use permit as provided in sections 16-530 to 16-553.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-104)  (Ord. No. 894, 2873)



SEC. 16-261.  FRONT YARD.



   There shall be a front yard of not less than 25% of the depth of the
parcel, provided that such front yard need not exceed 50 feet.  A reduction
to the setback required by this section may be permitted on approval of a
special use permit as provided in sections 16-530 to 16-553.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-104.1)  (Ord. No. 894, 2873)



SEC. 16-262.  SIDE YARD.



   (A)   There shall be a side yard of not less than 10% of the width
of the parcel; provided that such side yard need not exceed 50 feet.  A
reduction to the setback required by this section may be permitted on
approval of a special use permit as provided in sections 16-530 to 16-553.



   (B)   The street side yard shall not be less than five feet on a
minor street or less than ten feet on a major thoroughfare.  A reduction to
the setback required by this section may be permitted on approval of a
special use permit as provided in sections 16-530 to 16-553.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-104.2)  (Ord. No. 894, 2873)



SEC. 16-263.  REAR YARD.



   There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25% of the depth of the
lot; provided that such rear yard need not exceed 50 feet.  A reduction to
the setback required by this section may be permitted on approval of a
special use permit as provided in sections 16-530 to 16-553.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-104.3)  (Ord. No. 894, 2873)



SEC. 16-264.  LOT COVERAGE.



   The total area of the parcel which may be covered by buildings or
structures shall not exceed 25% of the total lot area.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-104.4)  (Ord. No. 894)



DIVISION 17.  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (ADDITIVE) ZONE



SEC. 16-270.  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this division is to authorize the designation
of any of the basic zones established by this code as planned development
zones by adding the letters “P-D” thereto. The P-D designation is
intended to insure the orderly development of land in conformance with the
general plan of the city and to permit departures from the restrictions
imposed within the basic zones as specified in this chapter where justified
by one or more of the following circumstances:



      (1)   When development is proposed in an area that the general
plan has phased for development at a later time;



      (2)   When development is proposed in an area subject to a
redevelopment plan;



      (3)   When development is proposed adjacent to or near public
parks, public buildings or similar areas;



      (4)   When disparities between adjacent zones require
protection of the more restricted zone;



      (5)   When development is proposed that does not conform to
the standards of the basic zone, but offers advantages if properly
conditioned to protect nearby uses.  Such development includes but is not
limited to:



         (a)   Commercial development near residential
development;



         (b)   Multiple-family development near single-family
development;



         (c)   Research and manufacturing development near
commercial or residential development;



         (d)   When development is proposed near areas of public
interest, such as areas of natural beauty, natural resources or historical
interest, and public parks, civic centers and monuments;



         (e)   When development of a planned residential group is
proposed.



   (B)   Another purpose of this division is to ensure that development
occurs in substantial conformance with plans or uses in connection with an
application for rezoning.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-107)  (Ord. No. 916, 934)



SEC. 16-271.  MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS OF BASIC ZONE.



   (A)   A special use permit shall be required for approval of any new
development, enlargement or rebuilding of a structure or new use, license or
certificate of compliance in any P-D zone.



   (B)   All requirements that apply in the basic zone to which the P-D
designation is attached shall apply in the P-D zone, but such requirements
may be modified by conditions imposed on the special use permit.  Such
conditions shall be designed to enhance the public welfare.  Such conditions
that concern numerical standards shall not increase or decrease by more than
25 percent the requirements that apply in the basic zone.



   (C)   If the basic zone to which the P-D designation is attached
does not have requirements or standards, standards shall be set as shown on
the development plan approved with the special use permit.  Conditions as
outlined in subsection (D) below may also be applied.



   (D)   Such conditions include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   If a P-D designation is requested on a development
application, conditions requiring that development substantially conform to
the plans or uses proposed in connection with the application for zoning or
rezoning;



      (2)   Conditions to reduce or eliminate obnoxious
characteristics of the development, such as noise, light, glare, smoke and
odor;



      (3)   Conditions to provide sufficient off-street parking and
loading spaces not required in the basic zone; to provide parking areas,
access and traffic circulation patterns designed to segregate pedestrians
from vehicles, prevent traffic congestion within the parcel or on nearby
streets and protect the privacy of abutting uses and residential streets; to
reduce the number of parking spaces required in the basic zone if such
requirements are demonstrated to be excessive, as for housing for seniors; to
require that off-street parking spaces be enclosed; and to waive carports and
garages if parking spaces are not visible from the street or other public
right-of-way;



      (4)   Conditions increasing or reducing the height of
development, including fences; increasing or decreasing the number of
dwelling units; increasing or decreasing landscaping; increasing or
decreasing projections into required yard areas; increasing or decreasing
sign sizes; increasing or decreasing minimum lot sizes and setbacks; and
requiring design and architectural elements that reduce conflicts between the
development and nearby property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-111.3)  (Ord. No. 725, 948, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-272.  PROCEDURE TO ESTABLISH P-D ZONE.



   (A)   Adoption of an ordinance establishing a P-D zone may be
initiated by application of an owner of real property within the area of the
proposed zone or by a resolution of intention adopted by the city council.



   (B)   The form of the owner’s application shall be prescribed by
the director.  The owner shall pay an application fee in the amount set by
resolution of the city council at the time of filing the application.



   (C)   All proposals to establish a P-D zone shall be heard by the
commission and the city council as set out in article VIII of this code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-109)  (Ord. No. 916, 1408)



SEC. 16-273.  PROCEDURE TO OBTAIN SPECIAL USE PERMIT.



   (A)   After a P-D zone has been established, no permit for
construction or alteration of any structure or license or certificate of
compliance for any use in such zone shall be issued unless a special use
permit for the development or use is approved in the manner and subject to
the conditions set out in sections 16-530 to 16-553.  If the basic zone
requires a special use permit for a specific use of the property, the
issuance of one special use permit shall satisfy the requirements of this
section and of the basic zone.



   (B)   Any application for a special use permit in a planned
development zone shall be accompanied by plans drawn to appropriate and
legible scale, together with supporting data and showing the following:



      (1)   A plot plan showing the location and dimensions of all
existing and proposed structures, landscaping, parking areas and other
proposed uses on the subject property supplemented by a narrative description
of all improvements proposed to be installed and the general type of uses on
each portion of the property;



      (2)   Schematic drawings, elevations or renderings showing the
architectural design of buildings and structures proposed to be constructed;
and



      (3)   A schedule of time for construction of various portions
of the development if the construction is to occur in stages.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-111.2)  (Ord. No. 725, 917, 948, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-274.  RECORDATION OF NOTICE OF ISSUANCE OF SPECIAL USE PERMIT.



   Within 30 days of issuance of a special use permit for property located
in a P-D zone, the permittee shall record with the county recorder a notice
thereof and file with the city clerk a copy of such notice, showing the date
and location of filing by the county recorder.



SEC. 16-275.  MINIMUM LOT AREA.



   (A)   Lots shall have a minimum area of 6,000 square feet in all
zones except the R-P-D, C-P-D, M-P-D.  Lots in the R-B-1 zone shall have a
minimum area of 4,000 square feet.



   (B)   The minimum width of lots shall be 50 feet except in the R-B-1
zone, in which the minimum width of lots shall be 40 feet.



   (C)   No lot shall be divided by a city boundary line.  The side
lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to the street line on
straight streets or to the tangent on curved streets.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-111.6)  (Ord. No. 617, 948)



SEC. 16-276.  MODIFICATION OF SPECIAL USE PERMIT FOR PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.



   Modifications to an approved  special use permit for a planned
development shall be made as set out in article VII, division 4 of this code.



SEC. 16-277.  SUBSEQUENT ZONE CHANGES.



   (A)   A rezoning of property subject to a special use permit for a
planned development shall be cause for review of the special use.



   (B)   Repeal of a planned development additive zone terminates the
special use permit for the planned development.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-110.4)  (Ord. No. 916, 1409)



SEC. 16-278.  TIME LIMIT FOR COMMENCEMENT OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   Improvements authorized by a special use permit for a planned
development must be substantially undertaken within 18 months unless some
other period is specified by the commission, or the permit shall expire.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-111)  (Ord. No. 916, 1409)



DIVISION 18.  LOT SIZE ADDITIVE



SEC. 16-285.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this division is to provide a zoning additive which can
be combined with various other zone designations.  The additive will create
necessary lot area, setbacks, or density controls which are not provided for
in the basic underlying zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-111.01)  (Ord. No. 1793)



SEC. 16-286.  LOT SIZE ADDITIVE; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Basic underlying zone - The basic underlying zone is any of
the zones specified in section 16-15 of this chapter to which a lot size
suffix is added pursuant to this division.



   (B)   Combined minimum side yard setback - The combined minimum side
yard setback is the total footage derived from adding both of the side yard
setbacks for a single lot.



   (C)   Minimum single side yard setback - The minimum side yard
setback is the minimum amount of space permitted between the main building
and the closest side property line.  Regardless of the combined minimum side
yard setback imposed pursuant to a suffix, the minimum single side yard
setback shall be observed for all side yards.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-111.04)  (Ord. No. 1793)



SEC. 16-287.  LOT SIZE ADDITIVE; EFFECT.



   A lot size additive may be added as a suffix to any of the basic
underlying zones to establish a minimum lot area, minimum lot width, and side
yard setback.  The minimum requirements as set forth in section 16-288 shall
apply rather than the lot area, width and setback provisions of the basic
underlying zone.  All requirements other than the lot area, lot width, and
side yard setback shall be as specified in the provisions for the basic
underlying zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-111.06)  (Ord. No. 1793)



SEC. 16-288.  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.



   Whenever one of the following suffixes is added to a basic underlying
zone, the following minimum requirements shall apply:



 


Suffix

 
Minimum Lot Area (sq.ft.)
 
Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
 
Combined Minimum Sideyard Setback (ft.)
 
Minimum Single Sideyard Setback


6
 
6,000
 
60
 
10 A
 
5


7
 
7,000
 
65
 
10 A
 
5


8
 
8,000
 
70
 
12 A
 
5


9
 
9,000
 
75
 
15
 
5


10
 
10,000
 
80
 
20
 
8 B



 

15
 
15,000
 
85
 
20
 
8 B


20
 
20,000
 
90
 
25
 
10


30
 
30,000
 
95
 
30
 
10


1 acre
 
43,000
 
100
 
35
 
15


2 acres
 
87,000
 
150
 
60
 
25


3 acres
 
130,500
 
200
 
90
 
30


5 acres
 
217,500
 
300
 
120
 
40



 



   A  Fifteen feet combined with seven and one-half feet minimum is
required for two story dwellings.



   B At least one side shall be a minimum of 12 feet unless otherwise
specified in an approved development plan or unless access is provided from
an alley.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-111.08)  (Ord. No. 1793)



DIVISION 19.  AIRPORT HAZARD OVERLAY ZONE



SEC. 16-290.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose and intent of this section is to provide a method of
evaluating the potential impacts associated with establishing land uses
within the sphere of influence of the Oxnard Airport.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-5.13.1)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-291.  APPLICABILITY.



   These provisions shall apply within the sphere of influence to the new
development of vacant property and to modifications to commercial or
institutional development involving an increase of building height over 25
feet or a 25% increase in floor area.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-5.13.2)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-292.  AIRPORT SPHERE OF INFLUENCE DEFINED.



   The “sphere of influence” of the Oxnard Airport shall be defined as
the area surrounding the Oxnard Airport bounded on the north by Doris Avenue,
on the east by “B” Street, on the south by Wooley Road, and on the west
by the Edison Canal.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-5.13.3)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-293.  REVIEW BY FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (FAA) REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   Prior to the filing of an application for any project
within the sphere of influence, the developer shall submit the project to the
FAA for review and report to determine compliance with adopted approach and
departure slopes, and clear zones established for the Oxnard Airport.



      (2)   The developer shall submit the FAA report to the
director before a project is deemed complete.



   (B)   Additional FAA review shall be required for any revisions to
the project involving a change in the location or heights of buildings.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-5.13.4)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-294.  AIRCRAFT HAZARD AND LAND USE RISK ASSESSMENT REQUIRED.



   (A)   The applicant for a project within the sphere of influence
shall be responsible for the preparation of an aircraft hazard and land use
risk assessment concerning the proposed use.



   (B)   If the project requires an environmental impact report (EIR),
the assessment may be included in the EIR.



   (C)   If the project does not require an EIR, the assessment shall
be submitted to the director prior to any environmental determination and
shall be prepared by a qualified consultant subject to the approval of the
director.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-5.13.5)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-295.  AIRCRAFT HAZARD AND LAND USE RISK ASSESSMENT CONTENTS.



   The aircraft hazard and land use risk assessment shall address but not
necessarily be limited to the following items:



   (A)   Relationship of project to adopted FAA glide slopes and clear
zones;



   (B)   Relationship of project to adopted aircraft approach,
departure, and traffic patterns;



   (C)   A report of all aircraft accidents within the traffic area of
the Oxnard tower up to within six months of consideration of the project by
the commission;



   (D)   A report on the number of operations at Oxnard Airport and
violations (if available) under the authority of the Oxnard Airport control
tower for the 6- to 18-month period preceding consideration by the
commission; and



   (E)   An assessment of the level of risk posed to persons involved
in the proposed land use by the potential forced landing or crash of an
aircraft on the developed site.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-5.13.6)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-296.  REVIEW BY OXNARD AIRPORT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   A project within the sphere of influence shall be submitted to
the Oxnard Airport Authority for review and recommendation before the project
is considered by the commission.



   (B)   The staff report and minutes of the Oxnard Airport Authority's
review shall be furnished to the commission for information.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-5.13.7)  (Ord. No. 2132)



ARTICLE IV.  STANDARDS FOR ALL ZONES



DIVISION 1.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



SEC. 16-300.  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS ON THROUGH LOTS.



   In any case where a through lot has a depth of not more than 150 feet,
accessory buildings not exceeding one story and 15 feet in height may be
located in one of the required front yards, provided that every portion of
such buildings is at least five feet from the nearest front lot line.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-15)



SEC. 16-301.  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Accessory structures and accessory buildings shall be allowed
in any residential lot zone, notwithstanding other provisions of this
chapter, provided they comply with the following standards:



      (1)   The total aggregate floor area of all accessory
structures and accessory buildings shall not exceed 15% of the total open
area between the residence and adjacent rear property line or 120 square
feet, whichever is less.



      (2)   Minimum setback from any property line: three feet.



      (3)   Maximum height.



         (a)   Height shall be measured from the average grade
within five feet of the accessory structure or accessory building to the
highest point of the accessory structure or accessory building. Accessory
structures or accessory buildings with a flat roof shall not exceed a height
of eight feet. For accessory buildings with a sloped roof, the height limit
may be increased six inches for each additional one-foot increase to the
required setbacks, graduated over the length of the structure, not to exceed
a height of 12 feet. Accessory structures or accessory buildings set against
the residence shall not exceed the height of the adjacent eave or parapet.



         (b)   Regulation-size sports equipment such as a
basketball hoop, volleyball net, etc. which are un-covered and non-moveable
and feature no more than two supporting posts shall be exempt from the
aforementioned height restriction when a minimum five-foot setback is
provided to adjacent property lines, as determined by the planning manager.



      (4)   Maximum extension of roof eaves: 12 inches.



      (5)   An accessory structure or accessory building shall not
be located in any required front yard.



      (6)   With the exception of greenhouses featuring translucent
glass panels, exterior siding and roofing shall be made of non-reflective
materials.



      (7)   The accessory structure or accessory building is not
served by utilities.



      (8)   The accessory structure or accessory building is not
attached to, accessed from, nor blocking openings of any other structure or
building.



      (9)   The accessory structure or accessory building shall not
be located so as to block required clearances around equipment, vents,
utilities and similar items.



      (10)   The accessory structure or accessory building meets the
criteria set by the California Building Code to be found exempt from permit
requirements.



      (11)   The accessory structure or accessory building shall not
be occupied for living or sleeping purposes.



      (12)   Furniture, plants and similar items shall not be placed
on or above any accessory structure or accessory building.



   (B)   Accessory structures or accessory buildings not meeting the
above standards shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-9.2)  (Ord. No. 2132, 2890)



SEC. 16-302.  AUTHORIZED VEHICLE REPAIR, STORAGE, ASSEMBLY OR DISASSEMBLY.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided for in this code, no person,
shall repair, assemble, disassemble, or store any vehicle upon any property
within the city, unless such property is properly zoned for uses which
include the repair, assembly, disassembly, or storage, and unless such person
has received all city approvals, licenses, and permits required by law prior
to repairing, assembling, disassembling, or storing such vehicles.



   (B)   On improved residentially zoned properties only, vehicle
repairs shall be permitted upon the following conditions:



      (1)   The vehicle must be owned by a current resident of the
property upon which the repairs are being done;



      (2)   Registration or proof of current ownership of the
vehicle being repaired shall be available for inspection on the premises at
all times while the vehicle is under repair;



      (3)   Such repairs shall be conducted in a timely and orderly
fashion, so as not to create a nuisance condition as defined in this code;



      (4)   Storage of any vehicle under repair or parts of a
vehicle upon public streets or upon an unpaved driveway area is expressly
prohibited;



      (5)   Such repairs shall be conducted only between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-7.1)  (Ord. No. 2071)



SEC. 16-303.  BUILDING HEIGHTS.



   (A)   Zone height maximums and measurement - Except as provided in
this section, no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally
altered to exceed the height limit established for the zone in which such
building is located.  The building height shall be measured from the top of
the average curb elevation of the adjacent principal public street.



   (B)   Public or semi-public buildings - Publicly or semi-publicly
owned or leased buildings, schools, hospitals, churches, or institutions may
exceed the height limit of the individual zones and erect such buildings to a
height not to exceed the lesser of six stories or 75 feet, provided a special
use permit is obtained.  In granting special use permit, the required front,
side and rear yards shall be increased an additional one foot for each four
feet of height over the permitted 35 feet for the proposed building.



   (C)   Through lots - A through lot is a noncorner lot which is
adjacent to two public streets and located between two separate lots.  On
through lots, the height of a building may be measured from the average curb
elevation of either street.



   (D)   Top structures and freestanding structures - Penthouses or
roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating
fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and
fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks,
or similar structures related to buildings and uses in commercial or
industrial zones may be erected above the height limits prescribed in this
code, but no penthouse or roof structure, or any space above the height limit
shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space.



   (E)   Exceptions to height limits - Transmitting or receiving
antennas may be permitted to exceed height limits subject to the following
provisions:



      (1)   Residential zones - Satellite television receiving
antennas shall not exceed an overall height of 15 feet above grade.  Other
television antennas, whether freestanding, attached, or roof-mounted shall
not exceed a height of 30 feet above the roof ridge of the dwelling.  Radio
antennas (e.g., citizens band or amateur radio) shall not exceed an overall
height of 75 feet above grade.



      (2)   Commercial and industrial zones - The height limits for
such television and radio antennas in commercial zones shall be the same as
that for building structures within the zone except as may be otherwise
permitted by approval of a special use permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-8)  (Ord. No. 1908, 2152, 2539)



SEC. 16-304.  CORNICE REQUIREMENTS.



   Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses or other similar
architectural features may extend or project into the required side yard not
more than six inches for each one foot of width of such side yard not to
exceed 30 inches and may extend or project into the required front or rear
yard not more than 30 inches.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-17)  (Ord. No. 1170)



SEC. 16-305.  EXTENSION OF FIRE ESCAPES INTO YARDS.



   Fire escapes may extend or project into any front, side or rear yard
not more than four feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-18)



SEC. 16-306.  EXTENSION OF OPEN STAIRWAYS AND BALCONIES.



   Open, unenclosed stairways, or balconies not covered by a roof or
canopy may extend or project into a required rear yard not more than four
feet, and such balconies and canopies may extend into a required front yard
not more than 30 inches.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-19)



SEC. 16-307.  EXTENSION OF UNCOVERED PORCHES.



   Uncovered and unenclosed porches, platforms or landing places which do
not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend into
any required front, side or rear yard not more than six feet; provided,
however, that an openwork railing, not more than 42 inches in height may be
installed or constructed on any such porch, platform or landing place.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-20)  (Ord. No. 1409)



SEC. 16-308.  FENCES, HEDGES, HEIGHT LIMITATIONS; FRONT YARD.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, openwork fences,
railings guarding depressed ramps, boundary hedges, and landscaping or
architectural features, as defined in section 16-304, may be located in any
required front yard, providing such structures or hedges shall not exceed 42
inches in height and are 50 percent or more open.



   (B)   Walls and solid fences which do not exceed 18 inches in height
may be located in front yard areas.  Nothing in this section shall be
construed to limit the height of retaining walls, except that front yard
retaining walls will not be more than 18 inches higher than the soil retained.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-21)  (Ord. No. 555, 1632)



SEC. 16-309.  FENCES, HEDGES; HEIGHT LIMITATIONS; SIDE AND REAR YARD.



   A fence or wall, no portion of which exceeds seven feet in height as
measured from the grade of the enclosed lot at the fence or wall, or a hedge,
maintained so as not to exceed seven feet in height, also so measured, may be
located along side or rear lot lines subject to the following exceptions:



   (A)   No fence, wall or hedge shall be located in a required front
or side yard, except as provided in section 16-308.



   (B)   No portion of any fence, wall or hedge located in the side
yard required along the side street on a corner lot, or in the portion of a
rear yard abutting an intersecting street wherein accessory buildings are
prohibited, shall exceed six feet in height, measured from the grade of the
sidewalk or the grade of the street if there is no sidewalk.



   (C)   Any rear fence or wall along any alley shall be so constructed
as to provide a space in the rear yard, not less than six feet in width, 30
inches in depth and four feet in height, for the location of trash barrels
off of the public alley.  Such space shall be open to the alley and shall be
so designed and constructed that it will be easily accessible directly from
the rear yard, for the deposit of trash in barrels placed within the space. 
If another area within the rear yard meets the above requirements, it shall
not be necessary to incorporate such a space for trash barrels into the fence
or wall.



   (D)   Gates and doors on rear fences shall not open over the alley,
but shall be designed to open over the owner's property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-22)  (Ord. No. 555)



SEC. 16-310.  FENCE LIMITATIONS, COMMERCIAL ZONES.



   Unless the fence is reviewed and approved by means of a special use
permit, planned development permit or development plan granted pursuant to
this chapter, the following fence limitations shall apply to all commercial,
commercial manufacturing and commercial office zones:



   (A)   Height - No fence shall exceed eight feet in height as
measured from the grade of the enclosed lot.



   (B)   Street-fence setback area - For any lot for which a building
setback is imposed pursuant to this chapter, the street-fence setback line
shall be of an equal distance and no fence shall be located in the setback
area.  For any lot for which no building setback is imposed pursuant to this
chapter, the street-fence setback line shall be ten feet and no fence shall
be located in the street-fence setback area.



   (C)   Chain-link - No chain-link fence shall be located within the
front yard area or used as a front fence which runs parallel to any adjacent
street.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-22.7)  (Ord. No. 1899)



SEC. 16-311.  FENCE LIMITATIONS, INDUSTRIAL ZONE.



   (A)   Unless the fence is reviewed and approved by means of a
special use permit, planned development permit or development plan granted
pursuant to this chapter, the following fence limitations shall apply to all
industrial zones:



      (1)   Height - No fence shall exceed eight feet in height as
measured from the grade of the enclosed lot.



      (2)   Street-fence setback area - For any lot for which a
building setback is imposed pursuant to this chapter, the street-fence
setback line shall be of an equal distance and no fence shall be located in
the street-fence setback area.



   (B)   For any lot for which no building setback is imposed pursuant
to this chapter, the street-fence setback line shall be ten feet and no fence
shall be located in the street-fence setback area.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-22.9)  (Ord. No. 1899)



SEC. 16-312.  FENCE TYPES, PROHIBITED AND EXEMPTIONS.



   Barbed wire, broken glass or any protruding sharp and dangerous object
shall not be incorporated into fences or walls, except that barbed wire or
chain-link fences may be erected to protect commercial agricultural fields
being cultivated, and such fences may be used in any industrial zones.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-23)  (Ord. No. 555, 1899)



SEC. 16-313.  FENCE MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENT.



   Fences and walls which are not properly constructed or maintained are
unlawful and hereby declared public nuisances and subject to abatement as
such.  Any fence which deviates more than ten degrees from a 90 degree angle
with the level grade is unlawful.  Any missing or loose fence boards, blocks
or bricks shall be replaced, secured or tightened.  The painting on all
fences shall be properly maintained.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-24)  (Ord. No. 555, 1899)



SEC. 16-314.  FENCES, PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No person may erect or maintain any fence or wall within any
right-of-way or real property owned by the city without an encroachment
permit issued by the city.  Only a 50% or more see-through fence of a height
no greater than three and one-half feet shall be permitted.  No fence shall
be permitted in the parkway area which is located between the street and
public sidewalk.  A fence encroachment permit shall be a mere license to use
which is revocable at any time by the city.  If such a license is revoked,
the fence owner shall remove the fence within 60 days at his/her sole
expense.  To provide constructive notice to future owners, the fence
encroachment license shall be recorded against the property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-25)  (Ord. No. 555, 1900)



SEC. 16-315.  FENCES, SCHOOLS.



   Sections 16-308 through 16-310 shall not be interpreted to prohibit the
erection of a fence enclosing an elementary or high school site if such fence
does not project beyond the front line of the building.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-26)  (Ord. No. 555, 1899)



SEC. 16-316.  FENCES, SAFETY OR EMERGENCY.



   The provisions of this article shall not apply to a fence or wall
necessary for the public safety as determined by the public works director,
fire chief or building official, or as required by any law or regulation of
the State or an agency thereof.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-27)  (Ord. No. 767, 1899)



SEC. 16-317.  GARAGE USE FOR OTHER THAN STORAGE OF VEHICLE.



   Garages and carports may be used for uses incidental to the storage of
an automobile and incidental to the principal uses of the dwelling if the
incidental uses are not located within the dimensions for a garage or carport
required by section 16-638.  Incidental uses must be consistent with the
code and include, but are not limited to, storage, laundry facilities, and
tools and work areas necessary for maintenance of the dwelling and the
grounds and equipment thereof.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-13)  (Ord. No. 1504, 2695)



SEC. 16-318.  [RESERVED]



SEC. 16-319.  LOT RESTRICTIONS.



   The following requirements and prohibitions shall apply except as
hereinafter provided:



   (A)   Yards and population - No lot area shall be so reduced or
diminished that the yards or other open spaces are smaller than prescribed by
this chapter, nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner
except in conformity with the regulations herein established.



   (B)   Yard for each lot - No yard or other open space provided
around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this
chapter shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other
building; provided further, that no yard or open space on an adjoining
property shall be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot
whereon a building is to be erected.



   (C)   Buildings on lots - Every building hereafter erected shall be
located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than
one main building and its accessory buildings on one lot, except as
hereinafter provided.



   (D)   Parcel as a lot - Every individual parcel of land at the time
it was first zoned shall be deemed to be one lot, and not more than one main
building shall be permitted on such parcel of land unless all regulations
herein established are complied with and a subdivision map is recorded with
the county recorder.



   (E)   Yards open to sky - Every required front, side or rear yard
shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky.



   (F)   Institutions in R zones - In the R zones, no building shall be
erected, structurally altered or used for a school, church, hospital,
institution or other similar purpose permitted under the use regulations of
this chapter, unless such building is removed at least 50 feet from every
boundary line of a property included in any R zone, and provided that no
front yard, as required in the zone, shall be used for play or parking
purposes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-9)  (Ord. No. 1409)



SEC. 16-320.  ON-SITE LIGHTING.



   Lighting within physical limits of the area required to be lighted
shall not exceed seven footcandles, nor be less than one footcandle at any
point.  A light source shall not shine upon, or illuminate directly any
surface other than the area required to be lighted.  No lighting shall be of
a type or in a location that constitutes a hazard to vehicular traffic,
either on private property or on abutting streets.  The height of light
standards shall not exceed 26 feet.  To prevent damage from automobiles,
standards shall be mounted on reinforced concrete pedestals or otherwise
protected.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-9.3)  (Ord. No. 1376)



SEC. 16-321.  PORTE COCHERE REQUIREMENTS.



   A porte cochere may be placed over a driveway in a side yard, provided
such structure is not more than one story in height, is unenclosed on at
least three sides and is entirely open except for the necessary supporting
columns and reasonable architectural features.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-16)



SEC. 16-322.  SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AREA AND RECYCLED MATERIALS COLLECTION
AREA.



   All lots or parcels shall provide adequate and accessible disposal
areas for solid waste, as defined herein.  All applications for new
development approval for commercial, industrial or institutional uses or for
residential uses involving five or more residential units, shall specify in
the building plans sufficient space for the collection of recycled
materials.  The number and location of solid waste storage areas and
collection areas for recycled materials shall be specified in all permits, as
required by the city's solid waste division.  The solid waste disposal area
and recycled material collection area shall be properly screened from public
streets by a fence not less than six feet in height constructed to adopted
city standards.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-9.4)  (Ord. No. 1376, 2372)



SEC. 16-323.  STANDARDS FOR SITING ANTENNAS.



   (A)   Height limitations - See section 16-303.



   (B)   Location -



      (1)   Satellite television antennas for residential use shall
be located only in the rear of a lot and shall not cover more than 40 percent
of the required rear yard area in aggregate with any other rear yard
projection.  Upon showing by the applicant that usable satellite signal
cannot be obtained from such rear yard area, the antenna may be located
elsewhere on the property provided that an administrative permit is obtained
prior to such installation.  No more than two satellite antennas shall be
permitted on a single-family lot.



      (2)   Grounded radio antennas and standard television antennas
either freestanding or attached shall not be sited in any required front,
corner, or side yard.  Such antennas shall not cover more than 40 percent of
the required rear yard area in aggregate with any other projection or
accessory structure.



   (C)   Screening - All such antennas shall have the supporting
structures screened to a height of six feet above grade by use of landscaping
or walls to reduce visual impacts on surrounding properties and public
streets.



   (D)   Construction - All such antennas and the construction and
installation thereof shall conform to applicable city building and electrical
codes and shall meet all manufacturer's specifications, be of noncombustible
and corrosion-resistant material, and shall be erected in a secure,
wind-resistant manner.  Satellite television antennas shall not exceed a
diameter of 12½ feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-8.1)  (Ord. No. 2152, 2539)



SEC. 16-324.  ZONE WALL.



   A solid masonry or concrete wall not less than six feet nor more than
eight feet in height shall be erected between commercially zoned property and
abutting residentially zoned property at the time that any building or
structure is erected on the commercial property.  The height of the wall
shall be the vertical distance measured from the top of the wall to the
lowest point to grade within three feet of such wall on the commercially
zoned property.  The wall shall be constructed on or immediately adjacent to
the line dividing the residential and commercial properties.  Any fence
constructed in accordance with this section need not comply with the height
requirements of section 16-309.  A new wall shall not be required where
there is an existing wall which substantially conforms to this section on the
abutting residential property.  If the existing wall on abutting residential
property is the only wall that conforms to this section, and it is removed, a
new wall shall be required.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-9.1)  (Ord. No. 1376)



DIVISION 2.  PROHIBITIONS



SEC. 16-330.  GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.



   Except as may be specifically provided in individual zones, the
following prohibitions shall be in force:



   (A)   Area and yard regulations. No building shall be erected, nor
shall any existing building be moved, structurally altered, added to,
enlarged, reconstructed or rebuilt, nor shall any open spaces surrounding any
building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity
with the building site requirements and the area and yard regulations
established by this chapter for the zone in which such building is located.



   (B)   Height limit. No building shall be erected, nor shall any
existing building be moved, structurally altered, added to or enlarged, to
exceed in height the limit established by this chapter for the zone in which
such land, building or premises is located.



   (C)   Nonconforming use limitation. While a nonconforming use exists
on any lot no other use of more restricted classification shall be permitted,
even though such other use would otherwise be a conforming use.



   (D)   Use limitation in zones. No building or other improvement
shall be erected or moved onto any lot or other parcel of real property, and
no existing building shall be moved into, reconstructed, structurally
altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building improvement or
premises be used, or arranged, for any purpose other than a use permitted in
the zone in which the same are located.



   (E)   Yard limitation. No yard or other open space provided about
any building complying with the regulations of this chapter or amendments
thereto shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other
building or structure.



   (F)   Cannabis-related uses. No cannabis-related uses are allowed.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-34)  (Ord. No. 2929)



SEC. 16-331.  MULTIPLEX MOTION PICTURE THEATERS PROHIBITED.



   Multiplex motion picture theaters shall only be allowed in the central
business district zone and in the commercial portion (District D) of the
River Park Specific Plan Area. No zone clearance, special use permit or other
entitlement for use pertaining to a multiplex motion picture theater shall be
issued for any other location.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-35.1)  (Ord. No. 2466, 2742)



SEC. 16-332.  OIL DRILLING PROHIBITED IN ALL ZONES; EXCEPTION.



   Drilling for or production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances
within the city shall be prohibited except as set forth in this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-35)  (Ord. No. 530)



SEC. 16-333.  PARKING ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY VISIBLE FROM PUBLIC STREETS.



   (A)   No person shall park or store a vehicle on any portion of
residential property visible from a public street unless the vehicle is
parked on a driveway.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases
shall mean:



      (1)   DRIVEWAY - A solid or continuous slab of concrete or
asphalt a minimum of three inches thick and of dimensions capable of
encompassing the exterior outline of any vehicle parked thereon; provided
that access to such driveway is provided from a public right-of-way by an
authorized curb cut or other approved means.



      (2)   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY VISIBLE FROM A PUBLIC STREET - All
residential property which can be seen while standing in a public street and
which is not behind six-foot high opaque fence.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-7)  (Ord. No. 1967, 2071)



ARTICLE V.  SPECIFIC USE REQUIREMENTS



DIVISION 1.  ADULT BUSINESSES



SEC. 16-335.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city by regulating adult businesses,
by specifying appropriate locations for such businesses, and by requiring the
separation of such businesses by a minimum distance, thereby reducing or
eliminating the adverse secondary effects of such businesses.  The purpose
of this article is not to limit or restrict the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials, to restrict or deny access
by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the United States or
State constitutions, or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented materials and entertainment to their intended market.  The
purpose of this article is not to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-200)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-336.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words are defined
as follows:



   (A)   ADULT BUSINESSES - Those businesses defined as follows:



      (1)   ADULT ARCADE - An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide
projectors, or similar machines, or other image producing machines, for
viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions
characterized by the depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities.



      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO
STORE - An establishment that has a significant or substantial portion of its
stock-in-trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its advertising
to the sale, rental or viewing for any form of consideration, books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations
characterized by the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas
or specified sexual activities, or instruments, devices or paraphernalia
designed or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use.



      (3)   ADULT CABARET - A nightclub, bar, restaurant, “bottle
club,” or similar establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are
served, that regularly features:



         (a)   Persons who appear nude;



         (b)   Live performances characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or the presentation of specified sexual
activities; or



         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides,
or other photographic reproductions characterized by the depiction of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (4)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR - Any place where, for any form of
consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rubs, administration of
fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment
involving manipulation of the human body as a part of or in connection with
specified sexual activities, are provided, and where any person providing
such treatment, manipulation or services related thereto, exposes his or her
specified anatomical areas.  “Adult massage parlor” does not include the
practice of massage in any licensed hospital or by a licensed physician,
surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, any nurse or technician working under the
supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, or
by trainers of an athlete or an athletic team or school athletic program.



      (5)   ADULT MOTEL - A motel, hotel or similar commercial
establishment that:



         (a)   Offers public accommodations, for any form of
consideration, that provide patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions characterized by the depiction of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; and



         (b)   Advertises the availability of this type of
material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means
of any off-premises advertising, including but not limited to newspapers,
magazines, pamphlets, leaflets, radio or television; and



         (c)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a time period
of less than ten hours; and



         (d)   Allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the
sleeping room for a time period of less than ten hours.



      (6)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER - An establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions characterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of
consideration.



      (7)   ADULT THEATER - A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or
similar establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly features
persons who appear nude or live performances characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or the presentation of specified sexual activities.



      (8)   ESCORT AGENCY - A person or business that as one of its
primary business purposes and for a fee, tip or other consideration
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts on the
premises.  “Escorts” are persons who, on the premises of an escort
agency and for patrons, act as companions, guides or dates or privately model
lingerie or perform a striptease.



      (9)   NUDE MODEL STUDIO - Any place where a person who appears
nude or displays specified anatomical areas is provided for money or any form
of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons.  Nude model studio
does not include a nude modeling class:



         (a)   Offered by a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation;



         (b)   Offered by a private college or university for
class credits that are transferable to a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or



         (c)   Held in a structure having no sign or other
advertising visible from the exterior of the structure indicating that a nude
model is available for viewing, where no more than one nude model is on the
premises at the same time, and where in order to participate in the class a
student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class.



      (10)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT - An establishment that
as one of its primary business purposes offers for any form of consideration
a place where two or more persons, at least one of whom is nude, may
congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of engaging in specified
sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas.  Sexual
encounter establishment does not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar licensed professional
person engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.



   (B)   CITY MANAGER - The manager of the city or designee.



   (C)   EMPLOYEE - A person who works or performs in and/or for an
adult business, regardless of whether the person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of the business.



   (D)   ESTABLISH - “Establish” and its variants (such as
“establishing” and “establishment”) shall mean any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of an adult business as a
new business;



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not
an adult business, to an adult business; or



      (3)   The relocation of an adult business.



   (E)   NUDE - The display of the unclothed human buttocks, anus or
genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female human breast, or a state of
dress that fails opaquely and fully to cover such areas of the body.



   (F)   OPERATOR - The owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, or
person in charge of the premises of an adult business.



   (G)   PERMITTEE - A person in whose name an adult business permit
has been issued under this article, as well as the persons listed as
applicants in the application for such permit.



   (H)   PERSON - An individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association or other entity.



   (I)   PUBLIC BUILDING - Any building owned, leased or held by the
United States, the State, the county, the city, a school district, or any
other special district, agency or political subdivision of the State or the
United States, which building is used for governmental purposes.



   (J)   PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION AREA - Public land within the city
that has been designated for park, recreational, or arts activities,
including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trail, swimming pool,
reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis court, pedestrian or bicycle
path, open space, wilderness area, or similar public land under the control,
operation, or management of the city.



   (K)   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION - Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple,
or building used primarily for religious worship or related religious
activities.



   (L)   RESIDENTIAL ZONE or RESIDENTIAL USE - Property zoned by the
city for residential use or a single-family house, duplex, townhouse,
multiple-family dwelling, mobile home park, campground, recreational trailer
park, or travel trailer park.



   (M)   SCHOOL - Any public or private educational facility, including
but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges, colleges and universities.  School includes the school grounds,
but does not include facilities used primarily for noneducational purposes
and only incidentally as a school.



   (N)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS - Any of the following:



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areolae; or



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   (O)   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTS - Sexual crimes against children,
sexual abuse or rape, or crimes connected with an adult business, including
but not limited to distribution of obscenity, prostitution or pandering.



   (P)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES - Any of the following:



      (1)   The fondling or other intentional touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;



      (2)   Actual or simulated sex acts, including intercourse,
oral copulation, and sodomy;



      (3)   Actual or simulated masturbation;



      (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal
or tumescence; or



      (5)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the matters set forth in subsections (1) through (4) above.



   (Q)   YOUTH ORGANIZATION - Any building used primarily for meetings
of a social, educational or athletic club or group composed primarily of
persons under the age of 18 years.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-201)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-337.  LOCATION OF ADULT BUSINESSES.



   (A)   Adult businesses, except for adult motels, may be established
only within M-1 (light manufacturing) and M-L (limited manufacturing) zones
on property designated for adult businesses on the map on file with the city
clerk.



   (B)   Adult motels may be established only within the CBD (central
business district), C-O (commercial office), C-2 (general commercial), C-M
(commercial and light manufacturing) and BRP (business and research park)
zones on property designated for adult motels on the map on file with the
city clerk.



   (C)   Notwithstanding subsections (A) and (B) of this section, no
person shall establish an adult business within 1,000 feet of another adult
business or any religious institution, school, public building, public park,
recreation area, youth organization, residential zone or property used for
residential purposes.



   (D)   Each adult business defined in section 16-336 shall be
considered a separate business, whether or not owned or operated by the same
persons.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-202)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-338.  MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE.



   Distance between any two adult businesses shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest
exterior wall of each business.  Distance between any adult business and any
religious institution, school, public building, public park, recreation area,
youth organization, residential zone or property used for residential
purposes shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures, from the closest exterior wall of the business to the nearest
property line of the religious institution, school, public building, public
park, recreation area, youth organization, residential zone or property used
for residential purposes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-203)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-339.  EXISTING ADULT BUSINESSES.



   (A)   Any adult business lawfully operating on the effective date of
this article [September 23, 1993] in a location in which section 16-337 does
not allow an adult business to be established shall be deemed a nonconforming
use and may continue to operate in such location for a period of 14 months,
provided an adult business permit is issued for the business as provided in
sections 16-340 through 16-342.  The planning commission may grant one or
more than one year extensions of such period on a convincing showing by the
permittee of extreme financial hardship, which is defined as the inability of
a reasonably prudent operator of the business to recover a reasonable
financial investment in the business within the time allowed.  “Reasonable
financial investment” refers to investment as of August 10, 1993, including
any written lease entered into by the permittee before such date and
extending more than one year from such date.



   (B)   A nonconforming use may not increase the floor area occupied
by the adult business on the effective date of this article.  A
nonconforming use shall terminate if voluntarily discontinued for 30 or more
consecutive days.  However, a nonconforming use may be changed to a
conforming use.



   (C)   An adult business lawfully operating on the effective date of
this article in a location in which section 16-337 allows an adult business
to be established is not rendered nonconforming by the location, subsequent
to the grant or renewal of an adult business permit, of a religious
institution, school, public building, public park, recreation area, youth
organization, residential zone or property used for residential purposes,
within 1,000 feet of the adult business.  This provision applies only to the
renewal of a valid adult business permit and does not apply when an
application for a permit is submitted after a permit has expired or been
revoked.



   (D)   If two or more adult businesses are lawfully operating on the
effective date of this article in locations in which section 16-337 allows
adult businesses to be established and are within 750 feet of one another,
the adult business that was first established and has been in continuous
operation at the particular location is the conforming use and the later
established business is nonconforming.



   (E)   All adult businesses operating on the effective date of this
article shall apply for an adult business permit as provided in section
16-340 within 30 days of such effective date.  No such adult business shall
continue to operate if the permit is denied.



   (F)   All adult businesses (except adult motels) operating on the
effective date of this article and exhibiting on the premises in a viewing
room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or
other video reproduction that depicts specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the provisions of section
16-349 in order to be eligible for issuance of an adult business permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-204)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-340.  ADULT BUSINESS PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No adult business shall operate without a valid adult business
permit issued by the city for a particular type of adult business at a
particular location.



   (B)   The city manager shall grant, deny, renew, suspend, revoke and
transfer permits for proposed or existing adult businesses in accordance with
this article.



   (C)   The application for a permit must be made on a form provided
by the city manager.  An original and two copies of the completed and sworn
application form must be filed with the city manager.  If the applicant is
an individual, he or she must sign the application.  If the applicant is
other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual
who has a ten percent or greater interest in the business entity must sign
the application.



   (D)   The completed application shall contain the following
information and be accompanied by the following documents:



      (1)   If the applicant is:



         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state his or
her legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory written proof that he
or she is at least 18 years of age;



         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its
complete name, the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general
or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; or



         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its
complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation
is in good standing under the laws of the State, the names and capacity of
all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent, and
the address of the registered office for service of process.



      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the adult business
under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant must state the
fictitious name of the adult business and show proof of registration of the
fictitious name;



      (3)   A description of the type of adult business for which
the permit is applied and the proposed address where the adult business will
operate;



      (4)   The address to which notice of action on the application
is to be mailed;



      (5)   The names of all employees required by section 16-347 to
obtain an adult business employee license;



      (6)   A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration
of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by
the adult business.  The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches.



      (7)   A certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within
30 days prior to application by a State registered land surveyor, depicting
the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult business,
and:



         (a)   Any structures containing existing adult
businesses within 1,000 feet of the closest exterior wall of the building in
which will be located the adult business for which a permit is applied;



         (b)   The property lines of any religious institution,
school, public park, recreation area or youth organization within 1,000 feet
of the closest exterior wall of such building; and



         (c)   The property lines of any residential zones or
property used for residential purposes within 1,000 feet of the closest
exterior wall of such building.



      (8)   A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises
entries of the adult business, showing the location of the lighting system
required by section 16-352; and



      (9)   If the adult business is to exhibit on the premises in a
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space films, video
cassettes, or other video reproductions that depict specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, the applicant shall comply with the
requirements stated in section 16-349.



   (E)   The completed application shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee and an annual permit fee.  The permit fee
shall be refunded if the application is denied.  The amount of such fees
shall be set by resolution of the city council.



   (F)   Applicants shall promptly supplement the application if the
information therein, including the names of employees required by section
16-347 to obtain an adult business employee license, changes in any way. 
Failure to supplement the application within 30 days from the date of such
change shall be grounds for suspending the permit.



   (G)   If the city manager determines that the applicant has
completed the application improperly, the city manager shall promptly notify
the applicant of such fact and, on request of the applicant, grant the
applicant an extension of time of not more than ten days to complete the
application properly.  In addition, the applicant may request an extension,
not to exceed ten days, of the time for the city manager to act on the
application.  The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be
stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of
time.



   (H)   The fact that an applicant possesses other types of State or
city permits or licenses (including but not limited to a business license, a
special use permit, a massage permit, an arcade permit or a dance permit)
does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult
business permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-205)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-341.  INVESTIGATION AND ACTION ON APPLICATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application
and permit fees, the city manager shall immediately stamp the application as
received and promptly investigate the information contained in the
application to determine whether the adult business is entitled to a permit.



   (B)   Within 30 days of receipt of the application, the city manager
shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application, and mail a
copy thereof to the applicant, as follows:



      (1)   The city manager shall write or stamp “Granted” or
“Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.



      (2)   If the application is denied, the city manager shall
attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial and refund
the annual permit fee.



      (3)   If the application is granted, the city manager shall
attach to the application an adult business permit.



      (4)   The application as granted or denied and the permit, if
any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid,
addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-206)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-342.  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The city manager shall grant the application and issue the
permit unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set
forth in subsection (C) of this section.  The permittee shall post the
permit conspicuously in the adult business premises.



   (B)   If the city manager grants the application or if the city
manager neither grants nor denies the application within 30 days after it is
stamped as received (except as provided in section 16-340), the applicant may
begin operating the adult business for which the permit was sought.



   (C)   The city manager shall deny the application for any of the
following reasons:



      (1)   If an individual, the applicant is under 18 years of age;



      (2)   The applicant has failed to provide information required
by the permit application or has provided false information in the
application;



      (3)   The application and annual permit fees have not been
paid;



      (4)   The applicant is in violation of, or is not in
compliance with, any of the provisions of this article, including but not
limited to the locational requirements for an adult business set out in
section 16-337.  However, such locational requirements shall not apply to a
nonconforming use described in section 16-339 during the period in which
section 16-339 allows the nonconforming use to continue to operate in the
location in which it was operating on the effective date of this article
[September 23, 1993];



      (5)   The granting of the application would violate a statute,
ordinance, or court order; or



      (6)   An applicant knowingly has employed to work in the adult
business for which the permit is sought a person who does not have an adult
business employee license, as required by section 16-347 of this article.



   (D)   If a person applies for a permit or renewal of a permit for a
particular location within one year from the date of denial of a previous
application for a permit or renewal of a permit at the same location, and
there has not been a change in circumstances that could reasonably be
expected to lead to a different decision regarding the reasons for the
previous denial, the city manager shall deny the application.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-207)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-343.  EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance
and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 16-340,
accompanied by the annual permit fee and a copy of the permit to be
renewed.  The application fee and the certificate and drawing referred to in
section 16-340 shall not be required.  Application for renewal shall be made
at least 30 days but not more than 60 days, before the expiration date of the
permit.  When made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the permit will not be stayed.



   (B)   Applications for renewal shall be filed no earlier than 45
days before the date the current permit expires and shall be acted on as
provided in sections 16-341 and 16-342.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-208)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-344.  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   The city manager shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed 30
days if the city manager determines that a permittee, or an employee of a
permittee, violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-209)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-345.  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The city manager shall revoke a permit if a cause of
suspension, as set out in section 16-344, occurs and the permit has been
suspended within the preceding year.



   (B)   In addition, the city manager shall revoke a permit upon
determining that:



      (1)   A permittee gave false or misleading information in the
application that tended to enhance the applicant's opportunity to obtain the
permit; or



      (2)   A permittee or an employee of a permittee knowingly
operated the adult business during a period of time when the permit was
suspended.



   (C)   When the city manager revokes a permit, the revocation shall
continue for one year, and the permittee shall not be issued another adult
business permit for one year from the date the revocation became effective. 
If, subsequent to revocation, the city manager finds that the basis for
revocation has been corrected, the city manager shall grant a permit if at
least 30 days have elapsed since the date of revocation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-210)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-346.  TRANSFER OF PERMIT.



   (A)   A permittee shall not operate an adult business under the
authority of a permit at any place other than the address of the adult
business stated in the application for the permit.



   (B)   A permittee shall not transfer the permit to another person
unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the
city manager, stating that the transferee is now the permittee.  Such an
amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with
the city manager in accordance with section 16-340, accompanies the
application with a transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the city
council, and the city manager determines in accordance with sections 16-341
and 16-342 that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an
original permit.



   (C)   No permit may be transferred when the city manager has
notified the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or
revoked.



   (D)   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly
in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be
deemed revoked.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-211)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-347.  ADULT BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.



   (A)   No person shall be employed in an adult business to engage in
the services rendered by a nude model studio, escort agency, sexual encounter
establishment, or adult massage parlor without a valid adult business
employee license issued by the city.



   (B)   The city manager shall grant, deny and renew adult business
employee licenses.



   (C)   The application for a license must be made on a form provided
by the city manager.  An original and two copies of the completed and sworn
license application must be filed with the city manager.



   (D)   The completed application shall contain the following
information and be accompanied by the following documents:



      (1)   The applicant's legal name and any other names
(including “stage names” and aliases) used by the applicant;



      (2)   Age, date, and place of birth;



      (3)   Height, weight, hair and eye color;



      (4)   Present residence address and telephone number;



      (5)   Present business address and telephone number;



      (6)   State driver's license or identification number;



      (7)   Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at
least 18 years of age;



      (8)   The applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the
police department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant's
face.  Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the
applicant;



      (9)   A history of adult business licenses issued by the city
to the applicant for the five  years immediately preceding the date of
application, including whether the applicant has ever had such a license,
permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended, or had
any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or
suspended.  In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, the
applicant shall state the date and the name of the jurisdiction and describe
in full the reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension; a copy of any
order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the
application;



      (10)   A statement of whether the applicant has been convicted
of a specified criminal act, including the date, place, nature of any such
conviction or plea of nolo contendere and the convicting jurisdiction; and



      (11)   If the application is made for the purpose of renewing
a license, the applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed.



   (E)   The completed application shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee and an annual license fee.  The license fee
shall be refunded if the application is denied.  The amount of such fees
shall be set by resolution of the city council.



   (F)   Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application
and license fees, the city manager shall immediately stamp the application as
received and promptly refer the application to the police department for
investigation and report concerning the information contained in the
application.



   (G)   If the city manager determines that the applicant has
completed the application improperly, the city manager shall promptly notify
the applicant of such fact and on request of the applicant, grant the
applicant an extension of time of not more than ten days to complete the
application properly.  In addition, the applicant may request an extension,
not to exceed ten days, of the time for the city manager to act on the
application.  The time period for granting or denying a license shall be
stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of
time.



   (H)   Within 30 days of receipt of the application, the police
department shall report to the city manager and the city manager shall grant
or deny the application and mail a copy thereof to the applicant, as follows:



      (1)   The city manager shall write or stamp “Granted” or
“Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.



      (2)   If the application is denied, the city manager shall
attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial and refund
the annual license fee.



      (3)   If the application is granted, the city manager shall
attach to the application an adult business employee license.



      (4)   The application as granted or denied and the license, if
any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid,
addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application.



   (I)   The city manager shall grant the application and issue the
license unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set
forth in subsection (K) of this section.



   (J)   If the city manager grants the application or if the city
manager neither grants nor denies the application within 30 days after the
application is stamped as received, except as provided in section 16-347, the
applicant may begin employment in the capacity for which the license was
sought.



   (K)   The city manager shall deny the application for any of the
following reasons, based on the report from the police department:



      (1)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading,
or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license
or in any report or document required to be filed with the application;



      (2)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;



      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
act for which:



         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified
criminal act;



         (b)   Less than five years has elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a felony offense for the specified criminal
act; or



         (c)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date
of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors for the specified
criminals acts occurring within any 24-month period; and



         (d)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect on disqualification of the applicant.  An applicant who has
been convicted of a specified criminal act may qualify for an adult business
employee license only after such periods have elapsed; provided, however,
that if a conviction is set aside on appeal, the city manager shall disregard
the conviction.



      (4)   The adult business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by State or city law.



   (L)   Each adult business employee license shall expire one year
from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the city
manager a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual license fee
and a copy of the license to be renewed.  The request for renewal shall be
made at least 30 days, but no more than 45 days, before the expiration date
of the license.  When made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the license will not be stayed.



   (M)   On receiving a request for renewal, accompanied by the annual
license fee, the city manager shall within 30 days renew the license, unless
the police department reports that the applicant has been convicted of any
specified criminal act or committed any act during the previous license
period that would have been grounds to deny the initial license application,
in which case the city manager shall deny renewal.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-212)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-348.  REVIEW OF DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   After denial of an application for an adult business permit or an adult
business employee license, or denial of renewal of a permit or license, or
suspension or revocation of a permit, or denial of transfer of a permit, or
denial by the commission of a request for an extension of time made pursuant
to section 16-339, the applicant or person to whom the permit or license was
granted may request review of such administrative action by the city council,
according to a review procedure to be established by resolution of the city
council.  On rendition of the city council’s decision, the city or the
applicant or permittee may seek review of such administrative action by the
courts pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.8.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-213)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-349.  REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO ADULT BUSINESSES WITH VIDEO BOOTHS.



   (A)   An applicant, operator or permittee of an adult business
(other than an adult motel), regardless of whether or not a permit has been
issued to the business under this article, which business exhibits on the
premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a
film, video cassette or other video reproduction that depicts specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the
following requirements:



      (1)   The application for an adult business permit shall be
accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing the location of one or more
manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and any
portion of the premises to which patrons will not be admitted.  A manager's
station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area, with no dimension
greater than eight feet.  The diagram shall also designate the place where
the adult business permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted.  A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's
blueprint is not required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the
north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a
designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the dimensions of
all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches.  The city manager may waive the diagram for renewal applications if
the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies
that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since the diagram
was prepared.



      (2)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city manager.



      (3)   At least one employee shall be on duty and situated at
each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.



      (4)   The interior of the premises shall be configured so that
there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is admitted for any purpose, excluding
restrooms.  Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment.  If the
premises have two or more managers' stations designated, the interior of the
premises shall be configured so that there is an unobstructed view of each
area of the premises to which any patron is admitted for any purpose from at
least one of the manager's stations.  The view required in this subsection
must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.



   (B)   The view area specified in subsection (A)(4) shall remain
unobstructed at all times by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or
other materials.  No patron shall be admitted to any area of the premises
that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be admitted in
the diagram submitted pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section.



   (C)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
one time.  The entry to each viewing room shall be open and not be covered
by any door, panel, curtain or other obstruction to view.



   (D)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
admitted at an illumination of not less than two footcandles, as measured at
the floor level.  Such illumination shall be maintained at all times that
any patron is present on the premises.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-214)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-350.  RESTRICTIONS REGARDING MINORS.



   (A)   In order to protect minors from exposure to material harmful
to minors, except as set out below the operator of an adult business shall
not knowingly, or with reasonable cause to know, permit, suffer, or allow a
person under 18 years of age to:



      (1)   Be admitted into the adult business premises unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian;



      (2)   Remain on the adult business premises unless accompanied
by a parent or guardian;



      (3)   Purchase goods or services at the adult business
premises without the specific consent of a parent or guardian; or



      (4)   Work at the adult business premises as an employee.



   (B)   The permittee shall not allow any portion of the interior of
the premises of the adult business to be visible from outside the premises.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-215)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-351.  SIGNS.



   Adult businesses are subject to applicable provisions of the city's
sign ordinances.  In addition, no signs or material visible from the
exterior of the adult business premises shall advertise the presentation of
any activity prohibited by federal, city or State law or depict materials or
performances available at the adult business.  However, signs visible from
the exterior of the business premises may advertise the existence and
location of the business.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-216)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-352.  LIGHTING.



   All off-street parking areas and premises entries of an adult business
shall be illuminated from dusk to the close of business with a lighting
system that provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one
footcandle of light on the parking surface and walkways.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-217)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-353.  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No adult business shall be open for business, nor shall any employee of
an adult business engage in or solicit a performance, sale or service in
connection with the business, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of
any day.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-218)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-354.  CRIMINAL PENALTIES AND ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.



   (A)   In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under the
Cal. Penal Code, if any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or
violates any of the provisions of section 16-337; subsections 16-339(B), (C)
or (D); section 16-340(A); section 16-346(A); section 16-347(A); section
16-350; or section 16-353 of this division such person upon conviction of
such offense shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days in the county
jail, or both, in the discretion of the court.  Each violation or instance
of noncompliance shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
Further, each day of continued violation or noncompliance shall be considered
as a separate offense.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the city
from taking such other lawful action in any court as is necessary to prevent
or remedy any violation or noncompliance.  Such other lawful actions shall
include, but shall not be limited to, an equitable action for injunctive
relief or an action at law for damages.  All remedies and penalties provided
for in this section shall be cumulative and independently available to the
city, and the city shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies set
forth in this section to the full extent allowed by law.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-219)  (Ord. No. 2313)



SEC. 16-355.  IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION.



   The city, the police department and all other city departments and
agencies, and all city officers, agents and employees charged with
enforcement of State and city statutes and laws shall be immune from
prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon an
adult business while acting within the scope of authority conferred by this
article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-219.1)  (Ord. No. 2313)



DIVISION 2.  ATTACHED DWELLING UNIT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



SEC. 16-360.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose and intent of this division is to implement the goals and
objectives of the general plan to provide quality multiple-family housing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.9.1)  (Ord. No. 2152)



SEC. 16-361.  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this division shall apply to the development of any
new attached multi-family residential project of six or more units. 
Projects of five units or less shall be subject only to the development
standards of the zone in which such projects are located and such other
provisions of this code as may apply.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.9.2)  (Ord. No. 2152)



SEC. 16-362.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Minimum dwelling size - One bedroom:  450 square feet; two or
more bedrooms:  800 square feet.



   (B)   Building separation - Minimum separation between any two
buildings shall be a distance equal to half of the height of the taller
structure unless otherwise determined by health and safety requirements
during the Development Advisory Committee review process.



   (C)   Recreation facilities - Multiple-family attached dwelling
units of 12 units or more shall provide common recreational facilities with
interior yard space areas to include, but not be limited to, one or more of
the following:



      (1)   Swimming pools;



      (2)   Spa;



      (3)   Tennis and/or basketball or volleyball courts;



      (4)   Barbecues and outdoor picnic facilities;



      (5)   Recreation buildings;



      (6)   Exercise courses and stations;



      (7)   Children's play equipment; and



      (8)   Such other facilities as are approved by the planning
commission.



   (D)   Open area - Projects having 12 or more units shall provide at
least one lawn area of not less than 2,500 square feet and having a minimum
dimension of not less than 35 feet.



   (E)   Distance to garage from dwelling unit - The maximum distance
to a garage from any dwelling unit entry shall be 75 feet.



   (F)   Balconies and patios - All second story dwelling units shall
have at least one patio or balcony, having a minimum dimension of ten feet.



   (G)   Balcony enclosures - All balconies and patios shall have
railings or walls which provide at least 50 % enclosure.



   (H)   Storage areas - Each dwelling unit shall have a storage area
of at least 225 cubic feet. The storage area may be included in the garage
area, but may not intrude into the minimum garage dimensions.



   (I)   Garages - All garages shall have automatic garage door
openers.  All garage doors shall have architectural treatment or detail.



   (J)   Utility meters - Wall-mounted utility meters shall be screened
or integrated into the building design.



   (K)   Refuse enclosures - Refuse enclosures shall be designed to
reflect the major design elements or details of the residential units and
shall provide an access for persons separate from the refuse vehicle access.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.9.3)  (Ord. No. 2152, 2923)



SEC. 16-363.  DEVELOPMENT DESIGN REVIEW.



   Attached multi-family developments of six or more units which are
proposed for a property not located in a planned development zone, or which
do not otherwise require a special use permit, may be approved by issuance of
a development design review permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.9.4)  (Ord. No. 2152)



DIVISION 3.  BED AND BREAKFAST USES



SEC. 16-370.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this division is:



   (A)   To encourage preservation and restoration of historically and
culturally significant residential structures;



   (B)   To provide limited visitor lodging in residences in the city;
and



   (C)   To ensure compatibility of bed and breakfast uses with the
existing, surrounding land uses.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.8.1)  (Ord. No. 2165)



SEC. 16-371.  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   BED AND BREAKFAST INN - An establishment, originally built as
a single-family residence, operated by a resident owner, and containing three
to five guest bedrooms, each of which is available for rent to the general
public for up to 29 consecutive days.



   (B)   TRADITIONAL BED AND BREAKFAST (HOMESTAY) - A traditional bed
and breakfast is an establishment which contains no more than two guest
bedrooms, each of which is available for rent to the general public for up to
29 consecutive days.  Traditional bed and breakfast facilities are also
referred to as “homestays.”



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.8.2)  (Ord. No. 2165)



SEC. 16-372.  LIMITATIONS ON LOCATION.



   Traditional bed and breakfast uses and bed and breakfast inns shall be
permitted only within the boundaries of the Wilson Neighborhood.  The
commission may also approve bed and breakfast uses within other areas of the
city provided the commission makes the findings required for designation of a
structure as a significant heritage feature, as provided herein.  Bed and
breakfast uses must also comply with the standards in this section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.8.3)  (Ord. No. 2165)



SEC. 16-373.  TYPE OF PERMIT REQUIRED.



   In those zones where bed and breakfast uses are allowed, the following
permits are required:



   (A)   Traditional bed and breakfast (homestay):  development design
review permit.



   (B)   Bed and breakfast inns:  special use permit, pursuant to
sections 16-530 to 16-553.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.8.4)  (Ord. No. 2165)



SEC. 16-374.  STANDARDS FOR TRADITIONAL BED AND BREAKFAST (HOMESTAY).



   The standards for traditional bed and breakfast are:



   (A)   The maximum number of guest bedrooms for rent shall not exceed
two.



   (B)   The owner of the homestay shall live on the premises and
operate the homestay.



   (C)   No cooking facilities shall be provided in individual guest
bedrooms.



   (D)   No exterior advertising signs shall be permitted.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.8.5)



SEC. 16-375.  STANDARDS FOR BED AND BREAKFAST INNS.



   The standards for bed and breakfast inns are:



   (A)   Maximum number of guest bedrooms - The maximum number of guest
bedrooms for rent shall not exceed five.  The commission may approve more
bedrooms provided adequate parking and interior yard space are available.



   (B)   Owner occupancy required - The owner of the bed and breakfast
inn shall live on the premises and operate the inn.



   (C)   Meal service - Meal service shall be limited to breakfast and
evening snacks for overnight guests of the inn.



   (D)   Cooking in guest bedrooms - No cooking facilities shall be
provided in individual guest bedrooms.



   (E)   Alteration to structures - Any alterations proposed to the inn
shall be consistent with the materials, color, and architectural style of the
original construction, as determined by the commission, based on a
recommendation from the Ventura County Cultural Heritage Commission, or an
architect or other design professional specializing in period architecture.



   (F)   Historical significance - The proposed bed and breakfast inn
shall have some historical significance in the establishment and development
of the city, as determined by the commission, based on the findings required
for designation of a structure as a significant heritage feature.



   (G)   Signs -



      (1)   A bed and breakfast inn with 100 feet or more of
continuous street frontage shall be permitted to install one double-faced
sign not to exceed six square feet per side and 48 inches in height in its
front yard, or one indirectly lighted sign not exceeding four square feet in
area attached to the main building, subject to approval of the commission. 
Any other bed and breakfast inn shall be limited to one 4-square-foot
indirectly lighted sign attached to the main structure.  Lighting fixtures
and wattage of signs are to be approved by the director.



      (2)   The sign may not refer to the inn as a hotel or motel. 
The design of the sign shall be compatible with the design of the inn. 
Signs for bed and breakfast inns shall be reviewed by the commission during
consideration of the special use permit.



   (H)   Fire safety -



      (1)   In addition to Uniform Fire Code Requirements, the bed
and breakfast inn shall comply with all fire safety requirements of the fire
department prior to occupancy.  At a minimum these include, but are not
limited to:



         (a)   Installation of a “hard wired” smoke detector
and evacuation plan in every guest room;



         (b)   Installation of an approved fire extinguisher on
each floor; and



         (c)   Provision of at least two exits from the main
structure, both of which do not require a key or special knowledge to open
from the inside.



      (2)   The bed and breakfast inn shall be subject to inspection
by the city fire marshal.  The results of this inspection shall be provided
to the director.



   (I)   Building code -



      (1)   If the city council has designated the bed and breakfast
inn as a significant heritage feature, the inn shall comply with the State
historic building code.



      (2)   The bed and breakfast inn shall be subject to an
inspection by the city building inspector, who shall provide to the director
a list of Uniform Building Code or State historical building code
deficiencies prior to the commission's consideration of the special use
permit.



   (J)   Parking requirements -



      (1)   Parking shall be provided at the rate of one off-street
parking space per guest room plus parking for the owner as required at the
time of original construction of the structure.  Parking surfaces may
include, but are not limited to:  brick, pavers, cobblestones, stamped
colored concrete, and grass-cell pavement.  Excessive amounts of paving to
meet parking requirements shall not be allowed.



      (2)   Inns located on corner lots may credit the nonprimary
street frontage toward the parking requirement, with 25 linear feet equal to
one parking space, subject to approval of the commission.



   (K)   Yard areas - Interior yard space shall be provided in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the zoning designation within
which the proposed bed and breakfast inn is located.



   (L)   On-site lighting - On-site lighting shall be shielded from
spilling onto adjacent property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.8.6)  (Ord. No. 2165)



DIVISION 4.  COMMUNITY HOUSING CONVERSIONS



SEC. 16-380.  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The intent and purpose of this section is to regulate the
conversion of existing, occupied apartment housing into condominiums,
townhouse condominiums, residential stock cooperatives, or community
apartments.



   (B)   The city finds that such ownership patterns may have
substantial effects and that regulation is necessary to implement the
policies set forth in the housing element of the general plan to provide
adequate housing opportunities for all economic segments of the community, to
mitigate adverse impacts upon schools and other public facilities, to provide
for reasonable notice to displaced tenants and to provide for adequate
maintenance of private residential properties to insure safety and maximize
the quality of the city's living environments.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-220)  (Ord. No. 1805)



SEC. 16-381.  SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No existing residential apartment unit shall be converted for sale,
transfer, or conveyance as a condominium, townhouse condominium, stock
cooperative, or community apartment, collectively referred to in this article
as a community housing project, without a special use permit pursuant to
sections 16-530 to 16-553, and where applicable, an approved subdivision map.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-221)  (Ord. No. 1805)



SEC. 16-382.  REQUIREMENTS FOR FILING.



   An application for conversion of an apartment shall include a tentative
subdivision map if required by State law, a development plan consisting of
all materials normally required for a special use permit, and the following
information in a form established by the director:



   (A)   A report on the physical elements of all structures and
facilities, detailing the structural condition of all elements of the
property including foundations, electrical, plumbing, utilities, walls,
ceilings, windows, recreational facilities, sound transmission of each
building, mechanical equipment, parking facilities, and appliances. 
Regarding each such element, the report shall state, to the best knowledge or
estimate of the applicant, when such element was built; the condition of each
element; when such element was replaced; the approximate date upon which such
element will require replacement; the cost of replacing such element; and any
variation of the physical condition of such element from the city’s current
building and zoning ordinances and those that were in effect on the date that
the last building permit was issued for the subject structure.  The report
shall identify any defective or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed
corrective measures.



   (B)   A report from a licensed structural pest control operator,
approved by the city, on each structure and each unit within the structure.



   (C)   A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the
subdivider necessary to refurbish and restore the project to achieve good
appearance and safety.



   (D)   Any declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions
and/or organizational documents which would apply to any owners of the units
within the community housing project.  The declaration or organizational
documents shall include, but not be limited to, procedures or requirements
for conveyance of units; the assignment of parking; an agreement for common
area maintenance, including facilities and landscaping; an estimate of any
initial assessment fees anticipated for such maintenance of all vehicular
access areas within the project; and an assignment of appropriate
responsibilities for maintenance of all utility lines and services for each
unit.



   (E)   Specific information concerning the characteristics of the
project, including but not limited to the following:



      (1)   Square footage and number of rooms in each unit;



      (2)   Names and addresses of all tenants.



   (F)   Proof of service to each tenant of the notice to convert as
specified in section 16-387.



   (G)   Any other information which, in the opinion of the director,
will assist in determining whether the proposed project will be consistent
with the purposes of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-222)  (Ord. No. 1805)



SEC. 16-383.  COMPLETED FILING.



   Before a filing shall be deemed complete, the physical elements report
and other documents shall be in a form sufficient to allow review of the
application for a special use permit and tentative subdivision map.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-223)  (Ord. No. 1805)



SEC. 16-384.  COPY TO BUYERS.



   Prior to the execution of any agreement to purchase a unit, stock, or
an exclusive right to lease in the community housing project, the developer
shall provide each purchaser with a copy of all reports in sufficient time to
review such reports.  Copies of the reports shall be made available at all
times at the sales office.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-224)  (Ord. No. 1805)



SEC. 16-385.  HEARING.



   The commission shall hold a noticed public hearing concerning the
application for both the tentative subdivision map and special use permit. 
In addition to the notice requirements of section 16-580, a ten-day notice
shall be given by mail to the present tenants of the building proposed for
conversion.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-225)  (Ord. No. 1805)



SEC. 16-386.  PHYSICAL STANDARDS FOR CONVERSIONS.



   (A)   To achieve the purpose of this article, the commission shall
require that all conversions conform to the requirements of the code in
effect at the time of tentative subdivision map approval, except as otherwise
provided herein.



   (B)   No apartment building which is a nonconforming use or a
nonconforming structure because of parking, setback, height, interior yard
space and other zoning ordinance standards, shall be eligible for conversion.



   (C)   All provisions of the code must be met and any nonconformity
corrected prior to the approval of the final map, unless adequate security is
provided, as approved by the finance director, to assure completion of such
corrective work prior to the close of escrow of any unit in the community
housing project.



   (D)   The commission shall require conformance with the standards of
this section in approving the special use permit.



      (1)   Building regulations - Except as herein provided, the
conversion project shall conform to all city ordinances, including the city
building code, plumbing code, mechanical code and electric code in effect on
the date that the last building permit was issued for the subject structure
or structures before the application was filed.



      (2)   Fire prevention -



         (a)   Smoke detectors - Each living unit shall be
provided with approved detectors of the products of combustion other than
heat, conforming to the latest Uniform Building Code standards, mounted on
the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or area
giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes.



         (b)   Maintenance of fire protection systems - All fire
hydrants, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers and other fire
protective appliances shall be maintained in an operable condition at all
times.



         (c)   Maintenance of emergency vehicle access/fire lanes
- All emergency vehicle access and established fire lanes shall be maintained.



      (3)   Sound transmission -



         (a)   Shock mounting of mechanical equipment.  All
permanent mechanical equipment, such as motors, compressors, pumps and
compactors, which are determined by the building official to be a source of
structural vibration or structure-borne noise shall be shock-mounted with
inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration insulators in a manner approved by
the building official.



         (b)   Noise standards - The structure shall conform to
all interior and exterior sound transmission standards of Chapter 35
(Appendix) of the Uniform Building Code.



      (4)   Utility metering - Each dwelling unit shall be
separately metered for gas, water and electricity.



      (5)   Landscape maintenance - All landscaping shall be
restored as necessary and maintained to achieve a good appearance and high
quality.



      (6)   Condition of equipment and appliances - The developer
shall provide written certification and 90 day warranty to the buyer of each
unit at the close of escrow that any dishwashers, garbage disposals, stoves,
refrigerators, hot water tanks and air conditioners that are provided are in
operable working condition as of the close of escrow.  At such time as the
homeowners' association takes over management of the development, the
developer shall provide written certification and a 90-day warranty to the
association that any pool and pool equipment (filter, pumps, chlorinator) and
any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the
association is in operable working condition.



      (7)   Refurbishing and restoration - All main buildings,
structures, fences, patio enclosures, carports, accessory buildings,
sidewalks, driveways, landscaped areas and additional elements as required by
the commission shall be refurbished and restored as necessary to achieve a
good appearance, high quality and high degree of safety.



      (8)   Advisory physical standards - In addition to the above,
the proposed community housing project shall meet any mandatory development
standards and shall substantially conform to any advisory standards for the
construction of new community housing projects, which standards have been
adopted by the city council and are in effect at the time of the application
for conversion is deemed complete.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-226)  (Ord. No. 1805)



SEC. 16-387.  NOTICES TO TENANTS.



   The city council shall not approve the final map for a subdivision to
be created from the conversion of residential real property into a community
housing project unless the city council finds that the subdivider has given
the notices to tenants required by Cal. Gov't Code, Section 66427.1.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-227)  (Ord. No. 1805)



SEC. 16-388.  EFFECT UPON LOW AND MODERATE INCOME HOUSING SUPPLY.



   In reviewing requests for conversion, the commission shall consider the
following:



   (A)   Whether the amount and impact of the displacement of tenants
caused by the conversion would be detrimental to the health, safety, or
general welfare of the community;



   (B)   The role that the apartment complex proposed for conversion
plays in the existing housing rental market and whether the apartment complex
is serving low and moderate income households.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-228)  (Ord. No. 1805)



SEC. 16-389.  FINDINGS.



   Before approving an application for a special use permit to convert
apartments to a community housing project, the commission shall find that:



   (A)   All provisions of this article are met;



   (B)   The proposed conversion is consistent with the general plan;



   (C)   The proposed conversion will conform to the code in effect at
the time of tentative map approval, except as otherwise provided in this
article;



   (D)   The overall design and physical condition of the proposed
community housing project substantially meets the city's design criteria to
achieve a good appearance, high quality and high degree of safety;



   (E)   The proposed conversion will not displace a significant
percentage of low and moderate income or senior citizen tenants, and will not
delete a significant number of low and moderate income rental units from the
city's housing stock;



   (F)   The project as approved or conditionally approved will meet
all mandatory development standards and will substantially comply with the
adopted advisory standards for new condominium construction, which standards
are in effect at the time of approval; and



   (G)   Each dwelling unit provides a reasonable level of safety,
convenience and amenities for owner-occupied residences.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-229)  (Ord. No. 1805)



DIVISION 5.  COMMUNITY OWNERSHIP UNITS



SEC. 16-395.  SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   As used in this division, a “community ownership unit”
means any townhouse condominium, condominium, office condominium, commercial
condominium, industrial condominium, residential stock cooperative,
commercial stock cooperative, industrial stock cooperative, community
apartment, or timeshare.



   (B)   No building shall be constructed which is intended to be sold,
nor shall any existing building be converted for sale as a community
ownership unit, until a special permit is obtained.  If a special use permit
or a planned development permit is required by another provision of this
chapter, only one application need be filed and only one fee paid.



   (C)   A special use permit may be granted for a community ownership
unit that is consistent with the adopted general plan; conforms to policies,
ordinances and standards that are related to the specific area and type of
development; and conforms to the requirements set forth in the standards
pertaining to any form of a community ownership unit.  The conditions
imposed on a special use permit for a community ownership unit may address
factors affecting the establishment, operation or maintenance of the
requested use, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Number and type of units, patios, common areas, parking,
pathways, entrances, landscaping, communication terminals, design,
aesthetics, utilities, amenities, circulation, storage, buffers, building
orientation, security, handicap facilities, energy efficiency, mitigation of
adverse environmental impacts, owners’ association, and deed restrictions;



      (2)   Those factors identified in section 16-532 of this code;
and



      (3)   Other factors affecting the public health, safety and
welfare.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-112.2)  (Ord. No. 1706, 1814, 1959)



DIVISION 6.  HOME OCCUPATIONS



SEC. 16-400.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this division is to provide for and regulate the conduct
of home occupations in dwelling units.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-8.13.1)  (Ord. No. 2130, 2829)



SEC. 16-400.1.  APPLICABILITY.



   A home occupation permit is required to conduct a home occupation from
a dwelling unit under limited conditions as described in this division.



(Ord. No. 2829)



SEC. 16-401.  PERMIT AND LICENSE REQUIRED.



   A home occupation permit shall be issued by the director, who may
impose reasonable conditions on the permit to mitigate potential adverse
impacts.  An application for a home occupation permit shall be made on a
form provided by and filed with the director.  A city business license shall
be obtained in accordance with Chapter 11 of the code prior to or
concurrently with an application for a home occupation permit.  The
applicant is responsible for complying with all city, county, State and
federal requirements including business license requirements and local zoning
laws. Payment of the business license tax is not an endorsement of the
business or verification of competency or reliability.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-8.13.3)  (Ord. No. 2130, 2829)



SEC. 16-402.  PERMIT INITIATION AND EXPIRATION.



   (A)   The use authorized by a home occupation permit shall be
initiated within 30 days of final approval.  If not initiated within 30
days, the home occupation permit shall automatically be null and void.



   (B)   A home occupation permit shall become null and void when the
use for which the permit was granted ceases or is suspended for more than 30
days, or if a valid business license is not maintained for the home
occupation.



(Ord. No. 2829)



SEC. 16-403.  OPERATING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Home occupations shall operate according to the following
standards:



      (1)   No permit shall be issued for a home occupation that
violates any provision of the city code.



      (2)   The operation of a home occupation shall not alter the
appearance of the dwelling unit by the use of colors, materials, lighting,
signs or exterior alterations not compatible with the surrounding area.  No
structural alterations shall be permitted within the dwelling to separate any
area used for a home occupation from the principal dwelling space.



      (3)   A home occupation permit shall only be approved for a
resident of the subject property. No area used for a home occupation shall be
subleased or rented to another party.



      (4)   The home occupation shall not include direct sales of
goods or displays of goods on the premises.



      (5)   There shall be no on- or off-site advertising that
identifies the home occupation by street address, except as may be required
by State law or by city business licensing requirements.



      (6)   The home occupation shall be conducted indoors and
confined completely within a dwelling or accessory building.  The area used
for a home occupation shall not exceed 25% of the gross area of one floor of
the dwelling or accessory building.



      (7)   Use of a garage for home occupation purposes shall not
interfere with the permanent maintenance of off-street parking spaces,
including required garage spaces.



      (8)   A single vehicle no larger than a two axle vehicle and
weighing no more than 10,000 pounds used in connection with a home occupation
may be parked at the dwelling.  Parking for any vehicle used in connection
with the home occupation shall be provided off-street.



      (9)   The home occupation shall not encroach into any required
parking, setback, or open space area.



      (10)   Activities conducted by and equipment or material used
in the home occupation shall not change the fire safety or occupancy
classifications of the dwelling or accessory building, or use utility or
solid waste services in amounts greater than normally provided for the
residential use.



      (11)   No employees other than residents of the dwelling shall
be allowed in connection with a home occupation, except that babysitters or
domestic staff shall not be considered employees of a home occupation.



      (12)   Customers or clients of the home occupation shall not
call upon the premises arriving either by vehicle or as pedestrians, with the
exception of individual tutorial instruction including music or academic
lessons limited to no more than one person at any time subject to the other
provisions of this section.



      (13)   The applicant for a permit for a home occupation that
is to be conducted on rental property shall submit the property owner's
written authorization for the proposed use prior to the issuance of a home
occupation permit.



      (14)   If the person conducting the home occupation serves as
an agent or intermediary between outside suppliers and outside customers, all
articles, except for samples, shall be sold or shipped directly to customers
located at an off-premises location.



      (15)   The home occupation shall not involve the interior or
exterior use or storage of material or mechanical equipment which is not part
of a normal household or hobby use.



      (16)   Home occupations shall be conducted only between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.



      (17)   The home occupation shall not create more noise, light,
vibration, smoke, odor, humidity, heat, cold, glare, dust or dirt, electrical
interference, pedestrian activity, vehicular traffic, or television or radio
interference, than is customary in the residential area in which the home
occupation is located.



      (18)   Deliveries to a home occupation shall not involve types
of vehicles or more frequent deliveries than are customary for a residential
area.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-8.13.4)  (Ord. No. 2130, 2829)



SEC. 16-404.  PROHIBITED HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   Sale of alcohol, explosives, hazardous wastes, or firearms which
involve the storage of such items within a structure are prohibited as home
occupations.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-8.13.5)  (Ord. No. 2130, 2829)



SEC. 16-405.  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The director shall notify a permittee in writing of a home
occupation permit revocation if the director finds that one or more of the
following conditions exist:



      (1)   The operation or nature of the business has been altered
contrary to the original approval;



      (2)   The use is not consistent with an associated permit or
specific plan;



      (3)   The use has become detrimental to the public health or
safety or constitutes a nuisance;



      (4)   The permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner;



      (5)   The condition of the premises where the home occupation
is located has been altered contrary to the original approval, including
expansion of use;



      (6)   The condition of the site where the use is located has
changed so that the use is no longer justified under the meaning and intent
of this chapter.



   (B)   The director shall mail such notice to the permittee, stating
the basis on which the director intends to revoke the home occupation permit,
and informing the permittee that the director shall revoke the permit within
15 calendar days of the notice mailing date, unless the condition found to be
in violation of this chapter is abated within the time specified.  The
notice shall also inform the permittee of the appeal procedures set forth in
section 16-406.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-8.13.6)  (Ord. No. 2130, 2829)



SEC. 16-406.  APPEAL.



   Any person may appeal to a hearing officer a decision of the director
approving or denying an application for a home occupation permit or revoking
a home occupation permit.  The appeal shall be in writing, shall state the
grounds for appeal, and shall be filed with the city clerk 15 calendar days
of the date of the mailing of the director's decision, together with the
appeal fee adopted by resolution of the city council.  The decision of the
hearing officer shall be final.



(Ord. No. 2829)



DIVISION 7.  (RESERVED)



Editor’s note:



   Division 7 was repealed by Ord. No. 2912, adopted December 20, 2016.
Division 7 related to  incentives to create affordable housing, and the
sections thereunder were derived from Ord.  Code §§ 36-7.14.136-7.14.4,
36-7-14.636-7.14.11, 36-7.14.13 and 36-7.14.14, and Ord.  Nos. 2505, 2630,
2631, 2705 and 2789.



DIVISION 7A.  DENSITY BONUS AND RELATED INCENTIVES AND CONCESSIONS PROGRAM



SEC. 16-410A.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this Division 7A is to meet the requirements set forth
in Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915 et seq. (known as the State Density Bonus
Law). If any provision of this Division 7A conflicts with State law, or
provides more rights than are legally required by State law, the minimum
requirements of State law shall control.



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410B.  DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the definitions in section 16-10, the following
definitions apply to this division and shall control over any conflicting
definitions in section 16-10. State law definitions, as they may be amended
from time to time, control over the definitions in this section. Where the
definitions are provided by State law, the citation to the statute follows.



   (A)   AFFORDABLE HOUSING BENEFITS - One or more of the following:



      (1)   A density bonus pursuant to section 16-410H;



      (2)   An incentive pursuant to section 16-410L;



      (3)   A development standard waiver or modification pursuant
to section 16-410O; and



      (4)   A parking standard modification pursuant to section
16-410P.



   (B)   AFFORDABLE HOUSING COST - The definition set forth in Cal.
Health and Safety Code, Section 50052.5. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915(c)(2))



   (C)   AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPER - The applicant or permittee of a
qualified housing development and its assignees or successors in interest.



   (D)   AFFORDABLE RENT - The definition set forth in Cal. Health and
Safety Code, Section 50053. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(c)(1))



   (E)   AFFORDABLE UNIT - A residential dwelling unit that is
guaranteed by the affordable housing developer to be rented or sold in
accordance with the requirements of this division to one of the following:



      (1)   A very low income household;



      (2)   A low income household; or



      (3)   A moderate income household within a common interest
development (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(c)(l )-(c)(2)).



   (F)   CHILD CARE FACILITY - A child day care facility other than a
family day care home, including but not limited to infant centers,
preschools, extended day care facilities, and school age child care centers
(Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(h)(4)).



   (G)   CITY - The City of Oxnard or its designee.



   (H)   COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT - Any of the following: a
community apartment project, a condominium project, a planned development, or
a stock cooperative pursuant to Cal. Civil Code, Section 4100. All common
interest development units must be offered to the public for purchase (Cal.
Gov’t Code, Section 65915(b)(1)(D)).



   (I)   CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION PROJECT - A residential project in
which the applicant proposes to convert apartment units to condominiums
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915.5(a).



   (J)   DENSITY BONUS - Except as used in section 16-410T, Condominium
Conversion Projects,  a density increase over the otherwise maximum
allowable residential density as of the date of application to the city for a
qualified housing development. (Cal Gov’t Code, Section 65915(f)) As used
in section 16-410T, "density bonus" shall be defined as set forth in section
16-410B. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915.5(b))



   (K)   DENSITY BONUS UNITS - Dwelling units granted pursuant to
section 16-410H which exceed the otherwise maximum allowable residential
density.



   (L)   DEVELOPMENT STANDARD - A site or construction condition,
including, but not limited to, a height limitation, a setback requirement, a
floor area ratio, an on-site open-space requirement, or a parking ratio, that
applies to a residential development pursuant to the zoning ordinance, the
general plan, specific plan or other city condition, law. policy, resolution,
or regulation (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(o)(l)).



   (M)   HOUSING DEVELOPMENT - A development project of five or more
residential units, including mixed-use developments. This also includes a
subdivision or common interest development that is approved by the city and
consists of residential units or unimproved residential lots and either a
project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing commercial
building to residential use or the substantial rehabilitation of an existing
multifamily dwelling where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net
increase in available residential units. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(i))



   (N)   HOUSEHOLD INCOME CATEGORY DEFINITIONS



      (1)   VERY LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD - A household whose income
does not exceed 50% of the county's median household income as defined in
Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 50105. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915(b)(1)(B))



      (2)   LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD - A household whose income does not
exceed 80% of the county's median household income as defined in Cal. Health
and Safety Code, Section 50079.5. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(b)(1)(A))



      (3)   MODERATE INCOME HOUSEHOLD - Persons or families whose
income does not exceed 120% of the county's median household income as
defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 50093. (Cal. Gov’t Code,
Section 65915(b)(1)(D))



   (O)   INCENTIVE - "Incentives and concessions" as that phrase is
used in Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(k).



   (P)   MARKET-RATE UNIT - A dwelling unit that is not an affordable
unit.



   (Q)   MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE RESIDENTIAL DENSITY - The density allowed
under the applicable zoning ordinance and the land use element of the general
plan, or if a range of density is permitted, means the maximum allowable
density for the specific zoning range and land use element of the general
plan applicable to the project. Where the density allowed under the zoning
ordinance is inconsistent with the density allowed under the land use element
of the general plan, the general plan density shall prevail. (Cal. Gov’t
Code, Section 65915(d)(2))



   (R)   MINIMUM AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMPONENT - A housing development
project which includes a minimum of any of the following:



      (1)   VERY LOW INCOME MINIMUM AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMPONENT -
Provides at least 5% of the total units for very low income household
residents (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(b)(1)(B)); or



      (2)   LOW INCOME MINIMUM AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMPONENT -
Provides at least 10% of the total units for low income households (Cal.
Gov’t Code, Section 65915(b)(1)(A)); or



      (3)   MODERATE INCOME MINIMUM AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMPONENT -
Provides at least 10% of the total dwelling units in a common interest
development for moderate income households (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915(b)(1)(D)).



      (4)   A SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING DEVELOPMENT - As that term is
defined in section 16-410B. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(b)(1)(C))



      (5)   Ten percent of the total units of a housing development
for transitional foster youth, as defined in Cal. Education Code, Section
66025.9, or disabled veterans, as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
18541, or homeless persons, as defined in the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless
Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. Sec. 11301 et seq.). The units described in this
division (R)(5) shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction of
55 years and shall be provided at the same affordability level as very low
income units. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(b)(1)(E))



   (S)   OTHER INCENTIVES OF EQUIVALENT FINANCIAL VALUE - The reduction
or waiver of requirements which the city might otherwise apply as conditions
of condominium conversion approval, but shall not be construed to require the
city to provide cash transfer payments or other monetary compensation. (Cal.
Gov’t Code, Section 65915.5(c))



   (T)   QUALIFIED HOUSING DEVELOPMENT - A housing development that
meets the requirements of section 16-410C for density bonus.



   (U)   QUALIFIED LAND - Land offered for donation in accordance with
section 16-410K that meets the criteria set forth in Section 16-410K.



   (V)   SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING DEVELOPMENT - A residential development
as defined in Cal. Civil Code, Sections 51.3 and 51.12, or a mobilehome park
that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons
pursuant to Cal. Civil Code, Sections 798.76 or 799.5. (Cal. Gov’t Code,
Section 65915(b)(1)(C))



   (W)   SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING DEVELOPMENT UNIT - A residential
dwelling unit within a senior citizen housing development that is available
to, and occupied by, a senior citizen as defined in Cal. Civil Code, Section
51.3. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(b)(1)(C))



   (X)   SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT - A significant, quantifiable,
direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public
health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the
date the application for the housing development was deemed complete.
Inconsistency with the zoning ordinance or general plan land use designation
shall not constitute a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or
safety. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65589.5(d)(2))



   (Y)   TOTAL UNITS AND TOTAL DWELLING UNITS -Dwelling units other
than density bonus units. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(b)(3))



   (Z)   ZONING ORDINANCE - Chapter 16 and 17 of the City of Oxnard
Municipal Code.



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410C.  ELIGIBILITY FOR DENSITY BONUSES AND INCENTIVES.



   Density bonuses are available to affordable housing developers in
accordance with this division for the following:



   (A)   Housing developments which include a minimum affordable
housing component (section 16-410H and section 16-410T(A));



   (B)   Housing developments which include a minimum affordable
housing component and a child care facility (section 16-410I);



   (C)   Senior citizen housing developments (section 16-410J); and



   (D)   Land donations for very low income housing (section 16-410K).



   (E)   Ten percent of the total units of a housing development are
for transitional foster youth (as defined in Cal. Education Code, Section
66025.9), disabled veterans (as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 18541),
or homeless persons (as defined in the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless
Assistance Act; 42 U.S.C. Sec. 11301 et seq.). The units described in this
division (E) shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction of 55
years and shall be provided at the same affordability level as very low
income units. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(b)(1)(E))



   (F)   For the purpose of calculating a density bonus, the
residential units must be on contiguous sites that are the subject of one
development application, but do not have to be based upon individual
subdivision maps or parcels.



   Notwithstanding any language in this Division 7A to the contrary and
consistent with the Second Appellate District case of Kalnel Gardens v. City
of Los Angeles (2016) 3 Cal. App. 5th 927,within the coastal zone. Density
bonuses shall not be available to affordable housing developers if the city
finds that the proposed project cannot feasibly be accommodated on the site
in a manner that is in conformity with the California Coastal Act.



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410D.  FEES.



   An application for a density bonus permit shall be accompanied by the
fee set by resolution of the city council.



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410E.  APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   When an applicant seeks a density bonus for a housing development that
meets the criteria set out in section 16-410H (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915) the affordable housing developer must comply with all of the following
requirements:



   (A)   The applicant shall file an application for a density bonus
permit in accordance with sections 16-410E and 16-410F that includes a
minimum affordable housing component, whether or not the project also
requires or has been granted a special use permit or other permits or
approvals. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(b)(l))



   (B)   State in the application the specific minimum affordable
housing component proposed for the housing development. (Cal. Gov’t Code,
Section 65915(b)(2))



   (C)   Enter into an agreement with the city or its designee pursuant
to section 16-410S to maintain and enforce the affordable housing component
of the housing development. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(c))



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410F.  CONTENT OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   The application for a density bonus permit shall include the
following information:



      (1)   A description of the project, including the number of
dwelling units, the number of affordable units and level of affordability,
and the location of the affordable units;



      (2)   A description of the density bonus and the incentives or
concessions requested, if any, in accordance with sections 16-410H thru
16-410M (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(b)(2)(d)(l));



      (3)   For parking standard modification requests, that the
requirements of section 16-426 are met (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(p));



      (4)   The location, design, and phasing criteria required by
section 16-410Q, including any proposed development standard(s) modifications
or waivers pursuant to section 16-410O;



      (5)   Any proposal for the waiver or reduction of development
standards which waiver or reduction is required to allow the city to avoid
physically precluding the construction of a development meeting the criteria
of Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(b) at the densities or with the
concessions or incentives permitted by the statute;



      (6)   The proposed method of ensuring the continued
affordability of all low, very low rental units, or senior units, or child
care facilities, that qualified the applicant for the award of the density
bonus for at least 55 years, as required by Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915(c)(1); and



      (7)   Other information reasonably requested by city staff
needed to establish eligibility for a requested density bonus, incentives or
concessions, or to demonstrate that the incentive meets the definition of
identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing
costs or affordable rents.



   (B)   For the application for a density bonus permit for the
donation of qualified land pursuant to section 16-410K, the application must
show the location of the qualified land in addition to including sufficient
information to establish that each requirement of that section has been met.
(Cal. Gov’t Code, 65915(g)(2))



   (C)   The application for a density bonus permit for a housing
development that conforms to the requirements of section 16-410I and/or
section 16-410L. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(b)) and includes a child
care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or
adjacent to, the project, shall show the location and square footage of the
child care facility in addition to including sufficient information as how
the applicant proposes to regulate attendance at the child care facility to
conform to the requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(h)(2)(B).



   (D)   An application for a density bonus permit will not be
processed until all of the provisions of this Division 7A are complied with
and shall be processed concurrently with other required entitlements for
which the affordable housing benefit is sought.



   (E)   Approval of a density bonus permit shall occur at the planning
commission, unless the city council makes the final determination for the
project. The approval of the density bonus is nondiscretionary unless the
city adopts written findings justifying the denial of the density bonus.



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410G.  EFFECT OF PROPOSAL FOR WAIVER OR REDUCTION OF DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS.



   A proposal for a waiver or reduction of development standards shall
neither reduce nor increase the number of incentives or concessions to which
the applicant is entitled pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(e)(2).



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410H.  DENSITY BONUS ALLOWANCE FOR HOUSING DEVELOPMENT WITH
AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMPONENT.



   If the requirements of section 16-410C are met, then the affordable
housing developer is entitled to a density bonus pursuant to Cal. Gov’t
Code, Section 65915(f). The amount of density bonus to which the applicant is
entitled shall vary according to the amount by which the percentage of
affordable units offered by the applicant exceeds the percentage of the
minimum affordable housing component; the applicant may also elect to accept
a lesser percentage of density bonus or no increase in density. (Cal. Gov’t
Code, Section 65915(f). All density calculations resulting in fractional
units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. (Cal. Gov’t Code,
Section 65915(f)(5))



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410I.  DENSITY BONUS FOR HOUSING DEVELOPMENT WITH AFFORDABLE HOUSING
COMPONENT AND CHILD CARE FACILITY.



   (A)   Criteria - For a density bonus to be granted pursuant to
section 16-410I(B) for a minimum affordable housing component with a child
care facility in a housing development, all of the following must be
satisfied:



      (1)   Compliance with each requirement in section 16-410C.
(Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(h)(1))



      (2)   The housing development must include a child care
facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to,
the housing development. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(h)(1))



      (3)   Approval of the housing development must be conditioned
to ensure that both of the following occur:



         (a)   The child care facility must remain in operation
for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time
during which the affordable units are required to remain affordable pursuant
to section 16-410S (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(h)(2)(A)).



         (b)   Of the children who attend the child care
facility, the children of very low income households, low income households,
or moderate income households must equal a percentage that is equal to or
greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required under the
respective minimum affordable housing component income category for which the
density bonus is sought (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(h)(2)(B)).



      (4)   The city has not made a finding based upon substantial
evidence that the community has adequate child care facilities. (Cal. Gov’t
Code, Section 65915(h)(3))



   (B)   Density bonus allowance - If the requirements of Section
16-410I(A) are met, then an applicant for a housing development with an
affordable housing component and child care facility is entitled to:



      (1)   A density bonus pursuant to section 16-410H; and



      (2)   An additional density bonus that is an amount of square
feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of
square feet in the child care facility. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915(h)(1)(A))



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410J.  DENSITY BONUS FOR SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING DEVELOPMENT.



   An applicant for a senior citizen housing development or a mobile home
park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older
persons pursuant to Cal. Civil Code, Sections 798.76 or 799.5 is entitled to
a density bonus of 20% of the number of senior citizen housing development
units. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Sections 65915(b)(1)(C) and 65915(f)(3))



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410K.  DENSITY BONUS FOR LAND DONATION.



   For a density bonus for a qualified land donation to be granted, all of
the requirements of State law, as it may be amended from time to time, shall
be met. See Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(g). For qualifying donations,
the city shall award a 15% density bonus, but in no event shall the total
density bonus from all sources exceed 35%. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915(g)(2))



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410L.  AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVES.



   Cal. Gov’t Code, Sections 65915(d), (j), (k) and (l) govern the
following provisions regarding affordable housing incentives. Subject to
section 16-410N, all of the following applicable requirements must be
satisfied to be granted an incentive(s) pursuant to sections 16-410L(B) and
16-410M:



   (A)   The applicant for an incentive may also be an applicant for a
density bonus and must qualify for a density bonus pursuant to section
16-410C (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(d)(l)).



   (B)   A specific written proposal for an incentive(s) must be
submitted with the application for density bonus in accordance with section
16-410F (Cal. Gov’t Code, Sections 65915(b)(1) and (d)(1)). The applicant's
proposal may subsequently be amended or supplemented based on project design
or other changes requested by the city; provided, however, that the city
shall have additional time to review the requested changes.



   (C)   If an incentive(s) pursuant to sections 16-410L and 16-410M is
sought, the applicant must establish that each requested incentive would
result in identifiable and actual cost reductions for the qualified housing
development (Cal. Gov’t Code, Sections 65915(k)(1) and (3)).



   (D)   If an incentive(s) for mixed-use zoning in conjunction with a
housing project is sought, the applicant must establish that requirements of
State law are met. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(k)(2))



   (E)   If an additional incentive for a child care facility is sought
pursuant to section 16-410M(D), the applicant must establish that
requirements of that section are met.



   (F)   The granting of an incentive shall not be interpreted, in and
of itself, to require a general plan amendment, local coastal plan amendment,
zoning change, study or other discretionary approval. (Cal. Gov’t Code,
Section 65915(j)) An incentive is applicable only to the project for which it
is granted. For purposes of this division (F), "study" does not include
reasonable documentation to establish eligibility for the incentive or to
demonstrate that the incentive meets the definition of identifiable and
actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs or affordable
rents.



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410M.  NUMBER OF INCENTIVES GRANTED.



   Subject to section 16-410N, the applicant who meets the requirements of
section 16-410L(A) shall receive the following number of incentives described
below and as shown in Table 16-410M.



   (A)   One incentive for qualified housing development projects that
include at least 10% of the total units for low income households, at least
5% for very low income households, or at least 10% for persons and families
of moderate income households in a common interest development. (Cal. Gov’t
Code, Section 65915(d)(2)(A))



   (B)   Two incentives for qualified housing development projects that
include at least 20% of the total units for low income households, at least
10% for very low income households, or at least 20% for persons and families
of moderate income households in a common interest development. (Cal. Gov’t
Code, Section 65915(d)(2)(B))



   (C)   Three incentives for qualified housing development projects
that include at least 30% of the total units for low income households, at
least 15% for very low income households, or at least 30% for persons and
families of moderate income households in a common interest development.
(Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(d)(2)(C))



   (D)   Subject to section 16-410N(D), a qualified housing development
proposal that includes a child care facility shall be granted an additional
incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the
construction of the child care facility. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915(h)(1)(B))



TABLE 16-410M - INCENTIVE ALLOWANCES FOR QUALIFIED HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS



 


Income Category

 

Minimum % of Affordable Units



Very low income
 

5%

 

10%

 

15%



Low income
 

10%

 

20%

 

30%



Common interest development (moderate income)
 

10%

 

20%

 

30%



Incentives allowed
 

1

 

2

 

3




 



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410N.  CRITERIA FOR DENIAL OF APPLICATION FOR INCENTIVES.



   Outside of the coastal zone and except as otherwise provided in this
Division 7A or by State law. if the requirements of section 16-410L(A) are
met, the city shall grant the incentive(s) that are authorized by sections
16-410L(B) and 16-410M unless a written finding, based upon substantial
evidence, is made with respect to any of the following, in which case the
city may refuse to grant the incentive(s):



   (A)   The incentive does not result in identifiable and actual cost
reductions, consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(k), to provide
for affordable housing costs or for rents for the targeted units to be set as
specified in Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(k). (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915(d)(1)(A))



   (B)   The incentive would have a specific, adverse impact, as
defined in Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65589.5(d)(2), upon the public health
and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed
in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no
feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse
impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and
moderate-income households. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Sections 65915(d)(1)(B) and
65915(d)(3))



   (C)   The incentive would be contrary to State or federal law. (Cal.
Gov’t Code, Section 65915(d)(1)(C))



   (D)   The city finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the
community has adequate child care facilities, in which case the additional
incentive for a child care facility pursuant to section 16-410M(D) may be
denied. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(h)(3))



Within the coastal zone, the city shall deny applications for incentives
and/or density bonuses if the city finds that the proposed project - with the
requested incentive(s), density bonus(es) and/or waiver of development
standard(s) - cannot feasibly be accommodated on the site in a manner that is
in conformity with the California Coastal Act.



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410O.  WAIVER OR MODIFICATION OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   Requirements for waiver or modification of development standards:



   (A)   Application - To qualify for a waiver or reduction of one or
more development standards, the applicant must submit a written application
(together with an application for a qualified housing development) that
states the specific development standard(s) sought to be modified or waived
and the basis of the request. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(e)(1)) An
applicant for a waiver or modification of development standard(s) pursuant to
this section may request a meeting with the director to review the proposal.
If requested, the director shall meet with the applicant. (Cal. Gov’t Code,
Section 65915(e)(1)). An application for the waiver or reduction of
development standard(s) pursuant to this section shall neither reduce nor
increase the number of incentives to which the applicant is entitled pursuant
to Section 16-410L. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(e)(2))



   (B)   To deny the requested waiver or reduction of development
standard(s) outside of the coastal zone, the city shall make a written
finding, based upon substantial evidence, of any of the following:



      (1)   The requested waiver or reduction of development
standard(s) would have a specific adverse impact (as defined in Cal. Gov’t
Code, Section 65589.5(d)(2)) upon public health and safety or the physical
environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register
of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without
rendering the development unaffordable to very low, low-income, and
moderate-income households.



      (2)   The requested waiver or reduction of development
standard(s) would be contrary to State or federal law.



   (C)   Within the coastal zone, the city shall deny the requested
waiver or reduction of development standard(s) if it finds that the requested
waiver or reduction of development standard(s) cannot feasibly be
accommodated on the site in a manner that is in conformity with the
California Coastal Act.



   (D)   Granting application for waiver or modification of development
standards - If the requirements of sections 16-410O(A) and (B) are satisfied,
the application for waiver or modification of development standard(s) shall
be granted, unless, within the coastal zone, the waiver or modification of
development standard(s) cannot feasibly be accommodated on the site in a
manner that is in conformity with the California Coastal Act.



   (E)   If the requirements of sections 16-410O(A) and (B) are
satisfied, the city shall not apply a development standard that will have the
effect of physically precluding the construction of a qualified housing
development at the densities or with the incentives permitted by this
Division 7A (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section § 65915(e)(1)) unless, within the
coastal zone, the waiver or modification of development standard(s) cannot
feasibly be accommodated on the site in a manner that is in conformity with
the California Coastal Act.



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410P.  PARKING STANDARD MODIFICATIONS FOR QUALIFIED HOUSING
DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   Requirements for parking standard modifications - Modification
of parking standard set forth in section 16-622 are available only for
qualified housing developments. An application for parking standard
modifications stating the specific modification requested must be submitted
with the qualified housing development application. (Cal. Gov’t Code,
Section 65915(p)(3))



   (B)   Parking standard modifications - If the requirements of
section 16-410C are met, the vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of
handicapped and guest parking, shall not exceed the following ratios (Cal.
Gov’t Code, Section 65915(p)(1)):



      (1)   Zero to one bedroom: one on-site parking space.



      (2)   Two to three bedrooms: two on-site parking spaces.



      (3)   Four and more bedrooms: two and one-half on-site parking
spaces.



   (C)   If the total number of parking spaces required for the
qualified housing development is other than a whole number, the number shall
be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this section,
"on-site parking" may be provided through tandem parking or uncovered
parking, but not through on-street parking. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915(p)(4))



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, all other
provisions of Chapter 16, Article X (Off-Street Parking Requirements)
applicable to residential development apply.



   (E)   An applicant may request additional parking incentives beyond
those provided in this section if applied for pursuant to section 16-410L.
(Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(p)(5))



   (F)   Exceptions - Upon request of the applicant, the following
maximum parking standards shall apply, inclusive of handicap and guest
parking, to the entire housing development subject to this Division 7A, as
required by Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(p):



      (1)   A maximum of 0.5 parking spaces per bedroom shall apply
when all the following conditions apply (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915(p)(2)):



         (a)   The development includes the maximum percentage of
low- or very low-income units provided for section 16-410H (Density Bonus
Allowance for Housing Development with Affordable Housing Component).



         (b)   The development is located within one-half mile of
a major transit stop, as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code, Section
21155(b).



         (c)   There is unobstructed access to the major transit
stop from the development. A development shall have unobstructed access to a
major transit stop if a resident is able to access the major transit stop
without encountering natural or constructed impediments.



      (2)   A maximum of 0.5 parking spaces per unit shall apply
when all the following conditions apply (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915(p)(3)(A)):



         (a)   The development consists solely of rental units,
exclusive of a manager's unit or units, with an affordable housing cost to
lower-income families, as provided in Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section
50052.5.



         (b)   The development is located within one-half mile of
a major transit stop, as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code, Section
21155(b).



         (c)   There is unobstructed access to the major transit
stop from the development. A development shall have unobstructed access to a
major transit stop if a resident is able to access the major transit stop
without encountering natural or constructed impediments.



      (3)   A maximum of 0.5 parking spaces per unit shall apply
when all the following conditions apply (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915(p)(3)(B)):



         (a)   The development consists solely of rental units,
exclusive of a manager's unit or units, with an affordable housing cost to
lower-income families, as provided in Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section
50052.5.



         (b)   The development is for individuals who are 62
years of age or older and which complies with Cal. Civil Code, Sections 51.2
and 51.3.



         (c)   The development shall have either paratransit
service or unobstructed access, within one-half mile, to fixed bus route
service that operates at least eight times per day.



      (4)   A maximum of 0.3 parking spaces per unit shall apply
when all the following conditions apply (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915
(p)(3)(C)):



         (a)   The development consists solely of rental units,
exclusive of a manager's unit or units, with an affordable housing cost to
lower-income families, as provided in Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section
50052.5.



         (b)   The development is a special needs housing
development, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 51312.



         (c)   The development shall have either paratransit
service or unobstructed access, within one-half mile, to fixed bus route
service that operates at least eight times per day.



   (G)   Notwithstanding allowances in section 16-410P(F) above, if the
city or an independent consultant has conducted an area-wide or
jurisdiction-wide parking study in the last seven years, then the city may
impose a higher vehicular parking ratio not to exceed the ratio described in
section 16-410P(B) above, based on substantial evidence found in the parking
study that includes, but is not limited to, an analysis of parking
availability, differing levels of transit access, walkability access to
transit services, the potential for shared parking, the effect of parking
requirements on the cost of market-rate and subsidized developments, and the
lower rates of car ownership for low- and very low-income individuals,
including seniors and special needs individuals. The city shall pay the costs
of any new study. The city shall make findings, based on a parking study
completed in conformity with this division (G), supporting the need for the
higher parking ratio. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(p)(7)



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410Q.  DENSITY BONUS AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVE PROGRAM.



   (A)   Project design and phasing -Projects seeking an affordable
housing benefit pursuant to this Division 7A must comply with the following
requirements, unless otherwise specified in writing by the director:



      (1)   Location/dispersal of units - Affordable units shall be
reasonably dispersed throughout the development where feasible and shall
contain on average the same (or greater) number of bedrooms as the
market-rate units.



      (2)   Phasing - If a project is to be developed in phases,
each phase must contain the same or substantially similar proportion of
affordable units and market-rate units.



      (3)   Exterior appearance - The exterior appearance and
quality of the affordable units must be similar to the market-rate units. The
exterior materials and improvements of the affordable units must be similar
to, and architecturally compatible with, the market-rate units.



   (B)   Application requirements - An application for one or more
affordable housing benefits must be submitted as follows:



      (1)   Each affordable housing benefit requested must be
specifically stated in writing on the application form provided by the city.



      (2)   The application must include the information and
documents necessary to establish that the requirements of this Division 7A
are satisfied for each affordable housing benefit requested, including:



         (a)   For density bonus requests, that the requirements
of section 16-410C are met;



         (b)   For incentive requests, that the requirements of
section 16-410L are met;



         (c)   For development standard waiver or modification
requests, that the requirements of Section 16-410O are met; and/or



         (d)   For parking standard modification requests, that
the requirements of section 16-410C are met.



      (3)   The application must be submitted concurrently with a
complete application for a qualified housing development.



      (4)   The application must include a site plan that complies
with and includes the following:



         (a)   For senior citizen housing development projects -
the number and location of proposed total units and density bonus units.



         (b)   For all qualified housing development projects
other than senior citizen housing development projects - the number and
location of proposed total units, affordable units, and density bonus units.
The density bonus units shall be permitted in geographic areas of the
qualified housing development other than the areas where the affordable units
are located. (Cal. Gov. Code, Section 65915(i))



         (c)   The location, design, and phasing criteria
required by section 16-410Q(A), including any proposed development
standard(s) modifications or waivers pursuant to section 16-410O.



      (5)   The application for a qualified housing development must
state the level of affordability of the affordable units and include a
proposal for compliance with section 16-410S for ensuring affordability.



      (6)   If a density bonus is requested for a qualified land
donation pursuant to section 16-410K, the application must show the location
of the qualified land in addition to including sufficient information to
establish that each requirement in section 16-410K has been met.



      (7)   If an additional density bonus or incentive is requested
for a child care facility pursuant to section 16-410I and/or section
16-410M(D), the application shall show the location and square footage of the
child care facility in addition to including sufficient information to
establish that each requirement in section 16-410I and/or section 16-410M(D)
has been met.



   (C)   An application for an affordable housing benefit under this
Division 7A will not be processed until all of the provisions of this section
are complied with as determined by the director and shall be processed
concurrently with the application for the qualified housing development
project for which the affordable housing benefit is sought.



Prior to the submittal of an application for a qualified housing development,
an applicant may submit to the director a preliminary proposal for affordable
housing benefits.



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410R.  DETERMINATION ON DENSITY BONUS AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING
INCENTIVE PROGRAM REQUESTS.



   The decision-maker on the underlying qualified housing development
application is authorized to approve or deny an application for an affordable
housing benefit in accordance with this Division 7A.



   (A)   Affordable housing benefit determinations - An application for
an affordable housing benefit shall be granted if the requirements of this
Division 7A are satisfied unless:



      (1)   The application is for an incentive for which a finding
is made in accordance with section 16-410N; or



      (2)   The underlying application for the qualified housing
development is not approved independent of and without consideration of the
application for the affordable housing benefit; or



      (3)   The housing development is proposed on any property that
includes a parcel or parcels on which rental dwelling units are or, if the
dwelling units have been vacated or demolished in the five-year period
preceding the application, have been subject to a recorded covenant,
ordinance, or law that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and
families of lower or very low income; or occupied by lower or very low income
households, unless the proposed housing development replaces those units, and
either of the following applies:



         (a)   The proposed housing development, inclusive of the
units replaced pursuant to this division (A)(3), contains affordable units at
the percentages set forth under State law; or



         (b)   Each unit in the development, exclusive of a
manager's unit or units, is affordable to, and occupied by, either a lower or
very low income household.



      (4)   For proposed projects within the coastal zone, the
proposed project cannot feasibly be accommodated on the site in a manner that
is in conformity with the California Coastal Act.



   (B)   Affordable housing benefit compliance provisions - To ensure
compliance with this Division 7A and State law, approval of an application
for an affordable housing benefit may be subject to, without limitation:



      (1)   The imposition of conditions of approval to the
qualified housing development, including imposition of fees necessary to
monitor and enforce the provisions of this Division 7A;



      (2)   An affordable housing agreement and, if applicable, an
equity sharing agreement pursuant to section 16-410S; and



      (3)   Recorded deed restriction implementing conditions of
approval and/or contractual or legally mandated provisions.



   (C)   Appeals -



      (1)   If the decision to approve or deny an application for an
affordable housing benefit is made by the planning commission, then an appeal
may be filed consistent with the procedures of section 16-545.



      (2)   If the determination of the underlying application for
the qualified housing development is also appealed along with the decision of
the affordable housing benefit, then the entire project shall be controlled
by the appeal procedures applicable to the underlying application.



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410S.  AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGREEMENT AND EQUITY SHARING AGREEMENT.



   (A)   General requirements - No density bonus pursuant to section
16-410C shall be effective unless and until the affordable housing developer,
or its designee approved in writing by the director, enters into an
affordable housing agreement and, if applicable, an equity sharing agreement,
with the city or its designee pursuant to and in compliance with this
section. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(c)) The agreements shall be in the
form provided by the city which shall contain terms and conditions mandated
by, or necessary to implement, State law and this article. The director may
designate a qualified administrator or entity to administer the provisions of
this section on behalf of the city. The affordable housing agreement shall be
recorded prior to, or concurrently with, final map recordation or, where the
qualified housing development does not include a map, prior to issuance of a
building permit for any structure on the site. The director is hereby
authorized to enter into the agreements authorized by this section on behalf
of the city upon approval of the agreements by city attorney for legal form
and sufficiency.



   (B)   Low or very low income minimum affordable housing component or
senior citizen housing development -



      (1)   The affordable housing developer of a qualified housing
development based upon the inclusion of low income and/or very low income
affordable units for rent must enter into an agreement with the city to
maintain the continued affordability of the affordable units for 55 years, or
a longer period if required by the construction or mortgage financing
assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program, as
follows (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(c)(1)). The agreement shall
establish specific compliance standards and specific remedies available to
the city if such compliance standards are not met. The agreement shall among
other things, specify the number of lower-income affordable units by number
of bedrooms; standards for qualifying household incomes or other qualifying
criteria based upon the specific project; standards for maximum rents; the
person responsible for certifying tenant incomes; procedures by which
vacancies will be filled: required annual report and monitoring fees:
restrictions imposed on lower-income affordable units on sale or transfer;
and methods of enforcing such restrictions.



      (2)   Rental units - Rents for the low income and very low
income affordable units that qualified the housing development for the
density bonus pursuant to section 16-4I0C shall be set and maintained at an
affordable rent. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(c)(1))



      (3)   For-sale units - Owner-occupied low income and very low
income affordable units that qualified the housing development for the
density bonus pursuant to section 16-410C shall be available at an affordable
housing cost. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(c)(1)) For-sale very low, low
and moderate units shall not have a term of affordability but shall be
subject to an equity sharing agreement that meets the requirements of Cal.
Gov’t Code, Section 65915(c)(2) unless the equity sharing agreement is in
conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law) (Cal.
Gov’t Code, Section 65915(c)(2)).



      (4)   To qualify as a senior unit, at least 35 senior citizen
housing development units are maintained and available for rent or sale to
senior citizens as defined in Cal. Civil Code, Section 51.3.



   (C)   Moderate income minimum affordable housing component -



      (1)   The affordable housing developer of a qualified housing
development based upon the inclusion of moderate income affordable units in a
common interest development must enter into an agreement with the city
ensuring that:



         (a)   The initial occupants of the moderate income
affordable units that are directly related to the receipt of the density
bonus are persons and families of a moderate income household.



         (b)   The units are offered at an affordable housing
cost. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915(c)(2))



      (2)   The affordable housing developer of qualified housing
development based upon a moderate income minimum affordable component shall
enter into an equity sharing agreement for a common interest development with
the city. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section § 65915(c)(2)) The city shall enforce
the equity sharing agreement unless it is in conflict with the requirements
of another public funding source or law. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915(c)(2)) The equity sharing agreement shall include at a minimum the
following provisions:



         (a)   Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain
the value of improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate
share of appreciation. The city shall recapture any initial subsidy, as
defined in division (C)(2)(b) below, and its proportionate share of
appreciation, as defined in division (C)(2)(c) below, which amount shall be
used within five years for any of the purposes described in Cal. Health and
Safety Code, Section 33334.2(e) that promote home ownership. (Cal. Gov’t
Code, Section 65915(c)(2)(A))



         (b)   The city's initial subsidy shall be equal to the
fair market value of the unit at the time of initial sale minus the initial
sale price to the moderate income household, plus the amount of any down
payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is
lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale
shall be used as the initial market value. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915(c)(2)(B))



         (c)   The city's proportionate share of appreciation
shall be equal to the ratio of the city's initial subsidy to the fair market
value of the unit at the time of initial sale. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section
65915(c)(2)(C))



   (D)   Minimum affordable housing component and child care facility -
If an additional density bonus or incentive is granted because a child care
facility is included in the qualified housing development, the affordable
housing agreement shall also include the affordable housing developer's
obligations pursuant to section 16-410I(A)(3) for maintaining a child care
facility, if not otherwise addressed through conditions of approval.



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410T.  DENSITY BONUS OR INCENTIVE FOR CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION
PROJECTS.



   (A)   The city will grant either a density bonus or provide other
incentives of equivalent financial value to a condominium conversion project
that agrees to pay the reasonably necessary administrative costs incurred by
the city pursuant to this section if either:



      (1)   Thirty-three percent of the total units of the proposed
condominium project is affordable to persons and families of moderate income
households; or



      (2)   Fifteen percent of the total units of the proposed
condominium project will be affordable to persons and families of lower
income households (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915.5(a)).



   (B)   Definition of density bonus for condominium conversion
projects - If the requirements of section 16-410T(A) are met, then the
condominium conversion project will be entitled to an increase in units of
25% over the number of apartments, to be provided within the existing
structure or structures proposed for conversion from apartments to
condominiums. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915.5(b))



   (C)   Pre-submittal preliminary proposals for density bonus or
incentive for condominium conversion projects - Prior to the submittal of a
formal request for subdivision map approval or other application for
necessary discretionary approvals, an applicant to convert apartments to a
condominium project may submit to the director a preliminary proposal for
density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value. The director
shall, within 90 days of receipt of a written proposal, notify the applicant
of the director's preliminary response and schedule a meeting with the
applicant to discuss the proposal and the director's preliminary response.
(Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915.5(d))



   (D)   Application for density bonus or incentives for condominium
conversion projects - An applicant must submit a completed application
provided by the city for a density bonus or for other incentives of
equivalent financial value. The application must be submitted concurrently
with the application for the condominium conversion project. The application
must include the following:



      (1)   All information and documentation necessary to establish
that the requirements of section 16-410T(A) are met;



      (2)   The proposal for a density bonus or the proposal for
other incentives of equivalent financial value;



      (3)   Site plans demonstrating the location of the units to be
converted, the affordable units, the market-rate units, and the density bonus
units in the condominium conversion project; and



      (4)   Any other information and documentation requested by the
city to determine if the requirements of section 16-410T(A) are met.



   (E)   Both the application for a density bonus or other incentives
of equivalent financial value and the application for the condominium
conversion must be complete before the application for a density bonus or
other incentives of equivalent financial value will be considered.



   (F)   Granting density bonus or incentive for condominium conversion
projects -



      (1)   Approval -



         (a)   If the requirements of section 16-410T(A) are met,
the decision-making body for the condominium conversion project application
is authorized to grant an application for a density bonus or other incentives
of equivalent financial value, subject to section 16-410T(F)(2).



         (b)   Reasonable conditions may be placed on the
granting of a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value
that are found appropriate, including, but not limited to, entering into an
affordable housing agreement pursuant to section 16-410S which ensures
continued affordability of units to subsequent purchasers who are persons and
families of moderate income households or low income households. (Cal.
Gov’t Code, Section 65915.5(a))



      (2)   Ineligibility - An applicant shall be ineligible for a
density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value if the
apartments proposed for conversion constitute a qualified housing development
for which a density bonus as defined in section 16-410B or other incentives
were provided. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915.5(f))



      (3)   Decision on condominium conversion project - Nothing in
this section shall be construed to require the city to approve a proposal to
convert apartments to condominiums. (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915.5(e))



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410U.  ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Occupancy - Prior to occupancy of an affordable unit, the
household's eligibility for occupancy of the affordable unit must be
demonstrated to the city. This provision applies throughout the restricted
time periods pursuant to section 16-410S and applies to any change in
ownership or tenancy, including subletting, of the affordable unit.



   (B)   Ongoing compliance - Upon request, the affordable housing
developer must show that the affordable units are continually in compliance
with this Division 7A and the terms of the affordable housing agreement. Upon
30-day notice, the city may perform an audit to determine compliance with
this Division 7A and the terms of any agreement or restriction.



   (C)   Enforcement - The city has the authority to enforce the
provisions of this Division 7A, the terms of affordable housing agreements
and equity sharing agreements, deed restrictions, covenants, resale
restrictions, promissory notes, deed of trust, conditions of approval, permit
conditions, and any other requirements placed on the affordable units or the
approval of the qualified housing development. In addition to the enforcement
powers granted in this Division 7A, the city may, at its discretion, take any
other enforcement action permitted by law, including those authorized by city
ordinances. Such enforcement actions may include, but are not limited to, a
civil action for specific performance of the restrictions and agreement(s).
damages for breach of contract, restitution, and injunctive relief. The
remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall
not preclude the city from seeking any other remedy or relief to which it
otherwise would be entitled under law or equity.



(Ord. No. 2912)



SEC. 16-410V.  BURDEN IS ON APPLICANT.



   When an applicant seeks a density bonus for a development or for
donation of land, the applicant bears the burden of establishing that the
housing development meets the threshold requirements.



(Ord. No. 2912)



DIVISION 7B.  (RESERVED)



DIVISION 7C.  ALL-AFFORDABLE HOUSING OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM (AAHOP) AND -AH
ADDITIVE ZONE



SEC. 16-420A.  INTENT.



   The all-affordable housing opportunity program (AAHOP) and its main
implementation tool, the affordable housing (-AH) additive zone designation,
is a city-initiated program to provide realistic and more-certain
opportunities for developers and the non-profit sector to develop
all-affordable residential developments to help reach the city's regional
housing needs allocation (RHNA). AAHOP is a city incentive that is separate,
and in addition to, the "State" Density Bonus authorized by Division 7A
(commencing with section 16-410A). AAHOP projects may apply for, and obtain a
density bonus and concession(s). AAHOP projects are intended to create a
quality of life and appear substantially similar to market rate developments
of a similar size and architectural style.



(Ord. No. 2913)



SEC. 16-420B.  CREATION AND SELECTION OF ADDITIVE ZONES (-AH).



   (A)   Additive zone - Additive zone designations act as a suffix to
the underlying zone designation. The AAHOP additive designation is "-AH." The
-AH designation does not change allowable uses and/or density from the
underlying zone but adds the right to develop properties in a manner
consistent with this Division 7C.



   (B)   Selection of AAHOP sites - The parcels and aggregations of
parcels with the -AH additive zone designation are shown in the housing
element (2030 general plan, chapter 8) supplement 2. AAHOP-designated sites
do not necessarily have to be available for sale or require owner permission
to be "-AH" designated, although both conditions are preferred. Supplement 2
may be amended to add, remove, or modify the AAHOP sites by the city council
as a component of an AAHOP zone change ordinance.



   (C)   Rolling inventory - If an AAHOP-designated site is approved
for a non-AAHOP use with a general plan or zoning amendment, use permit, or
other action the city shall designate a replacement AAHOP site (or
combination of sites) if required to maintain a "tolling" AAHOP potential
unit inventory that meets or exceeds the then-remaining RHNA allocation for
extremely low, very low, and low income housing for the current RHNA planning
period, as calculated by the director. The city shall be responsible for the
designation of replacement AAHOP site(s) within one year from the date of the
approved entitlements unless the rolling inventory for extremely low, very
low, and low income housing subsequently exceeds the remaining RHNA need.
Private parties may propose AAHOP sites through the rezoning process in
combination with an AAHOP application process.



   (D)   Evaluation of sites for AAHOP inventory - In determining
additional parcels or groups of parcels that may be suitable for the -AH
additive zoning, potential sites shall be evaluated for their potential
compatibility with adjacent land uses and availability of public services and
found to either be suitable or have the potential to be suitable with
appropriate design that transitions to adjoining neighborhoods.



(Ord. No. 2913)



SEC. 16-420C.  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Multifamily - Multifamily affordable residential uses are
allowed by right in AAHOP zones if they meet all other applicable
requirements of this Division C.



   (B)   Mixed use permissible - AAHOP projects are also permissible if
they are constructed in addition to other permitted or conditional uses that
are permitted in accordance with the underlying zoning designation.



   (C)   Underlying zoning permissible - As the -AH additive
designation does not replace the 2030 general plan land use or underlying
zone designations, any proposed use or development other than an
all-affordable AAHOP project shall be governed by the 2030 general plan and
zone designations and applicable standards and guidelines.



   (D)   Specific plans - To the same extent as required for all other
projects, AAHOP projects shall be consistent with any applicable adopted
specific plan, urban village strategy or concept plan, and downtown strategic
plan.



(Ord. No. 2913)



SEC. 16-420D.  AFFORDABILITY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   One hundred percent affordable - All housing units built
pursuant to this Division C shall be affordable to extremely-low income, very
low income, low-income, or moderate-income households as defined and
periodically updated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
for Ventura County.



   (B)   Moderate units and RHNA - If a project proposes to provide
for-sale or rental moderate-income units, said units may only be used to
qualify the project for AAHOP if, at the time of the approval of the project,
the number of proposed moderate units will not exceed the number of moderate
units the city needs to meet its RHNA allocation in the current planning
period (as calculated by the director), and shall not exceed 25% of any
project.



   (C)   Manager's unit - For a project with between 10 and 40 units,
one manager's unit is exempt from the affordability requirement. For a
project between 41 and 80 units, up to two manager's units are exempt from
the affordability requirement. For projects of 81 or more units, up to three
manager's units are exempt from the affordability requirement. Projects that
provide 9 or less affordable units do not obtain an exemption for a manager
unit.



   (D)   Deed restrictions - Each affordable unit must be deed
restricted in an appropriate manner and by appropriate instruments as
determined by the city attorney.



(Ord. No. 2913)



SEC. 16-420E.  DENSITY OF UNITS.



   (A)   Minimum number of units - To obtain a concession under section
16-420F, below, at least 16 affordable units shall be provided.



   (B)   Maximum density - The allowable density of units per acre for
the -AH additive zone is the amount shown on the zoning map. All sites allow
between 20 and 39 units per acre. AAHOP project density is based on the site
size less land dedications for roadway widening required by the 2030 general
plan circulation diagram (Figure 4-1).



   (C)   Density bonus applications - Because AAHOP projects are 100&
affordable, they automatically qualify for the State density bonus if the
developer files a density bonus permit request under Division 7A of Article V
of Chapter 16 (commencing with section 16-410A).



   (D)   Subdivisions - AAHOP projects may be subdivided in a manner
that portions of the project may exceed the designated housing density or
have a different compatible use, so long as the overall applicable density is
achieved.



(Ord. No. 2913)



SEC. 16-420F.  PLAN REVIEW AND PROCESSING.



   (A)   Application - An AAHOP project shall be identified by the
applicant at the time of the DDR application. The DDR application fee and
applicable supplemental development and environmental analysis and impact
fees are required.



   (B)   Standards - The attached dwelling unit development standards
apply (City Code sections 16-360 to 16-363). Maximum building heights have
been set at six-stories by the 2030 general plan and an increase in allowed
stories up to six will not be counted as a concession.



   (C)   Design - AAHOP projects shall incorporate good design
principles and include on-site amenities appropriate for the resident
population to be served.



   (D)   Concessions - An AAHOP project applicant that provides at
least 15 affordable units may identify and request one development standard
concession as part of the DDR project application; said concession is in
addition to any concessions that may be obtained through the application for
and issuance of, a density bonus permit pursuant to Division 7A of this
chapter (commencing with section 16-410A).



   (E)   Adjustment to standards - The city commits to utilizing
established attached dwelling unit development standards and modifying
numerical standards by plus or minus 10%, as necessary, to ensure requested
densities (up to the maximum allowed for the subject AAHOP site) and to
ensure quality development is achieved for AAHOP projects.



   (F)   DDR - A development design review (DDR) process (City Code
section 16-525) is required for all AH-designated projects. During the DDR
process, projects shall be reviewed for compliance with development and
building code standard and comply with the city's standard conditions of
approval. The city may require reasonable conditions of approval that
implement the general plan that will not materially affect the financial
feasibility of the project.



   (G)   Ministerial - Other than a density bonus permit and/or
subdivision map, no other discretionary review, such as a special use permit
or planned unit development permit, shall be required for affordable
residential projects.



   (H)   CEQA - The AAHOP DDR permit is not defined as ministerial
within the meaning of CEQA and Cal. Public Resource Code 21080(b)(1): the
all-affordable residential use and density of each AAHOP site is allowed by
right. AAHOP projects not otherwise exempt from CEQA shall comply with an
appropriate CEQA review process. The DDR review process applies a series of
fixed standards and objective measurements and does not intend to involve the
use of personal or subjective judgments in deciding whether or how the
project should be carried out. However, in a manner similar to allowed uses
in the city's industrial zones, there are implied and explicit quality of
life, public safety, and environmental performance standards that may require
reasonable interpretive judgement by professionals to ensure that an AAHOP
project is similar to comparable and contemporaneous market-rate developments.



   (I)   Impact fees - AAHOP projects shall pay all applicable impact
fees, provide appropriate design and engineering studies, and otherwise
follow the applicable entitlement process for a discretionary project of
comparable size and use. AAHOP applicants may request alternative impact fee
payments and/or credits as allowed by applicable codes and regulations.



   (J)   Community involvement - AAHOP project applicants shall provide
information and make a project presentation at three community meetings: 1) a
conceptual proposal at an inter-neighborhood community organization
(INCO)-recognized neighborhood council meeting in which the proposed project
is located or by an advertised local neighborhood meeting if the INCO
neighborhood council is inactive or does not provide a meeting opportunity
within 60 days of a written request, 2) an AAHOP DDR application presentation
at the RNCO or an advertised community meeting if the INCO neighborhood
council is inactive or does not provide a meeting opportunity within 60 days
of a written request, and 3) a DDR approval-ready project at a regularly
schedule planning division community workshop. All three presentations shall
include discussion of project site design, circulation, and architectural
elevations and solicit and consider public suggestions regarding design
compatibility with surrounding uses and possible environmental impacts. The
director shall determine the appropriate amount of notice for each meeting
based on the size and location of the AAHOP project. Nothing in this division
(J) precludes a developer from additionally engaging the INCO and/or a
neighborhood or any other community organization in addition to the three
required meetings.



(Ord. No. 2913)



SEC. 16-420G.  ASSISTANCE FOR AAHOP PROJECTS.



   (A)   All-affordable housing opportunity program projects on
designated sites within the current housing element of the general plan that
are composed of multiple lots may request that lot merger fees be waved.
Unless the lot merger involves unique situations that involve an agency or
easement party other than the city or a utility company, the city shall grant
the lot merger fee waiver request.



   (B)   The city council may. but is not required to, consider the
following forms of assistance, among other forms of assistance: providing
funding (e.g., in-lieu fees, gap financing, costs of public improvements such
as sidewalks), providing soft costs for project development and deferment of
development impact fees and project review fees.



(Ord. No. 2913, 2927)



SEC. 16-420H.  INTERPRETATION OF THIS DIVISION 7C.



   (A)   No effect on other sites - Nothing in this Division 7C
prevents all or partially affordable housing projects being developed on
non-AH-designated sites pursuant to the applicable 2030 general plan and
zoning designations, density bonus permit process, development standards,
CEQA review, and applicable permitting procedures.



   (B)   Development standards - Nothing in this Division 7C shall be
interpreted to require the city to waive or reduce development standards if
the waiver or reduction would have a specific, adverse impact, as defined by
Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65589.5(d)(2), upon health, safety, the physical
environment, or any real property listed in the California Register of
Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.



   (C)   Design - Nothing in this Division 7C shall be interpreted as
authorizing or encouraging the development of projects with lower quality
design compared with non-AAHOP projects. AAHOP projects are held to the same
building codes, landscape requirements, and exterior architectural standards
as comparable and contemporaneous market-rate developments.



(Ord. No. 2913)



DIVISION 8.  INCENTIVES TO CONVERT APARTMENTS TO AFFORDABLE CONDOMINIUM UNITS



SEC. 16-425.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this division is to adopt methods and procedures for
processing applications to convert apartments to condominium units, some of
which are set aside for moderate, low or lower income households, as set out
in Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 65915.5 (“the statute”).



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.15.1)  (Ord. No. 2505, 2789)



SEC. 16-426.  CONDOMINIUM DENSITY BONUS OR OTHER INCENTIVES.



   When an applicant for approval to convert apartments to condominium
units agrees to provide the percentage of units for moderate, low or lower
income persons, families and households set out in the statute and agrees to
pay the reasonably necessary administrative costs incurred by the city, the
actions and procedures set out in sections 16-428 through 16-435 shall apply.
The applicant shall apply for and obtain a density bonus permit in order to
be granted a density bonus or other incentives in accordance with the statute.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.15.2)  (Ord. No. 2505, 2789)



SEC. 16-427.  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   AFFORDABLE UNITS - Units set aside for moderate, low or lower
income households in accordance with the statute.



   (B)   DENSITY BONUS - An increase in unity to 25% over the number of
apartments, to be provided within the existing structure or structures
proposed for conversion.



   (C)   Terms used in this division that are also used in the statute
shall have the meaning in this division that such terms have in the statute.
If there is any inconsistency between this division and the statute, this
division shall be construed in a manner consistent with the statute.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.15.3)  (Ord. No. 2505, 2789)



SEC. 16-428.  FEES.



   (A)   A preliminary proposal, referred to in section 16-429, and an
application for a condominium density bonus permit, referred to in section
16-430, shall be accompanied by the fee set by resolution of the city
council.  City staff shall not act on a preliminary proposal or an
application that is not accompanied by the fee.



   (B)   If a preliminary proposal or an application for a condominium
density bonus permit requires an unusual amount or specialized type of study
or evaluation by city staff, a consultant or legal counsel, city staff shall
estimate the cost thereof and require the applicant to pay an additional fee
or make one or more deposits to pay such cost before the study or evaluation
is begun.  On completion of the study or evaluation, and before city staff
responds to the preliminary proposal or the city council decides the
application, city staff shall determine the actual cost of the work and the
difference between the actual cost and the amount paid by the applicant, and
shall require the applicant to pay any deficiency or shall refund to the
applicant any excess.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.15.4)  (Ord. No. 2505, 2789)



SEC. 16-429.  PRELIMINARY PROPOSAL.



   (A)   If a developer submits a preliminary proposal for the
conversion of apartments to condominiums pursuant to the statute before
submitting any formal requests for subdivision map approvals, city staff
shall, within 90 days of receiving the proposal, notify the developer in
writing that the city will apply the procedures set out in this division in
order to comply with the statute.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.15.5)  (Ord. No. 2505, 2789)



SEC. 16-430.  APPLICATION FOR CONDOMINIUM DENSITY BONUS PERMIT.



   An application for a condominium density bonus permit shall include the
following information, whether or not the project also requires or has been
granted any other approvals or permits, including the special use permit
required by section 16-381:



   (A)   A description of the project, including the number of
condominium units, the number of affordable units, and the location of the
affordable units;



   (B)   Whether the developer prefers that the city grant a density
bonus or provide other incentives of equivalent financial value and if the
latter, a description of such incentives, their financial value, and the
basis for calculating that value;



   (C)   The proposed sale or rental price of all units, and especially
of the affordable units;



   (D)   The proposed method to guarantee that the applicant will
establish the sales or rental prices as stated in the proposal;



   (E)   The proposed method and length of time of ensuring for a
specified number of years the continued affordability of the affordable units
to subsequent purchasers who are persons and families of low and moderate
income or lower income households; and



   (F)   Other relevant information requested by city staff.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.15.6)  (Ord. No. 2505, 2789)



SEC. 16-431.  SUPPLEMENTING APPLICATION.



   City staff may require the applicant to clarify, amplify, correct or
otherwise supplement the application.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.15.8)  (Ord. No. 2505, 2789)



SEC. 16-432.  PROJECT DESIGN.



   The applicant shall design the project so that the affordable units are
dispersed throughout the project, have a number of bedrooms proportionate to
the number of bedrooms in other units in the project, and do not differ in
appearance, size and amenities from other units in the project; provided,
however, that the interior appearance and amenities of the affordable units
may differ from other units in the project as an incentive for the project,
as specified by the city council in the resolution granting the condominium
density bonus permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.15.9)  (Ord. No. 2505, 2789)



SEC. 16-433.  STAFF RECOMMENDATION.



   After city staff deems the application to be complete, city staff shall
make a recommendation to the planning commission concerning the density bonus
or incentives of equivalent financial value.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.15.10)  (Ord. No. 2505, 2789)



SEC. 16-434.  PROCEDURE TO DECIDE APPLICATION.



   (A)   The secretary of the planning commission shall give notice as
provided in Cal. Gov't Code, Section 65091 of the planning commission's
public hearing on the application for a condominium density bonus permit. At
the same time, the secretary shall also give the applicant written notice of
the date, time and place of the hearing.



   (B)   The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the
application for a condominium density bonus permit. The planning commission
may continue the public hearing. Not more than 30 days after the close of the
public hearing, the commission shall adopt a resolution recommending to the
city council that the application be approved or denied, and stating any
conditions to approval of the application.



   (C)   If the planning commission recommends approval of a
condominium density bonus permit, the commission may recommend a density
bonus or incentives the same as or different from those requested by the
applicant or recommended by city staff.



   (D)   Before recommending approval of a condominium density bonus
permit, the applicant must show and the planning commission must make all of
the following findings regarding the project and the proposed density bonus
or other incentives recommended for approval:



      (1)   The project meets the criteria set out in the statute.



      (2)   The density bonus or incentives will not adversely
affect or be materially detrimental to uses or property adjacent to the
subject property or to the public health, safety or welfare.



      (3)   The subject property is adequate in size and shape and
served by adequate infrastructure to accommodate the density bonus or
incentives.



      (4)   If one or more incentives are recommended instead of a
density bonus, such incentive or incentives are of equivalent financial value
to a density bonus.



      (5)   The applicant has proposed a satisfactory method to
guarantee that the sales or rental prices will be established as stated in
the application.



      (6)   The applicant has agreed to a satisfactory method of
ensuring for a specified number of years the continued affordability of the
affordable units to subsequent purchasers who are persons and families of low
and moderate income or lower income households.



      (7)   The affordable units are dispersed throughout the
project, have a number of bedrooms proportionate to the number of bedrooms in
other units in the project, and do not differ in appearance, size or
amenities from other units in the project, except as specified by the
planning commission in accordance with section 16-432.



   (E)   Within 30 days of the date that the planning commission
renders its decision, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the
application and shall consider the commission's recommendation, which the
city council may affirm, deny or modify. The city clerk shall give notice of
the hearing as provided in Cal. Gov't Code, Section 65091. At the same time,
the city clerk shall also give the applicant written notice of the date, time
and place of the hearing. The city council may continue the public hearing.



   (F)   Within 30 days of the close of the public hearing, the city
council shall adopt a resolution approving or denying the application for a
condominium density bonus permit. If the city council approves a condominium
density bonus permit, the city council may approve a density bonus or
incentives the same as or different from those requested by the applicant or
recommended by the commission.



   (G)   If the city council approves a condominium density bonus
permit, the resolution shall include the finds set out in subsection (D)(1)
through (7) of this section and shall state any conditions on which the
permit is approved.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.15.11)  (Ord. No. 2505, 2789)



SEC. 16-435.  CONTINUED AFFORDABILITY.



   No condominium density bonus permit shall be granted unless the
developer agrees to a satisfactory method of ensuring for a specified number
of years the continued affordability of the affordable units to subsequent
purchasers who are persons and families of low and moderate income or lower
income households.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.15.12)  (Ord. No. 2505, 2789)



DIVISION 9.  LARGE FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES



SEC. 16-440.  STANDARDS FOR LARGE FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES.



   Each large family day care home must:



   (A)   Be located in a residence;



   (B)   Conform to applicable city ordinances concerning spacing and
concentration, traffic control, parking and noise control;



   (C)   In addition to required residential parking spaces in garages,
have two off-street parking spaces, which may be in tandem, for loading and
unloading;



   (D)   Conform to building standards published in Title 24 of the
Cal. Code of Regulations, pertaining to fire and life safety in large family
day care homes, and to city ordinances not inconsistent therewith that apply
to residences; and



   (E)   Be at least 100 feet away from all other large family day care
homes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-36.6)  (Ord. No. 2026, 2671, 2724)



DIVISION 10.  OIL DRILLING DISTRICTS.



[RESERVED]



DIVISION 11.  PLANNED RESIDENTIAL GROUPS



SEC. 16-445.  SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   A planned residential group may be approved by issuance of a
special use permit in accordance with sections 16-530 to 16-553. 



   (B)   A special use permit for a planned residential group may vary
the density, area, yards, height, parking and fencing requirements of the
zone when such action is in accordance with the basic principles and intent
of this chapter and the commission finds and determines that:



      (1)   A substantial improvement of the use of the land will be
thereby effected, and there will not be any detrimental effect upon the
surrounding area;



      (2)   The residential use proposed is permitted within the
zone;



      (3)   Building will substantially conform with plot plans and
elevations submitted in support of the special use permit; and



      (4)   The applicant has demonstrated that population densities
proposed are in conformance with existing and proposed public facilities,
such as streets, sewers, water, schools and parks.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-112.1)  (Ord. No. 1046)



SEC. 16-446.  SENIOR AND/OR SENIOR ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES.



   (A)   A senior and/or senior assisted living residential facility
may be approved as a planned residential group by issuance of a special use
permit in accordance with sections 16-530 to 16-553 of this code.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the requirements of section 16-531 shall not
apply to a special use permit for a senior and/or senior assisted living
residential facility.



   (B)   In addition to the requirements of sections 16-530 to 16-553,
an applicant for a senior and/or senior assisted living residential facility
shall evaluate parking, including resident, guest, employee and shuttle
parking, through a parking study. The parking study shall be based on
intended population level of assistance, project location and proximity to
public transportation and services for senior citizens. The applicant shall
prepare and submit the parking study for review and approval by the city
traffic engineer. Once the city traffic engineer approves the traffic study,
said study shall be submitted with any special use permit submitted pursuant
to this section to the planning commission for review and approval.



   (C)   The planning commission may grant a special use permit
pursuant the requirements of this section and sections 16-530 to 16-553 of
this code for a senior and/or senior assisted living residential facility
planned residential group to permit departures from the development standards
of the zone in which the use is located and to permit departures from the
attached dwelling unit development standards when such action is in
accordance with the basic principles and intent of this chapter and the
planning commission finds and determines all of the following:



      (1)   The residential use proposed is permitted within the
zone and is in conformance with the general plan;



      (2)   Through project design features and conditions, the
residential use will not adversely affect or be materially detrimental to
adjacent uses, buildings or structures or to the public health, safety or
general welfare;



      (3)   The site that is subject to the special use permit is
adequately served by sufficient parking as demonstrated in the submitted
parking study;



      (4)   The site that is subject to the special use permit will
be served by streets and highways adequate in width and structure to carry
the kind and quantity of traffic such use will generate; and



      (5)   The applicant has demonstrated that the proposed
population densities can be accommodated by existing and future public
facilities, services and infrastructure such as sewerage, water, fire
protection and storm drainage facilities.



(Ord. No. 2896)



DIVISION 12.  RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS



SEC. 16-450.  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The intent of this section is:



   (A)   To encourage, within the density standards of the general plan
and zoning ordinance, the development of a more desirable living environment
by application of site planning techniques and building groupings or
arrangements that are not otherwise permitted through strict application of
the zoning ordinance;



   (B)   To encourage the preservation of more open space for visual
enjoyment and recreational use;



   (C)   To encourage more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of
land;



   (D)   To encourage variety in the physical development patterns of
the city; and



   (E)   To encourage a variety of housing and ownership types to
satisfy the full range of housing needs.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.13.1)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-451.  APPLICABILITY.



   This division may be applied to any residentially zoned property,
provided the commission makes the findings specified herein.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.13.2)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-452.  USES PERMITTED.



   This division does not allow any uses other than those uses permitted
or conditionally permitted in the zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.13.3)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-453.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   Any project developed pursuant to this division shall comply with the
following regulations and any permit issued for such a project shall
incorporate the following regulations as conditions of approval:



   (A)   Maximum dwelling unit density -



      (1)   The dwelling unit density shall not exceed the number of
units determined by dividing the total net area of the project by the minimum
lot area requirements of the respective zone.



      (2)   Fractions shall be disregarded in determining the
permitted numbers of units.



   (B)   Minimum area and dimensions of lots - The area, width, and
depth of individually owned parcels of land within the project shall be
established by site plan approval.  The commission shall consider the
following circumstances before approving the project:



      (1)   Topography of the land;



      (2)   The ground area covered by dwellings and accessory
structures;



      (3)   Location of common space and its relationship to the
dwellings to be served; and



      (4)   Aesthetic relationships between individual dwellings and
open spaces.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.13.4)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-454.  YARDS AND SETBACKS.



   Front, side and rear yards and setbacks shall be established by site
plan approval.  Building and roof lines shall be indicated on the site plan
map.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.13.5)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-455.  DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS.



   The distance between any two buildings within the project shall be
established as a condition of approval, but shall not be less than the height
of the taller of the two buildings.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.13.6)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-456.  MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT.



   The maximum building height permitted in the respective zone shall
apply.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.13.7)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-457.  REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING.



   (A)   The number of required parking spaces shall conform to
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The location and arrangement of parking shall be subject to
review by the commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.13.8)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-458.  WALLS, FENCES, AND LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   The commission shall require appropriate walls, fencing and
landscaping around the perimeter of the project in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.  Walls and fences shall be shown on the site
plan.



   (B)   The commission shall consider a landscaping plan for all
common open areas. Landscaping shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.13.9)  (Ord. No. 2132)



SEC. 16-459.  SIGNS.



   The sign provisions for the zone in which the project is located shall
apply.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.13.10)  (Ord. No. 2132)



DIVISION 13.  ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS



SEC. 16-465.  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   Accessory dwelling units (also known as “second units” or
“granny flats”) are located within, attached to, or behind the primary
single family units, and can provide an important source of affordable
housing.



   (B)   Accessory dwelling units, when appropriately sized and
located, have little impact on neighborhood quality of life.



   (C)   Establishing reasonable regulations of accessory dwelling
units is an appropriate mechanism to properly balance the need for additional
affordable housing with the need to maintain existing community character and
neighborhood quality of life.



(Ord. No. 2914, 2925)



SEC. 16-466.  MINISTERIAL CONSIDERATIONS.



   (A)   New detached construction - If the director receives an
application to construct an accessory dwelling unit by constructing a new
detached structurex, and the proposal meets all of the requirements of the
Municipal Code, then within 120 days of the director receiving a complete
application the accessory dwelling unit, the director shall ministerially
approve the application without a hearing.



   (B)   New attached construction - If the director receives an
application to construct an accessory dwelling unit by adding on to an
existing structure and the proposal meets all of the requirements of the City
Code, then within one-hundred 120 days of the director receiving a complete
application the accessory dwelling unit, the director shall ministerially
approve the application without a hearing.



   (C)   Construction within existing structure - If the applicant will
not be adding floor area, and instead has submitted a complete application
for an accessory dwelling unit entirely within the existing space of a
single-family residence or accessory structure, then the requirements of
section 16-469 ("Exception for Accessory Dwelling Unit Within Existing Single
Family Residence or Accessory Structure") shall apply.



   (D)   Historic district or historic property - If the applicant
submits a complete application for an accessory dwelling unit within a
designated historic district or on a parcel with a historic designation by
the City, County of Ventura, State of California, and/or U.S. Department of
the Interior, or on a property that is within the 2005 Downtown Oxnard
Historic Resources Survey area, the application will default to applicable
permitting procedures for development of a new housing unit, except that the
accessory dwelling unit use is allowed pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code Section
65852.2.



(Ord. No. 2914, 2925)



SEC. 16-467.  STANDARDS FOR REVIEW.



   Except as provided in section 16-469, ("Exception for Accessory
Dwelling Unit Within Existing Single Family Residence or Accessory
Structure"), all accessory dwelling units shall meet or exceed all of the
following standards:



   (A)   Zoning compliance - Except as otherwise provided herein, the
primary residence and the accessory dwelling unit shall meet current
requirements for interior yard space, height, landscaping, setbacks and
parking for the zone in which the primary residence and the accessory
dwelling unit are located. The accessory dwelling unit shall not be
considered when calculating the maximum number of dwelling units permitted by
the underlying zone designation.



   (B)   Residentially zoned - The lot must be zoned R-l, R-l-PD,
R-1-7-PD, R-10-PD, R-1-8-PD ("Single Family"), R-2, R-2-PD ("Multiple
Family"). R-3, R-3-PD "Garden Apartment."



   (C)   Single family dwelling - There must be an existing
single-family dwelling on the lot, and the single-family dwelling must be
either legal nonconforming, or legal.



   (D)   No passageway - No passageway shall be required in conjunction
with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit.



   (E)   Setbacks for garage units - All otherwise applicable setback
requirements apply except that in no event shall:



      (1)   A setback be required for a garage that is converted to
an accessory dwelling unit, or



      (2)   A required setback exceed five feet from the side and
rear lot lines for an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed above a
garage.



   (F)   Kitchen - The accessory dwelling unit shall contain its own
kitchen facility and bathroom facility separate from the primary dwelling
unit. The kitchen facility shall include at least one of each of the
following features: (i) sink; (ii) refrigerator of more than five cubic feet
capacity; and (iii) range or cooktop. The accessory dwelling unit shall
comply with all applicable habitability standards.



   (G)   Foundation - The accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed
on a permanent foundation, complying to the California Building Standards
Code.



   (H)   Architecture - An attached or detached accessory dwelling unit
shall comply with the architectural standards of section 16-23 and shall be
of materials, colors and in a style which are each compatible with the
primary residence, as reasonable determined by the director.



   (I)   Public utilities - The accessory dwelling unit shall be served
by adequate public utility facilities including, but not limited to,
electric, sewer, water and streets, as certified by the public works director.



   (J)   Separate entrances - The accessory dwelling unit shall have an
entrance separate from the entrance to the primary residence. Only one of the
entrances may be visible from the front yard of the primary residence unless
the primary and accessory dwelling unit entrances are designed in a manner
that maintains the appearance of a single family dwelling. An entrance
leading to a foyer with entrances leading from the foyer to the primary
dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling unit is allowed.



   (K)   Occupancy by owner - The primary residence or the accessory
dwelling unit shall be occupied by the property owner, and the property owner
shall annually certify to the city such occupancy in a manner similar to the
annual reasonable accommodation self-certification process. An owner may be
absent from the primary or accessory dwelling unit for up to 12 months during
any 36-month period. A property owner who will be absent for more than 12
months may obtain an additional 12 months' absence with director approval if
the director determines the approval will not be detrimental to the
neighborhood. Before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the accessory
dwelling unit, an agreement affecting real property shall be recorded against
the property that imposed specific restrictions on the property including
occupancy by owner of the property, the accessory unit not being for sale
separate from the primary residence and limitations on rentals. The language
of the agreement affecting real property shall be approved by the city prior
to its recordation.



   (L)   Not for sale - The accessory dwelling unit shall not be
intended to be sold or offered for sale separately from the primary residence.



   (M)   Rentals - Either the accessory dwelling or the primary
residence may be rented, but not both. Rental terms shall be 30 days or
longer.



   (N)   Only one accessory dwelling unit - No more than one accessory
dwelling unit may be constructed on any legally existing lot or combinations
of lots that are developed as one residential use.



   (O)   Sprinklers - Fire sprinklers are required for any accessory
dwelling unit if they are required for the primary residence.



   (P)   Building code -  All building standards code requirements
that apply to detached dwellings apply to accessory dwelling units.



   (Q)   Maximum floor area -



      (1)   Detached unit - If the accessory dwelling unit is
detached from the existing primary dwelling unit, then the accessory dwelling
unit's maximum permissible floor area shall be 50% of the square footage of
the primary residence, except that the maximum shall not be less than 600
gross square feet, or more than 1,200 gross square feet, except that the
otherwise applicable maximum permissible floor area shall be increased to the
extent necessary for ADA compliance; provided, however, that at least an
efficiency unit (as that term is defined by Cal. Health and Safety Code,
Section 17958.1) shall be allowed to be constructed in compliance with the
local development standards.



      (2)   Addition to existing residence for accessory dwelling
unit - If the accessory dwelling unit is attached to an existing primary
dwelling unit, and floor area is added to the existing primary dwelling unit,
then the gross square feet and the  maximum floor area the applicant may add
is 50% of the gross square footage of the primary residence, except that the
maximum shall not be less than 600 gross square feet, or more than 1,200
gross square feet, except that the otherwise applicable maximum permissible
additional floor area shall be increased to the extent necessary for ADA
compliance; provided, however, that at least an efficiency unit (as that term
is defined by Cal. Health and Safety Code, Section 17958.1) shall be allowed
to be constructed in compliance with the local development standards.



(Ord. No. 2914, 2925)



SEC. 16-468.  PARKING.



   (A)   Parking requirements - The requirements of Municipal Code
section 16-622(F) (entitled "Schedule of Vehicle-Off-Street Parking
Requirements") apply.



   (B)   Demolished or converted required parking spaces - When a
required garage, carport, or covered parking structure for the primary unit
is demolished or converted in conjunction with the construction of an
accessory dwelling unit, required parking for the primary unit shall be
provided on the property, outside of the front yard setback, and on a city
approved pad or structure in compliance with applicable Oxnard City Code
requirements.



(Ord. No. 2914, 2925)



SEC. 16-469.  EXCEPTION FOR ACCESSORY UNIT WITHIN EXISTING SINGLE FAMILY
RESIDENCE OR ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, the
director shall, without a hearing, ministerially approve a complete
application for a permit to create an accessory dwelling unit if all of the
following apply:



   (A)   The unit is contained entirely within the existing space of a
single-family primary residence or legal accessory structure (without adding
floor area to the existing residence or accessory structure).



   (B)   The unit will be on a lot with a zoning designation listed in
section 16-467(B).



   (C)   There will be only one accessory dwelling unit on the lot.



   (D)   The accessory dwelling unit has independent exterior access
from the existing residence.



   (E)   The accessory dwelling unit side and rear setbacks are
sufficient for fire safety as determined by the fire marshal.



   (F)   Fire sprinklers are provided to the same extent that they are
required for the primary residence.



(Ord. No. 2914, 2925)



SEC. 16-469.5.  ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT IN C-2 AND CBD ZONES.



   Accessory dwelling units are allowed in the C-2 and CBD zones upon the
issuance of a special use permit pursuant to Division 3, section 16-530 of
the Oxnard Municipal Code if the lot is developed with only a legal single
family unit.



(Ord. No. 2914, 2925)



DIVISION 14.  SIGNIFICANT HERITAGE FEATURES



SEC. 16-470.  PROCEDURES FOR DESIGNATING SIGNIFICANT HERITAGE FEATURES.



   The city council, or such boards or persons as are authorized by the
city council, may specifically designate significant heritage features,
including physical objects, buildings or land.  The city may allow by
special use permit uses of such features other than those uses permitted in
the zone in which such features are located.  In granting such special use
permits, the commission shall consider the appropriateness of the designation
in light of the findings contained in section 16-471 and may impose
appropriate standards and conditions for use, conservation, or rehabilitation
of the feature.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-4.02)  (Ord. No. 1843)



SEC. 16-471.  FINDINGS NECESSARY FOR DESIGNATION AS SIGNIFICANT HERITAGE
FEATURE.



   In order to designate significant heritage features, the approval body
shall find that one of the following circumstances exist:



   (A)   The architecture or design of the feature is unique or of a
style unique to the area;



   (B)   The architecture or design of the feature exemplifies a
significant or unique architectural style; and



   (C)   The feature was the site of a significant historical or
cultural event, or was owned by a person or group of persons who were
significantly involved in the historical or cultural development of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-4.05)  (Ord. No. 1843)



DIVISION 15.  TEMPORARY USES



SEC. 16-475.  “TEMPORARY USE” DEFINED.



   A "temporary use" is one which occupies a parcel of land for a period
of more than one hour within a 24-hour period, but less than the maximum time
limits set forth herein; does not utilize any permanent structures except as
otherwise permitted herein; and is not located on property owned or leased by
the city for which the city has granted a written license agreement, allowing
the use in question.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-4.1)  (Ord. No. 1836, 2637)



SEC. 16-475.1.  EXEMPTIONS.



   Temporary uses of a duration of less than three days which are held on
city parks or public property and to be sponsored by bona fide charitable or
nonprofit organizations, are exempt from the requirements contained in
sections 16-476 through 16-483 of this chapter, provided such uses have prior
approval of the city’s parks director.



(Ord. No. 1836)



SEC. 16-476.  PERMITTED.



   (A)   No uses listed in this section shall be conducted unless a
temporary use permit authorizing such a use has been approved.  No temporary
use shall be permitted to occur within or on public street rights-of-way or
public property, including sidewalks, parks and parking lots, unless a
temporary use permit has been granted for such uses.



   (B)   The following temporary uses may be permitted subject to the
granting of a temporary use permit in accordance with the provisions of this
division:



      (1)   Residential zones, property for which a residential use
has been approved, and C-O zone -



         (a)   Construction signs, as defined in article IX;



         (b)   Sales or rental offices which are part of a
project containing five or more contiguous residential lots or units, are
located on or immediately adjacent to the site of the project, and are in
conformance with section 16-319;



         (c)   Subdivision model homes and related facilities;



         (d)   Subdivision signs, as defined in article IX;



         (e)   Temporary construction yards and offices used only
in conjunction with development of uses permitted by the applicable zone, and
located on or immediately adjacent to the site of the development; provided,
however, that one adult caretaker may be present during nonconstruction hours;



         (f)   Youth, charitable or nonprofit organization
projects;



         (g)   Similar temporary uses, which the director has
determined to be compatible with the zone and surrounding land uses; and



         (h)   In commercial zones, a temporary office structure
where a permanent office building has been severely damaged by fire or other
catastrophe.



      (2)   C-1 zone -



         (a)   Those temporary uses listed in subsection (1)
above;



         (b)   Christmas tree lots;



         (c)   Grand opening signs, as defined and regulated by
article IX; and



         (d)   Similar temporary uses, which the director has
determined to be compatible with the zone and surrounding land uses.



      (3)   C-2, CBD and C-P-D zones -



         (a)   Those temporary uses listed in subsection (2)
above;



         (b)   Auctions;



         (c)   Mechanical amusement rides, except in the CBD zone;



         (d)   Outdoor carnivals, circuses and rodeos, except in
the CBD zone;



         (e)   Outdoor concerts;



         (f)   Outdoor itinerant shows;



         (g)   Outdoor religious revival meetings;



         (h)   Outdoor sales, when the sale occurs adjacent to
the permanent retail facility in which the same type of goods are sold by the
same seller; and



         (i)   Similar temporary uses, which the director has
determined to be compatible with the zone and surrounding land uses.



      (4)   C-M, M-L, M-1, M-2,  M-P-D and BRP zones -



         (a)   Auctions;



         (b)   Construction signs as regulated in article IX;



         (c)   Grand opening signs, as referred to in article IX;



         (d)   Subdivision signs, as regulated in article IX;



         (e)   Temporary construction yards and offices used only
in conjunction with development of uses permitted in the applicable zones and
located on or immediately adjacent to the site of a development; provided,
however, that one adult caretaker may be present during nonconstruction hours.



         (f)   Youth, charitable or nonprofit organization
projects; and



         (g)   Similar temporary uses, which the director has
determined to be compatible with the zone and surrounding land uses.



      (5)   C-R zone -



         (a)   Subdivision signs, as regulated in article IX;



         (b)   Temporary construction yards and offices used only
in conjunction with development permitted in this zone, and located on or
immediately adjacent to, the site of said development; provided, however,
that one adult caretaker may be present during nonconstruction hours;



         (c)   Youth, charitable or nonprofit organization
projects; and



         (d)   Similar temporary uses, which the director has
determined to be compatible with the zone and surrounding land uses.



      (6)   Outdoor sales of only vegetables, fruits and flowers on
property located in the C-R zone or on a portion of property that is
otherwise zoned, but that is engaged in agricultural production for the
duration of the temporary use; provided, however, that such use shall be
located at least 75 feet from any structure used for residential purposes,
where such structure is under different ownership



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-4.2)  (Ord. No. 1409, 1633, 1836)



SEC. 16-477.  PERMIT REQUIRED; PERMIT APPLICATION; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   A temporary use permit shall be approved prior to the
commencement of any temporary use.  Application for a temporary use permit
shall be made on an application form secured from the director.  Such
application shall require the information necessary for review of the
application by appropriate city departments, including the name, address,
telephone number and signature of both the applicant and property owner, and
the project location.



   (B)   (1)   The director shall direct the application to all
concerned city departments or divisions for recommendations.  The director
shall review such recommendations and notify the applicant of approval,
conditional approval, or disapproval.



      (2)   In reviewing an application for a temporary use permit,
the director shall consider the potential effect of such a use on adjacent
public and private property, traffic, and parking and shall also consider
aesthetic impacts,  setbacks, structural soundness, site orientation and
arrangement, and hours of operation.  The director may impose reasonable
conditions necessary to mitigate potential adverse impacts.



   (C)   Temporary uses may be subject to additional permits, licenses
or inspections as required by any applicable law, code or regulation. 
Application for temporary use permits for temporary uses in zones with
planned development additives do not require a planned development permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-4.3)  (Ord. No. 1633, 1836)



SEC. 16-478.  FEE.



   A nonrefundable fee in the amount set by city council resolution shall
be paid upon the filing of an application for a temporary use permit.  The
nonrefundable fee may be waived at the written request of the applicant and
upon the approval of the city manager for charitable, youth or nonprofit
organization projects.  Temporary uses may be subject to additional fees or
taxes imposed pursuant to this code or other applicable regulations.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-4.4)  (Ord. No. 1633, 1836)



SEC. 16-479.  TIME LIMITS.



   (A)   The director in conjunction with other affected city
departments shall determine the time limitations of temporary uses, which
shall not exceed the following maximum time limits for the following uses:



      (1)   Three consecutive days:  outdoor sales.



      (2)   Ten consecutive days:



         (a)   Auctions;



         (b)   Concerts;



         (c)   Outdoor religious revival meetings;



         (d)   Outdoor carnivals, circuses, rodeos and itinerant
shows; and



         (e)   Mechanical amusement rides.



      (3)   Thirty consecutive days:  grand opening signs (one time
only).



      (4)   Forty-five consecutive days:  Christmas tree lots.



      (5)   One hundred eighty consecutive days, with thirty day
extension for climatic hardships:



         (a)   Vegetable, fruit or flower stands; and



         (b)   Youth, charitable or nonprofit organization
projects.



      (6)   Until the construction has received final utility
clearance:



         (a)   Construction signs; and



         (b)   Construction yard and office.



   (B)   No more than three outdoor sales shall occur on the same site
or at the same facility during a calendar year.



   (C)   No new temporary use permit shall be issued within 30 days
from the expiration date of a similar temporary use permit for the same
property, or from removal of materials or structures associated with the use,
whichever occurs later.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-4.5)  (Ord. No. 1633, 1836)



SEC. 16-480.  EXPIRATION OF USE; REMOVAL OF MATERIALS; BOND REQUIRED.



   (A)   All uses permitted by a temporary use permit shall be
terminated on or before the expiration date stated upon the permit.  All
materials or products used in connection with or resulting from the temporary
use shall be removed within five days after such expiration date.  A bond,
cash or other acceptable security in the amount of $250 to insure removal of
all materials, personal property, and structures shall be filed with the
director at the time of application for each of the following uses:



      (1)   Subdivision signs;



      (2)   Construction yards and offices;



      (3)   Sales or rental offices;



      (4)   Vegetable, fruit or flower stands; and



      (5)   Christmas tree lots.



   (B)   A bond, cash or other security shall also be required for any
other temporary use which the director finds should be bonded to insure
removal of all materials used in connection with or resulting from the use.



   (C)   Upon the removal of all materials associated with the approved
temporary use, the applicant shall request an inspection by the enforcement
division which shall make a recommendation to the director regarding the
release or other disposition of the bond, cash or other security deposit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-4.6)  (Ord. No. 1633, 1836)



SEC. 16-481.  DENIAL OF PERMIT; APPEAL.



   If, in the opinion of the director and other affected city departments,
a proposed temporary use will be detrimental to the public health, safety and
welfare and the adverse impacts cannot be mitigated, the director shall deny
the permit.  The applicant may appeal the denial to the commission as
provided in sections 16-530 through 16-553.  Said appeal shall be final with
the commission.  Before an appeal is scheduled for hearing, the applicant
shall pay a fee as provided by resolution of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-4.7)  (Ord. No. 1633, 1836)



SEC. 16-482.  SIGNS.



   Except as otherwise permitted by this division, sign area for auctions,
Christmas tree lots and vegetable, fruit and flower stands shall be limited
to one temporary unlighted attached sign not to exceed 20 square feet in
area.  When such temporary use is located in a C-R zone, an additional two
directional signs, of no more than six square feet each, shall be
permitted.  These additional signs shall be constructed of wood.  All signs
shall pertain only to the goods sold on the premises upon which displayed. 
Such signs shall not be located closer than five feet to any property line or
street right-of-way.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-4.8)  (Ord. No. 1836)



SEC. 16-483.  PROHIBITED USES.



   (A)   No temporary use permit shall be granted for the temporary
occupancy of a mobile home, coach or other similar prefabricated or
manufactured structure for use other than as a temporary construction office
as provided in this article.  Any use of such type of structure other than
as specified herein shall comply with provisions of this chapter and the
building codes applied to permanent structures.



   (B)   Except as otherwise permitted by or provided for in this
chapter, no retail commercial use that engages in outdoor sale, display,
promotion or storage of products or goods in commercial zones shall be
permitted, except that this prohibition shall not apply to the outdoor
displays of nurseries and lumber yards; the outdoor display of automotive
products associated with a service station use; and the outdoor display of
other large commodities, such as automobiles, motorcycles, and noninflatable
craft, associated with retail sales.



   (C)   All sales offices for attached or detached residential
projects shall be located within a specified dwelling unit.  If the sales
office is located in the garage of the dwelling unit, all improvements to the
garage made to accommodate the office shall be removed before the dwelling
unit is sold.  As a condition of a planned development permit or a
development plan permit, the approval body may authorize sales offices in
trailer coaches and similar temporary structures.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-4.9)  (Ord. No. 1836, 2515)



DIVISION 16.  WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES



SEC. 16-485.  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this division is to provide standards governing
the installation of towers, antennae, and other wireless communications
facilities to greatly reduce or eliminate any adverse economic, safety or
aesthetic impacts on neighboring property owners and the entire city. 



   (B)   Specifically, the purpose of this division is to:



      (1)   Permit towers to be located only in non-residential
areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the city;



      (2)   Encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites
as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;



      (3)   Encourage the location of towers and antennae in areas
where any adverse impacts on the city are minimal;



      (4)   Encourage the configuration of towers and antennae to
minimize adverse visual impacts through careful design (such as the use of
stealth facilities), siting, landscape screening, and other camouflaging
techniques;



      (5)   Expand the availability of quick, effective and
efficient wireless communications services in the city;



      (6)   Consider any potentially adverse effects that wireless
communications towers have on health and safety; and



      (7)   Use careful design and siting of towers to avoid damage
to adjacent properties.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-230)  (Ord. No. 2449)



SEC. 16-486.  APPLICABILITY.



   This division shall not apply to antennae and wireless communication
facilities under 70 feet in height that are owned and operated by a
federally-licensed amateur radio station.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-231)  (Ord. No. 2449)



SEC. 16-487.  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   ALTERNATIVE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY - Mounting
structures, including man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light
poles, and similar structures designed to camouflage or conceal the presence
of antennae or towers.



   (B)   ANTENNA - A device used in communications that radiates or
captures electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunication signals or
other communication signals.



   (C)   ANTENNA ARRAY - One or more rods, panels, whips, dishes or
similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency
signals.



   (D)   ATTACHED FACILITY - An antenna array or equipment facility
attached to an existing building or structure, located either inside or
outside of the building or structure.



   (E)   CELL SITE - A geographical area with a typical radius of ½
mile to five miles, containing both transmitting and receiving antennae.



   (F)   CELLULAR - Analog or digital wireless communications
technology based on systems of interconnected neighboring cell sites.



   (G)   CO-LOCATION - The locating of antennae from more than one
provider on a single building- mounted, roof-mounted wireless communication
facility.



   (H)   ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD - The local electric and magnetic fields
that envelop the surrounding space, as by the movement and consumption of
electric power by transmission lines, household appliances and lighting.



   (I)   EQUIPMENT FACILITY - A structure containing ancillary
equipment for a wireless communications facility, including cabinets,
shelters, and similar structures.



   (J)   FAA - The Federal Aviation Agency.



   (K)   FCC - The Federal Communications Commission.



   (L)   LATTICE TOWER - A multi-sided, open, metal frame tower.



   (M)   MANAGER - The city's planning and environmental services
manager.



   (N)   MICRO-CELL FACILITY - A wireless communications facility
consisting of not more than four antennae per site, each with dimensions no
greater than two feet by two feet (typically mounted on existing structures
or utility poles) or one foot by four feet; provided, however, that
cylindrical antennae less than six inches in diameter that transmit and
receive signals in 360 degrees may be no greater than five feet in height.



   (O)   MONOPOLE - A single pole wireless communications facility.



   (P)   DIVISION - The city's planning and environmental services
division.



   (Q)   RADIO FREQUENCY RADIATION - Electromagnetic radiation in the
portion of the spectrum from 3 kHz (kilohertz) to 300 GHz (gigahertz).



   (R)   REVIEWING AUTHORITY - The person or body designated by the
code or city regulations to decide applications for antennae, equipment
facilities and wireless communication facilities, or matters related thereto,
or appeals from such decisions.



   (S)   SCENIC HIGHWAY - A road, street, highway or freeway designated
as a scenic highway in the open space/conservation element of the city's
general plan.



   (T)   STEALTH FACILITY - A wireless communications facility designed
to blend into the surrounding environment, typically architecturally
integrated into a building or other concealing structure, also called an
“alternative wireless communications facility.”



   (U)   TOWER - A structure higher than its diameter and high relative
to its surroundings, free-standing or attached to another structure, of
skeleton framework or enclosed, that is erected primarily for the purpose of
supporting one or more antennae for wireless communications facilities.



   (V)   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS - Personal wireless services as
defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, including cellular, personal
communication, specialized mobile radio, enhanced specialized mobile radio,
paging, and similar services.



   (W)   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY - A structure, including a
tower, pole, monopole, lattice tower, water tower, building or other
structure, that supports antennae and related equipment that sends or
receives radio frequency signals.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-232)  (Ord. No. 2449)



SEC. 16-488.  APPROVAL PROCESS.



   (A)   In general - Wireless communications facilities shall not be
constructed, installed, or maintained before approval is granted by the
manager or a special use permit is issued, as set out in this section. 
Applicants are encouraged to submit a single application for multiple
wireless communications facilities.



   (B)   Approval by manager - Within the time period and with such
public notice as is prescribed by State law, the manager shall approve or
conditionally approve applications for the following wireless communications
facilities that comply with all of the development standards of this division
and the zone in which such facilities are to be located.



      (1)   A stealth facility not located in a residential zone;



      (2)   A stealth facility within 500 feet of a scenic highway;



      (3)   An attached or roof-mounted wireless communications
facility that is more than 500 feet from a scenic highway;



      (4)   A co-located wireless communications facility that is
more than 200 feet from a scenic highway;



      (5)   A wireless communications facility on property owned,
leased, or otherwise controlled by the city; and



      (6)   A micro-cell facility within a public right-of-way or
utility easement.



   (C)   Denial by manager; appeal - If an application to the manager
for wireless communications facilities does not meet the standards set out in
subsection (B) above, the manager shall deny the application in writing,
stating the basis for denial.  Within ten days of the manager's denial of an
application for wireless communications facilities, the applicant may appeal
the manager's decision to the commission by filing with the secretary of the
commission a written notice of appeal, stating the reasons that the applicant
believes the manager's decision to be incorrect.  The secretary of the
commission shall set the date of hearing on the appeal for not less than 21
or more than 30 days from the date of filing the appeal and shall give notice
of a public hearing on the appeal pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Section
65091.  Not more than 30 days following the termination of the hearing on
the appeal, the commission shall adopt a resolution granting or denying the
appeal.  The decision of the commission shall be final and not subject to
further administrative appeal.



   (D)   Issuance of special use permit - A special use permit issued
pursuant to sections 16-530 to 16-553 is required for the following wireless
communications facilities:



      (1)   A wireless communications facility in a residential zone;



      (2)   A non-stealth facility in a commercial, manufacturing,
business and research park, or central business district zone;



      (3)   A wireless communications facility with an individual
support tower (e.g., monopole or lattice tower);



      (4)   A non-stealth facility within 500 feet of a scenic
highway, when the facility is significantly screened;



      (5)   An attached facility within 500 feet of a scenic highway
or a co-located wireless communications facility on an existing tower within
200 feet of a scenic highway;



      (6)   A wireless communications facility that does not comply
with all of the development standards of this article or the zone in which
such facility is to be located, but that can be conditioned to eliminate
potential impacts or reduce potential impacts to an acceptable level through
the issuance of a special use permit in conformance with this article.



      (7)   A wireless communications facility within a Southern
California Edison (SCE) substation, whether or not located within 500 feet
from a scenic highway, as long as the substation contains existing SCE poles
at least as tall as one-half the height of the proposed wireless
communications facility and such facility is unobtrusively integrated into
the substation design.



   (E)   Issuance of master special use permit - In order for the city
to control cumulative development of wireless communications facilities on a
parcel, a master special use permit issued pursuant to sections 16-530 to
16-553 is required when an additional wireless communications facility is
proposed on a parcel that already has one or more such facilities.  The
applicant for the master special use permit shall be the property owner, not
a lessee; however, a lessee may act as the property owner's agent.



   (F)   Information for special use permit or manager's approval - The
application for a special use permit or for the manager's approval shall
require the following information.  If the application is for the manager's
approval, the manager, in his or her discretion, may waive items of
information.



      (1)   Site information -



         (a)   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the
location, type, and height of the proposed wireless communications facility,
on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including that
of any adjacent municipality or the county), adjacent roadways, proposed
means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the
proposed wireless communications facility and any other structures,
topography, parking, fencing and other information required by the manager;



         (b)   A complete description of the site, including what
telecommunications objectives the proposed wireless communications facility
will implement, such as coverage areas and system capacity;



         (c)   A legal description of the boundaries of the site
and the legal parcel;



         (d)   A map showing the location of the nearest
habitable structure, if closer than 1,000 feet, and the distance from the
proposed wireless communications facility to the structure;



         (e)   A map showing the distance of the proposed
wireless communications facility from other facilities and the type of
construction of existing wireless communications facilities; and



         (f)   A map and a description of on-site and adjacent
scenic areas (including scenic highways), habitat resources, water bodies,
and significant vegetation.



      (2)   Electromagnetic frequency information -



         (a)   A report prepared by a radio frequency engineer
approved by the manager, showing that radio frequency
radiation/electromagnetic frequency emitted by the proposed wireless
communications facility will conform to the safety standards adopted by the
FCC.



         (b)   The manager shall waive the foregoing report if
the applicant submits evidence satisfactory to the manager that the proposed
wireless communications facility meets the environmental evaluation exemption
standards set out in Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations.



      (3)   Co-location information - The applicant shall
demonstrate that the applicant has made reasonable efforts to colocate the
proposed wireless communications facility in accordance with sections
16-489.  The applicant shall provide:



         (a)   A written summary of all efforts to co-locate the
proposed wireless communications facility with an existing such facility,
either on the same property or in the general vicinity, including copies of
requests for co-location to existing carriers and any responses received;



         (b)   If an existing wireless communications facility is
not proposed for co-location, a letter explaining why such facility is not
suitable for co-location, including factors such as lack of existing towers
in the area, topography, frequency interference, line of sight problems,
available land, and zoning restrictions; and



         (c)   A statement as to whether construction of the
proposed wireless communications facility will accommodate co-location of
additional antennae for future users.



      (4)   Visual impact information -



         (a)   Photographs or computer enhanced representations
of the project site “before” and “after” installation, showing the
proposed tower and antennae and any landscaping or screening proposed to
lessen the visual impact of the wireless communications facility;



         (b)   If the site is visible from a scenic highway, a
residential neighborhood, or a public hiking trail, the photographs or
computer enhanced representations shall show the site from those points of
view.  If the photographs or computer enhanced representations show multiple
viewpoints, the applicant shall also provide an index map and key for
identification.



         (c)   The color proposed for the tower and the reasons
why that color is best for the proposed location;



         (d)   A landscape plan designed to screen the proposed
wireless communications facility to the maximum extent feasible, or statement
of reasons why landscaping is not necessary or feasible;



         (e)   Additional information, maps, drawings, as
required by the manager, designed to show that the proposed wireless
communications facility meets the intent of the city's general plan and
scenic resource protection goals and policies.



      (5)   Capacity information - Information on the total antenna
capacity for the proposed tower and any other proposed structures.



      (6)   Statement of intent - A statement of intent regarding
the establishment of utilities and services, such as electricity.



      (7)   Evidence - Evidence that the parcel for the proposed
site was legally created.



      (8)   Access proof required - A title report or other document
demonstrating that the applicant has legal access to the proposed site.



      (9)   Lease agreement - An agreement to lease space on the
proposed support structure to other users.



      (10)   Failure characteristics - Documentation that identifies
failure characteristics of the tower and demonstrates that the site and
setbacks are of adequate size to contain falling debris.



      (11)   Notification proof required - Evidence that the
applicant has notified all wireless communications service providers of the
applicant's plans to develop the proposed wireless communications facility.



      (12)   Operating license - Evidence that the applicant has a
current operating license from the FCC.



   (G)   Additional information for master special use permit - The
application for a master special use permit shall require the following
information, as well as the information required for a special use permit:



      (1)   A plot plan of the proposed master special use permit
boundary, showing all existing and proposed wireless communications
facilities, any additional area needed to provide required landscaping or
screening for such facilities, and the boundaries of individual lease areas;
and



      (2)   Elevations and total build-out information for each
tower.



   (H)   Fees - No application for wireless communications facilities
or appeal from decisions of the manager or the commission concerning such
applications shall be accepted unless accompanied by a fee in the amount set
by resolution of the city council.



   (I)   Expiration and reapplication -



      (1)   Any approval by the manager or special use permit or
master special use permit granted for stealth, micro-cell or significantly
screened wireless communications facilities, or wireless communications
facilities located in SCE substations, that become more prominent or visible
because of a change in the support structure, screening, surrounding
structures or landscape, shall be deemed to expire on 90 days' written notice
from the manager to the wireless communications facilities provider,
provided, however, that the manager may extend the period of expiration as
set out in subdivision (2) of this subsection.  Examples of such situations
include, but are not limited to, the removal of vegetation that formerly
screened such facilities; the removal or deterioration of a structure that
formerly screened such facilities; and the removal of an SCE substation or
the undergrounding of utilities in an SCE substation in which such facilities
are located.



      (2)   Such notice shall identify the location of the wireless
communications facilities and the change that rendered such facilities more
prominent or visible.  Such notice shall state that the wireless
communications provider shall reduce such prominence or visibility by taking
action as described by the manager, to be completed to the satisfaction of
the manager within 90 days of the date of the notice or the approval or
special use permit or master special use permit shall expire 90 days from the
date of the notice.  Alternatively, the notice shall state that no action
can be taken to sufficiently reduce such prominence or visibility, and shall
require the wireless communications provider to remove the wireless
communications facilities within 90 days of the date of notice.  The manager
may extend any such 90-day period for a reasonable time if the manager
determines that the wireless communications provider is exercising due
diligence to take the required action and reasonably requires more time to
complete the required action.



      (3)   If the wireless communications provider does not appeal
the issuance of such notice and attempts to comply with the notice by taking
the action specified by the manager to reduce the prominence or visibility of
the wireless communications facilities, and the manager is not satisfied with
such attempts, the manager shall give written notice to the wireless
communications provider of additional corrective action that must be
completed within a specified time.  In the alternative, or after such
additional corrective action has been attempted, the manager may give written
notice to the wireless communications provider that such attempts are
unsatisfactory and that the approval, special use permit or master special
use permit has expired or will expire at the time stated in the original
notice.



      (4)   Within ten days of the manager's issuance of a notice
under this subsection (I), the wireless communications provider may appeal to
the commission as provided in subsection 16-488(C) or may file a new
application for the wireless communications facilities on a basis other than
stealth, micro-cell or significantly screened facilities.  The expiration of
the approval or special use permit or master special use permit shall be
stayed pending the commission's decision on the appeal or the manager's or
commission's decision on the new application.



      (5)   On or before expiration of an approval, special use
permit or master special use permit under this subsection (I), the wireless
communications provider, at such provider's expense, shall remove the
wireless communications facilities.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-233)  (Ord. No. 2449, 2539)



SEC. 16-489.  CO-LOCATION.



   (A)   Wireless communications providers are encouraged to construct
and site their wireless communications facilities with a view towards sharing
such facilities with other providers, to co-locate with existing wireless
communications facilities, and to accommodate the future co-location of other
wireless communications facilities.



   (B)   City staff shall work with wireless communications providers
to facilitate the siting of wireless communications facilities on publicly
owned property, by identifying existing wireless communications facilities,
the appropriate contact persons, and the appropriate procedures.



   (C)   Wireless communications providers proposing a new wireless
communications facility having a support structure shall demonstrate that a
reasonable attempt was made to find a co-location site meeting engineering
standards and that none was practically or economically feasible.  Evidence
submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate
the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:



      (1)   No existing towers located within the geographic area
meet applicant's engineering requirements.



      (2)   Existing towers are not of sufficient height to meet
applicant's engineering requirements.



      (3)   Existing towers do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antennae and related equipment, or
cannot be reinforced or modified to accommodate applicant's proposed antennae
and related equipment at a reasonable cost.



      (4)   Applicant's proposed antennae would cause
electromagnetic interference with antennae on existing towers, or antennae on
existing towers would cause interference with applicant's proposed antennae.



      (5)   Fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the
owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an
existing tower for sharing are unreasonable.  Costs exceeding new tower
development are presumed to be unreasonable.



      (6)   There are other limiting factors that render existing
towers unsuitable.



   (D)   Wherever feasible, wireless communication facilities and
antennae shall be co-located on existing towers.  Written documentation
shall be presented to the manager that the owner of the property where the
wireless communication facility is to be located has agreed to this
requirement.  This subsection shall not apply to stealth antennae.



   (E)   Wireless communication facility owners shall not exclude other
related wireless communications services from co-locating on the same tower
if the tower is structurally and technically able to support such services.



   (F)   Wherever feasible, transmitting and receiving equipment
serving similar kinds of uses shall be placed on the same wireless
communication facility so that all users with similar equipment can operate
approximately equally.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-234)  (Ord. No. 2449)



SEC. 16-490.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Principal or accessory use - Antennae and towers may be
allowed as either principal or accessory uses.



   (B)   Parcel size - For purposes of determining whether the
installation of towers or antennae complies with zone development standards,
such as setbacks and lot coverage, the dimensions of the entire parcel shall
control, even though the antennae or towers may be located on separate leased
parcels within the entire parcel.



   (C)   State and federal requirements - Wireless communications
facilities shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA,
the FCC, and any other agency of the State or federal government with the
authority to regulate wireless communications facilities.  If such standards
or regulations change, the owners of wireless communications facilities
governed by this article shall bring wireless communications facilities into
compliance with the revised standards or regulations within six months of the
effective date of the revision, unless a different compliance schedule is
required by the controlling agency.  Failure to bring wireless
communications facilities into compliance with the revised standards or
regulations shall constitute grounds for the city to remove such facilities
at the owner's expense.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-235)  (Ord. No. 2449)



SEC. 16-491.  HEALTH AND SAFETY.



   (A)   Every wireless communications facility shall be placed,
operated and maintained in a manner that fully complies with current
regulations of the FCC governing radio frequency emissions.



   (B)   All wireless communications facilities shall meet the minimum
siting distances to habitable structures required for compliance with FCC
regulations and standards governing the environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions.



   (C)   New or existing wireless communications facilities shall not
interfere with public safety telecommunications or private use
telecommunication devices.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-236)  (Ord. No. 2449)



SEC. 16-492.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Height - The maximum height of wireless communications
facilities shall not exceed the height limitations of the zone in which such
facilities are located; provided, however, that wireless communications
facilities mounted on an existing structure that exceeds the height limit of
the zone, may be as high as the structure.  In the C-2, BRP, C-M and M-L
zones, whether or not such zones are in a planned development zone, the
height limitation shall be the basic height limitation for the zone before
any adjustment thereof by the commission, as allowed by the portions of the
code applicable to such zones, unless the commission grants additional height
on the grounds and conditions stated in such portions of the code and in
sections 16-530, 16-531, and 16-532.  Height shall be measured as the
vertical distance from the grade at the base of the wireless communications
facility to the top of the wireless communications facility or, in the case
of a roof-mounted wireless communications facility, from the grade directly
below the exterior base of the building to the highest point of the wireless
communications facility.  Antennae and other projections from the wireless
communications facility shall be included in the measurement of height. 
Exceptions to height limitations may be granted as provided in section
16-497.  Exceptions to height limitations for top structures and
freestanding structures that conceal antennae, but not for antennae not so
concealed, may be granted in conformance with the provisions of this code.



   (B)   Setbacks -



      (1)   Towers - Towers and all components thereof and
attachments thereto shall comply with the setback requirements for the zone
in which they are located.



      (2)   Attached wireless communications facilities - An
attached wireless communications facility antenna array may extend up to five
feet horizontally beyond the edge of the attachment structure, regardless of
setback requirements, provided that the antenna array does not encroach into
an adjoining parcel or public right-of-way.



   (C)   Separation -



      (1)   Separation from residential property - In granting a
special use permit or master special use permit, the commission shall require
towers to be placed far enough from residentially zoned property to
adequately mitigate visual impacts.  Tower separation shall be measured from
the base of the tower to the lot line of the residentially zoned property. 
No separation is required for stealth facilities.



      (2)   Separation distances between towers - Towers shall be
separated from each other by at least 5,000 feet, as measured along a
straight line between the base of the existing tower and the base of the
proposed tower.  No separation is required between stealth facilities,
significantly screened facilities or any combination thereof.



   (D)   Location -



      (1)   General requirement - Wireless communications facilities
shall be located to minimize their impact.  Whenever possible,
ground-mounted, non-stealth facilities shall be located next to existing
trees, light poles or utility poles of comparable height, provided that such
light poles and utility poles are not scheduled to be placed under ground and
comply with the setbacks for the zone.



      (2)   Order of preference - Applicants shall propose antennae
in the following order:



         (a)   Side-mounted antennae on existing structures;



         (b)   Antennae with appropriate visual or architectural
screening atop existing structures;



         (c)   Antennae within existing signs; and



         (d)   Antennae on monopoles.



      (3)   Restricted locations - Wireless communications
facilities shall not be established in any of the following locations, except
for stealth, significantly screened and micro-cell facilities determined by
the reviewing authority to be integrated with or screened by a non-antenna
support structure (such as a street light, utility pole, building or
landscape feature), so that such facilities will be substantially
indistinguishable from their support structures:



         (a)   Within any residential zone, unless the parcel on
which the wireless communications facility is proposed to be located is owned
by a public utility or a public agency;



         (b)   Within any nonresidential zone on a site that
contains a legally established residential use;



         (c)   Within 500 feet of a scenic highway;



         (d)   On any property that the city council has
designated as a significant heritage feature;



   (E)   Landscaping and screening:



      (1)   Wireless communications facilities shall be landscaped
and screened to comply with the requirements of the zone and any specific
plan area in which they are located.



      (2)   Existing mature trees and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the extent feasible.  Vegetation that causes
interference with antennae or inhibits access to an equipment facility may be
trimmed.



      (3)   Existing on-site vegetation may be used in lieu of other
landscaping when approved by the manager.



   (F)   Wireless communications facilities shall be designed and
maintained as follows:



      (1)   In general -



         (a)   Wireless communication facilities and accessory
equipment shall have subdued colors and non-reflective materials that blend
with the materials and colors of the surrounding area.



         (b)   Wireless communications facilities located 500
feet or less from a scenic highway shall be of stealth design to preserve the
scenic resources and character of the city.  Wireless communications
facilities over 500 feet and less than 1,000 feet from a scenic highway shall
be significantly screened, as determined by the manager.



         (c)   Wireless communications facilities shall not bear
any signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning, or other
required seals or signs.



      (2)   Towers - Towers shall have either a galvanized steel
finish or, subject to FAA standards, be painted a neutral color to reduce
visibility.



      (3)   Equipment facilities -



         (a)   Accessory equipment shall be located within a
building, structure, enclosure or underground vault.



         (b)   Equipment facilities located 500 feet or less from
a scenic highway shall be screened from view by an evergreen hedge with an
ultimate height of at least six feet and a planted height of at least 36
inches.



      (4)   Rights-of-way - All wireless communications facilities
located within street or road rights-of-way shall be either a micro-cell
facilities mounted on an existing utility pole or stealth facilities;
provided, however, that micro-cell facilities may not be mounted on utility
poles or other structures in rights-of-way where utilities are scheduled to
be placed under ground.  In such locations, wireless communications
facilities shall be removed at the owner's expense, as set out in section
16-494.



   (G)   Wireless communications facilities shall not be artificially
lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. 
Equipment facilities may have security and safety lighting that is
appropriately shielded to keep light within the boundaries of the site.



   (H)   Wireless communications facilities may be enclosed by a
security fence and may be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing
device.  Identification signs, including the emergency phone numbers of the
cellular service provider, shall be posted at all equipment facilities and
towers.



   (I)   The FCC has jurisdiction over the regulation of radio
frequency emissions.  As part of the application for wireless communications
facilities, applicants shall provide all information provided to the FCC
concerning the projected power density of such facilities and their
compliance with FCC standards.



   (J)   Towers to which one or more antennae are attached as of the
date of adoption of this article are subject to the following standards:



      (1)   Type of antenna - A tower that is modified or
reconstructed to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna shall
be of the same tower type as the existing tower, unless a change is approved
by the reviewing authority.



      (2)   Height -



         (a)   An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a
greater height, not to exceed 16 feet over the allowed height for the zone,
to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna.  The height change
may occur only once per tower.  Height shall be measured as described in
subsection 16-492(A).



         (b)   A change in height shall not require additional
distance separation.  The tower's pre-modification height shall be used to
calculate required distance separations.



      (3)   On-site location -



         (a)   A tower that is being rebuilt to accommodate the
co-location of an additional antenna may be moved on the same site within 50
feet of its existing location.  Only one tower shall remain on the site.



         (b)   A tower that is relocated on the same site shall
continue to be measured from the original tower location for purposes of
calculating separation distances between towers.



   (K)   Antennae attached to structures -



      (1)   Attached antennae shall be designed to be compatible and
blend with the architecture, colors, and materials of the structures to which
they are attached.



      (2)   Attached antennae shall be located to minimize their
visibility from public streets and residential areas.  Special screening
devices may be required or approved by the reviewing authority.



      (3)   Equipment facilities associated with attached antennae
shall be screened from public view.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-237)  (Ord. No. 2449, 2539)



SEC. 16-493.  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



   A wireless communications facility that has not operated for six
continuous months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner shall remove
such facility at the owner's expense within 90 days of notice from the
manager.  If the wireless communications facility is not removed within 90
days, the city may remove such facility at the owner's expense.  If there
are two or more users of a single wireless communications facility, this
provision shall not become effective until all users cease using such
facility for six continuous months.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-238)  (Ord. No. 2449)



SEC. 16-494.  REMOVAL OF WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES WITHIN UTILITY
RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   A wireless communications facility that is located within any utility
right-of-way where undergrounding of utilities is scheduled to occur, shall
be removed at the owner's expense within 90 days of notice from the city. 
If the wireless communications facility is not removed within 90 days, the
city may remove such facility at the owner's expense.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-239)  (Ord. No. 2449)



SEC. 16-495.  NONCONFORMING WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



   Wireless communications facilities that existed on January 13, 1998 and
that do not comply with the requirements of this division (“nonconforming
facilities”) are subject to the following standards:



   (A)   Nonconforming facilities may continue in use, but shall not be
expanded without compliance with this article.



   (B)   Nonconforming facilities may add additional antennae on
approval of the manager.



   (C)   Nonconforming towers may be maintained or replaced with a new
tower of similar construction and height; provided, however, that such
replacement or other construction, other than routine maintenance, shall
comply with the requirements of this division.



   (D)   With the exception of abandoned nonconforming facilities,
nonconforming facilities that are damaged or destroyed may be repaired and
rebuilt.  The type, location and physical dimensions of the rebuilt facility
shall be the same as the original facility.  Building codes in effect at the
time of repair or rebuilding shall apply thereto.  The applicant shall
obtain building permits within 180 days from the date the facility was
damaged or destroyed.  If no permit is so obtained or if the permit expires
before the repair or rebuilding is completed, the nonconforming facility
shall be deemed abandoned.



   (E)   Without conforming to the provisions of this division, a
nonconforming facility may be replaced, repaired, rebuilt or expanded in
order to improve the structural integrity of such facility, allow such
facility to accommodate colocated antennae or facilities, or upgrade such
facility to current engineering, technological or communications standards,
as long as the nonconforming facility is not increased in height by more than
ten percent and setbacks are not decreased.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-240)  (Ord. No. 2449)



SEC. 16-496.  MODIFICATIONS TO EXISTING WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



   (A)   Minor modifications - The manager may approve minor
modifications to existing wireless communications facilities.  Minor
modifications include the following:



      (1)   An increase of up to ten feet above the height limit of
the applicable zone in order to accommodate co-location or an attached
facility; or



      (2)   A decrease of up to ten percent in setbacks or
separation requirements.



   (B)   Major modifications - Major modifications to wireless
communications facilities shall require issuance of a special use permit in
accordance with sections 16-530 to 16-533.  Major modifications are any
modifications that exceed the definition of minor modifications or that are
not listed as minor modifications.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-241)  (Ord. No. 2449)



SEC. 16-497.  MODIFICATIONS TO DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   In granting a special use permit or a master special use permit
pursuant to this article, the commission may modify the development standards
of this article and of the zone in which the wireless communications
facilities are to be located, if the commission finds that such modifications
are consistent with the goals, principles and standards of the general plan
and other adopted city policies and with the public welfare; provided,
however, that the commission may modify numerical standards, such as
setbacks, height and separation distances, by no more than 25%, except in the
C-2, BRP, C-M and M-L zones, whether or not such zones are in a planned
development zone, as provided in section 16-492(A).



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-242)  (Ord. No. 2449, 2539)



SEC. 16-498.  VALIDATION OF PROPER OPERATION.



   Within 90 days of commencement of operations of a wireless
communications facility, the operator of such facility shall provide to the
program a report prepared by a qualified engineer, verifying that the
operation of such facility is in compliance with the standards established by
the American National Standards Institute and the Institute of Electrical and
Electronic Engineers for safe human exposure to electromagnetic fields and
radio frequency radiation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-243)  (Ord. No. 2449)



SEC. 16-499.  VIOLATIONS.



   Violation of any provision of this division is a misdemeanor.  Each
day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate offense. The penalty
for a misdemeanor is a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for a term not
to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-244)  (Ord. No. 2449)



DIVISION 17.  REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION



SEC. 16-501.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This division provides a procedure and sets standards for persons with
disabilities seeking a reasonable accommodation in the provision of housing
and is intended to comply with Cal. Gov’t Code Section 65583(c)(3)
requiring a Housing Element program to provide reasonable accommodations for
persons with disabilities, as well as the Federal Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C.
Sections 3601 et seq.) and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act
(Cal. Gov. Code Sections 12900 et seq.) (the Acts) regarding the application
of zoning laws and other land use regulations, policies and procedures.



(Ord. No. 2848)



SEC. 16-501.1.  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any
person with a disability, their representative, or entity when the
application of a zoning law or other land use regulation, policy or practice
acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. A person with a disability
is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or
substantially limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is
regarded as having such impairment or anyone who has a record of such
impairment. This section is intended to apply to those persons who are
considered disabled under the Acts. A reasonable accommodation may be
approved only for the benefit of one or more persons with a disability.



   (B)   A request for reasonable accommodation may include a
modification or exception to the rules, standards and practices for the
siting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities that
would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability
equal opportunity to housing of their choice. Facilities serving persons with
disabilities, not in compliance with this chapter at the time of adoption of
this division, may qualify for a reasonable accommodation permit pursuant to
this division.



(Ord. No. 2848)



SEC. 16-501.2.  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Application - A request for reasonable accommodation shall be
made on a city application form or in the form of a letter to the director
and shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The applicant’s name, address and telephone number,
and written permission of the property owner, if applicable.



      (2)   The address of the property for which the request is
being made.



      (3)   The current use of the property.



      (4)   Documentation for the claim that the person is
considered disabled under the Acts.



      (5)   The zoning code provision, regulation or policy from
which reasonable accommodation is being requested.



      (6)   Why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make
the specific property accessible to the person.



      (7)   Documentation that the specific exception or
modification requested by the applicant is necessary to provide one or more
persons with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling
unit.



   (B)   Fee - An application must be accompanied by the applicable
processing fee (equivalent to a temporary use permit - Tier 3 fee until such
time as the City Council modifies the reasonable accommodation fee) adopted
by City Council resolution.



(Ord. No. 2848, 2926)



SEC. 16-501.3.  REVIEW AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Administrative permit - Requests for reasonable accommodation
shall be reviewed by the director if no discretionary approval is sought
other than the request for reasonable accommodation.



   (B)   Associated discretionary permit - Requests for reasonable
accommodation submitted for concurrent review with a discretionary land use
application reviewed by the planning commission, such as a special use
permit, shall be considered together by the planning commission.



(Ord. No. 2848)



SEC. 16-501.4.  REVIEW PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Administrative permit - Within 30 days of receiving the
application, the director shall issue and mail a written determination to
either grant, grant with modifications or conditions, or deny a request for
reasonable accommodation.



   (B)   Associated discretionary permit - The written determination on
whether to grant, grant with modifications or conditions, or deny the request
for reasonable accommodation shall be made by the planning commission in
compliance with the applicable review procedure for the accompanying
discretionary permit. The planning commission shall take action and provide
notice as set forth in the zone code requirements for the associated
discretionary permit(s). The written determination on the request for
reasonable accommodation shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
section 16-501.5.



(Ord. No. 2848)



SEC. 16-501.5.  FINDINGS AND DECISION.



   (A)   Written findings - The applicant shall be notified of the
decision whether to approve, conditionally approve, modify or deny the
request for reasonable accommodation through a written determination. The
written determination shall be consistent with the Acts and shall be based on
the following findings, all of which are required for approval:



      (1)   The accommodation is requested by or on the behalf of
one or more persons with a disability protected under the Acts.



      (2)   The accommodation is necessary to provide one or more
persons with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling
unit.



      (3)   The accommodation will not impose an undue financial or
administrative burden on the city.



      (4)   The accommodation will not result in a fundamental
alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including but not limited
to land use and zoning.



      (5)   The accommodation will not result in a direct threat to
the health and safety of other persons or physical damage to the property of
others.



   (B)   Considerations - The director or planning commission may
consider, but are not limited to, the following factors in determining
whether the requested accommodation is reasonably necessary to provide one or
more persons with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling unit or would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of
the city’s zoning program:



      (1)   Whether the reasonable accommodation is being provided
primarily to benefit one or more persons with a disability.



      (2)   Whether the reasonable accommodation is necessary for
therapeutic benefit to the person(s) with a disability.



      (3)   Whether the accommodation would result in a substantial
increase in traffic or insufficient parking.



      (4)   Whether granting the requested accommodation would
substantially undermine any express purpose of either the city’s general
plan or an applicable specific plan.



      (5)   Whether the requested accommodation would significantly
deprive any neighboring property owners of the use and enjoyment of their own
properties.



      (6)   Whether there are preferable and/or feasible
alternatives to the requested accommodation that may provide an equivalent
level of benefit.



   (C)   Conditions of approval - In granting a request for reasonable
accommodation, the director or planning commission may impose any conditions
of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable
accommodation would comply with the findings required by subsection (A).
Conditions of approval for a reasonable accommodation request may, where
appropriate, provide for any or all of the following:



      (1)   Inspection of the affected premises by the city to
verify compliance with this division and any conditions of approval;



      (2)   Removal of the permitted improvements by the applicant
where removal would not constitute an unreasonable financial burden, if the
need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists; and



      (3)   Time limits and/or expiration of the approval if the
need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists.



(Ord. No. 2848, 2926)



SEC.16-501.6.  COMPLIANCE WITH EXISTING RULES.



   In order to be eligible for consideration for a reasonable
accommodation, the property must be in compliance with the then existing laws
and regulations otherwise applicable to the property except that which is the
subject of the reasonable accommodation request. If the non-compliance is
through no fault of the applicant, the director may waive this requirement.
However, such a waiver shall not preclude the city from requiring that the
existing violations be corrected in accordance with the city code and all
applicable rules and regulations.



(Ord. No. 2848)



SEC. 16-502.  APPEAL OF DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Administrative permit - A determination by the director
regarding a request for reasonable accommodation may be appealed to the
hearing officer in accordance with the administrative hearing procedures set
forth in article V of chapter 1 of the city code.



   (B)   Discretionary permit - A determination made by the planning
commission for a reasonable accommodation in conjunction with a discretionary
land use application may be appealed to the city council by the applicant or
any aggrieved person within 18 calendar days of the date of the
determination. Such appeal shall be delivered in writing to the city clerk.
An appeal fee as set by city council resolution shall be collected from the
appellant. The city clerk shall set a hearing date within 30 days of receipt
of the appeal. The city council decision shall be final.



(Ord. No. 2848)



SEC. 16-502.1.  [RESERVED].



SEC. 16-502.2.  [RESERVED].



SEC.16-502.3.  MODIFICATIONS.



   A request to modify an approved reasonable accommodation shall be
treated as a new application, unless in the opinion of the director, the
requested modification results in a minor change, is within the director’s
authority to approve and is consistent with the original approval.



(Ord. No. 2848)



SEC. 16-502.4.  TIME EXTENSIONS.



   The time limit for initiation of a reasonable accommodation as set
forth in the permit that has been approved in accordance with the terms of
this division may be extended for good cause for a period not to exceed 24
months by application to the director no less than 60 days prior to the
expiration date. The request must be accompanied by the applicable fee for
administrative permit extensions.



(Ord. No. 2848)



SEC. 16-502.5.  DISCONTINUANCE AND REVOCATION.



   A reasonable accommodation shall lapse if the exercise of rights
granted by it is discontinued for 30 days. The reasonable accommodation shall
remain in effect after that time only if the director makes a written
determination that (1) the modification is physically integrated into the
residential structure and cannot be easily removed or altered to comply with
code, and (2) the accommodation is necessary to allow another, identified,
person with a disability to occupy the dwelling unit within 90 days from the
date of the director’s determination. Any reasonable accommodation may be
revoked by the original decision maker for any violation of this division or
the terms or conditions of the reasonable accommodation, or if any law is
violated in connection with the use of the reasonable accommodation. The
director shall mail notice of intent to revoke a reasonable accommodation
that was granted by an administrative permit, and the permittee may request
an administrative hearing regarding such action, in accordance with the
procedures set forth in article V of chapter 1 of the city code.



(Ord. No. 2848)



SEC. 16-503.  RESTRICTIVE COVENANT.



   The owner of the property shall enter into a restrictive covenant with
the city which provides that prior to sale, transfer, lease or other
conveyance of the property or at the time the reasonable accommodation is no
longer necessary, that the owner of the property shall bring the property
into conformance with the city’s zoning code to the extent that relief was
provided as part of the request for reasonable accommodation. The restrictive
covenant shall be recorded against the property by the county recorder and
shall provide that the reasonable accommodation does not run with the land
and shall terminate upon sale, transfer, lease or other conveyance of the
property. Any grant of accommodation for a person with a disability shall be
considered as a personal accommodation for the applicant and does not run
with the land. If the director finds that the accommodation cannot be
feasibly removed or altered or the new property owner applies for and is
granted the same accommodation by the director a new covenant shall be
recorded as provided above.



(Ord. No. 2848)



DIVISION 18. EMERGENCY SHELTERS



SEC. 16-504.  EMERGENCY SHELTER DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Permanent emergency shelters and emergency shelters for
families shall meet the following standards:



      (1)   No shelter patron shall be re-admitted to the same
emergency shelter within five days of being discharged after a stay of six
months.



      (2)   If site characteristics permit, an enclosed or screened
waiting area shall be provided between the on-site intake area for shelter
patrons and the public right-of-way in order to prevent queuing within any
public right-of-way.



      (3)   Each shelter shall establish hours of operation for
patron intake and discharge, patron rules of conduct and procedures for
notifying patrons of such hours and rules of conduct.



      (4)   On-site manager/shelter personnel shall be provided
during all hours of operation when patrons are present. A designated area for
on-site personnel shall be located near the main entry to the shelter for the
purpose of controlling admittance and providing security.



      (5)   The emergency shelter operator shall conduct a
background check on all prospective patrons using Megan's Law database and
restrict patron intake in accordance with State and local registered sex
offender residency restrictions.



      (6)   Patrons shall not possess or consume alcoholic beverages
or illegal drugs while in the shelter, nor shall they possess weapons of any
kind while in the shelter.



      (7)   Space shall be allocated for each patron consisting of a
bed and storage area.



      (8)   At least two toilets, one shower and one sink shall be
provided for every twenty patrons.



      (9)   A shelter shall be limited to serving no more than the
number of patrons allowed by fire or building code occupancy.



      (10)   Off-street parking shall be provided for the on-site
manager.



      (11)   Each emergency shelter shall be equipped with exterior
security lighting in accordance with section 16-320 of the zoning code.
Lighting shall be shielded from all adjacent residential areas.



      (12)   The emergency shelter operator shall maintain an
on-site security plan and emergency preparedness plan.



      (13)   All items stored outdoors shall be screened from the
view of all public rights-of-way.



      (14)   Should an emergency shelter be proposed within 300 feet
of a school, the development services director or designee may request that
the developer/sponsor coordinate with the school district to address
potential concerns.



(Ord. No. 2864)



ARTICLE VI.  NONCONFORMING USES



SEC. 16-505.  INTENTION OF ARTICLE.



   (A)   Within the city there exist lots, structures and uses of land
or structures which were lawful when created, constructed or begun, but which
are prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or
future amendments.



   (B)   The city council intends to permit these nonconformities to
continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival.  Such
uses are declared by this article to be incompatible with permitted uses. 
The city council further intends that these nonconformities not be enlarged
upon, expanded or extended, or used as grounds for adding other prohibited
structures or uses.



   (C)   A nonconforming structure or use of a structure, a
nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land
shall not be extended or enlarged by attachment on a building or premises of
additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the
addition of other prohibited structures or uses.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-113)  (Ord. No. 734, 2694)



SEC. 16-506.  DEFINITION, NONCONFORMING BUILDING.



   A  building, structure or portion thereof which does not conform to
the provisions of this chapter and which lawfully existed at the time the
provisions with which a building, structure or portion thereof does not
conform became effective.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-114)  (Ord. No. 734)



SEC. 16-507.  DEFINITION, NONCONFORMING USE.



   A use of a building or land which does not conform to the provisions of
this chapter and which lawfully existed at the time the provisions with which
a building or land does not conform became effective.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-115)  (Ord. No. 734)



SEC. 16-508.  BUILDING LIMITATIONS.



   The following regulations shall apply to all nonconforming uses,
buildings and structures, or parts thereof:



   (A)   Any nonconforming building or structure may be continued and
maintained provided that there is no physical change other than necessary
maintenance and repair to such building or structure except as permitted in
other sections of this article.



   (B)   Any nonconforming use of a conforming building may be
maintained and continued provided that there is no increase or enlargement of
the area, space or volume occupied or devoted to such nonconforming use
except as otherwise provided in this article.



   (C)   Any part of the building, structure or land occupied by a
nonconforming use which is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the
provisions of this chapter shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a
nonconforming use.



   (D)   Any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a
nonconforming use, which use is discontinued or ceases for a period of six
months or more, shall not again be used or occupied for a nonconforming use.



   (E)   If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of
a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more
restrictive classification.



   (F)   Any otherwise conforming building or structure that is not
located in a residential zone and that is nonconforming only because it does
not comply with the setback or parking requirements established by this
chapter, may be refurbished, remodeled, structurally altered or enlarged
providing the following conditions are met:



      (1)   A special use permit subject to reasonable conditions is
approved as provided in sections 16-530 to 16-553 inclusive;



      (2)   After refurbishing, remodeling, structural alteration or
enlargement, the building or structure meets all other provisions of this
chapter except setbacks and parking; and



      (3)   The owner of the building or structure enters into an
agreement with the city to vote in favor of the formation of a parking
district and the imposition of assessments therein, in the event a parking
district is proposed.  The agreement shall be recorded.



   (G)   Any otherwise conforming building or structure that is used
for neighborhood shopping center or residential purposes, that is located in
a neighborhood commercial zone, and that is nonconforming only because it
does not comply with the setback, parking, landscaping, lot area or minimum
lot dimensions required by the neighborhood commercial zone, may be
reoccupied, refurbished, remodeled, structurally altered or enlarged.



   (H)   Any otherwise conforming building or structure used for
residential purposes and located in a residential zone that is nonconforming
only because it does not comply with the setback or parking requirements
established by this chapter may be refurbished, remodeled, structurally
altered or enlarged providing that the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The building after refurbishing, remodeling,
structurally altering or enlarging, meets all other provisions of the city
code except setbacks and parking; provided, however, that single-family
dwellings to which one or more bedrooms are added meet all provisions of the
city code except setbacks;



      (2)   The refurbishing, remodeling, structural alterations or
enlarging will not increase the need for parking or eliminate any required
parking space; provided, however, that the addition of one or more bedrooms
to a single-family dwelling shall provide all required parking spaces; and



      (3)   The refurbishing, remodeling, structural alteration or
enlargement will not increase any nonconforming setback.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-116)  (Ord. No. 734, 1012, 1176, 1295, 1565, 2695)



SEC. 16-509.  LAND USE LIMITATIONS.



   Every nonconforming use of land shall be subject to the following
provisions:



   (A)   No nonconforming use of land shall be enlarged, increased, or
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied when the
nonconforming use began;



   (B)   No nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in
part to any other portion of a lot or parcel occupied by such use when the
nonconforming use began; and



   (C)   If any nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of 30 days or more, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to
the regulations specified by this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-117)  (Ord. No. 734)



SEC. 16-510.  WHEN CAUSED BY RECLASSIFICATION.



   (A)   The foregoing provisions of this article shall also apply to
buildings, structures, land or uses which hereafter become nonconforming due
to any reclassification of zones or other change in the regulations of this
chapter.



   (B)   Where a period of years is specified in this article for the
removal of nonconforming uses, the period shall be computed from the date of
such reclassification or change.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-118)  (Ord. No. 734)



SEC. 16-511.  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit
additions or alterations to a nonconforming structure that are reasonably
necessary to comply with any lawful order of any public authority made in the
interest of the public health, welfare, or safety.



   (B)   Nothing in this article shall be construed or applied so as to
require the termination, discontinuance or removal or so as to prevent the
expansion, modernization, replacement, repair, maintenance, alteration,
reconstruction, rebuilding, and continued use of public utility buildings,
structures, equipment and facilities.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-119)  (Ord. No. 734, 767)



SEC. 16-512.  COUNCIL MAY ORDER USE CHANGED OR STRUCTURE REMOVED.



   In all zones every nonconforming structure designed, used or intended
for a use excluded from the zone may be ordered completely removed or altered
and converted within a certain time in the manner provided for in connection
with variances.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-120)  (Ord. No. 734)



SEC. 16-513.  COMPUTATION OF TIME FOR REMOVAL OF STRUCTURE.



   When setting a date by which a nonconforming structure shall be
removed, the commission shall estimate the reasonable, unamortized value of
the nonconforming structure and determine the time within which the owner of
the building will realize the reasonable unamortized value.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-121)  (Ord. No. 734)



SEC. 16-514.  USE MAY BE CONTINUED WHEN BUILDING DESTROYED; LIMITATION.



   Subject to all other provisions of this article, a building destroyed
to the extent of not more than 50 % of its reasonable value by fire,
explosion or other casualty, or act of God or the public enemy, may be
restored, and the occupancy or use of such building or part thereof which
existed at the time of such partial destruction may be continued.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-122)  (Ord. No. 734)



SEC. 16-515.  APPEAL OF DECISION REGARDING A NONCONFORMING USE OR A
NONCONFORMING BUILDING.



   (A)   When an application is received for any permit pursuant to
this chapter or any building permit, the planning manager shall make a
determination whether the proposed use of the land or structure pursuant to
the application is consistent with the requirements of this chapter. If the
planning manager's determination is that the proposed use of the land or the
structure is inconsistent with this chapter because a nonconforming use or
nonconforming structure may not be enlarged, increased, or extended or
because of abandonment or cessation of the nonconforming use or nonconforming
structure, the planning manger shall inform the applicant in writing of such
determination and the facts that support such determination.



   (B)   If the applicant desires to appeal the planning manager's
determination, the applicant must file a written appeal and the appeal fee
with the director within 15 days of the mailing date or ten days of personal
delivery of such written determination, whichever occurs first. Such written
appeal shall set forth the specific grounds for appeal, including a summary
of the facts that are in dispute. The appeal hearing shall be scheduled
within a reasonable period of time after receipt of the appeal, unless the
applicant agrees to a different date.



   (C)   At the hearing, the director shall hear evidence on the
disputed facts and exercise the director's independent judgment in rendering
a decision. The director may continue the hearing for good cause. Within 45
days of the close of the hearing, the director shall issue a written decision
that sets forth the reasons for such decision. Such decision shall be mailed
or personally delivered to the applicant.



   (D)   If the applicant desires to appeal the decision of the
director, the applicant must file a written appeal and the appeal fee with
the secretary to the commission within 15 days of the mailing date of the
director's decision or within ten days of receipt of the director's decision,
whichever occurs first. Such written appeal must set forth the specific
grounds for appeal, including a summary of the facts that are in dispute. The
appeal hearing shall be scheduled within a reasonable period of time after
receipt of the appeal, unless the applicant agrees to a different date.



   (E)   At the appeal hearing, the commission shall review evidence on
the disputed facts and exercise its independent judgment in rendering its
decision. The commission may continue the hearing for good cause. The
commission shall adopt a resolution setting forth its decision. The decision
of the commission shall represent the final administrative process available
within the city.



(Ord. No. 2770)



ARTICLE VII.  PERMIT PROCEDURES



DIVISION 1.  ZONE CLEARANCE PERMIT



SEC. 16-520.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this division is to provide minimum procedures for a
zone clearance permit to ensure non-home occupation land uses are conducted
in accordance with the city code.



(Ord. No. 2829)



SEC. 16-520.1.  APPLICABILITY.



   A zone clearance permit as approved by the director is required in
order to conduct any business from a non-residential location as described in
this division.



(Ord. No. 2829)



SEC. 16-520.2.  PERMIT AND LICENSE REQUIRED.



   The zone clearance permit shall be issued by the director.  A city
business license shall be obtained prior to or concurrently with an
application for a zone clearance permit.  The applicant is responsible for
complying with city, county, State and federal requirements, including
business license requirements and local zoning laws.



(Ord. No. 2829)



SEC. 16-520.3.  APPROVAL.



   The director may approve or deny an application for a zone clearance
permit if the director finds that the use is not detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare; and that the proposed land use is consistent with
all land use regulations applicable to the subject property, including but
not limited to any discretionary permit or specific plan.



(Ord. No. 2829)



SEC. 16-520.4.  PERMIT INITIATION AND EXPIRATION.



   (A)   The use authorized pursuant to a zone clearance permit shall
be initiated within 90 days of final approval.  If the intended use is not
initiated, i.e., conducting business in accordance with all applicable city,
county, State and federal laws and regulations, within 90 days the zone
clearance permit shall be automatically null and void.



   (B)   A zone clearance permit shall immediately become null and void
when the use for which the permit was granted ceases or is suspended for more
than 30 days, or if a valid business license is not maintained for the
subject use.



(Ord. No. 2829)



SEC. 16-520.5.  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The director shall notify a permittee in writing of a zone
clearance permit revocation, if the director finds that one or more of the
following conditions exist:



      (1)   The operation or nature of the business has been altered
contrary to the original approval:



      (2)   The use is not consistent with an associated permit or
specific plan;



      (3)   The use has become detrimental to the public health or
safety or constitutes a nuisance;



      (4)   The permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner;



      (5)   The condition of the premises or the operation of the
use has been altered contrary to the original approval, including expansion
of use;



      (6)   The condition of the area where the use is located has
changed so that the use is no longer justified under the meaning and intent
of this chapter.



   (B)   The director shall mail such written notice to the permittee,
stating the basis on which the director intends to revoke the zone clearance
permit, and informing the permittee that the director shall revoke the permit
within 15 calendar days of the notice mailing date, unless the condition
found to be in violation of this chapter is abated within the time
specified.  The notice shall also inform the permittee of the appeal
procedures set forth in section 16-520.6.



(Ord. No. 2829)



SEC. 16-520.6.  APPEAL.



   Any person may appeal to a hearing officer a decision of the director
approving or denying an application for a zone clearance permit or revoking a
zone clearance permit.  The appeal shall be in writing, state the grounds
for appeal, and shall be filed with the city clerk within 15 calender days of
the date of the mailing of the director's decision, together with the appeal
fee adopted by resolution of the city council.  The decision of the hearing
officer shall be final.



(Ord. No. 2829)



DIVISION 2.  DEVELOPMENT DESIGN REVIEW PERMIT



SEC. 16-525.  WHEN REQUIRED; PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Prior to the issuance of building permits for buildings or
structures for uses for which this chapter does not require a special use
permit or other zoning permit, an application for an administrative design
review permit shall be filed with the director.  Upon review of the
application, the director shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the
application within the time period and in accordance with any procedures
prescribed by State law.



   (B)   The decision of the director may be appealed to the commission
within ten days after the date of the director's decision.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-105.7)  (Ord. No. 2101)



DIVISION 3.  SPECIAL USE PERMIT



SEC. 16-530.  SPECIAL USE PERMITS; WHEN REQUIRED; PURPOSE.



   (A)   Whenever this chapter provides that a particular use may be
permitted by special use permit, an application for a special use permit
shall be determined as provided in this article.



   (B)   Special use permits authorized by this chapter are granted for
such time and upon such conditions and limitations as are deemed necessary to
preserve the integrity and character of the zoning district, the utility and
value of adjacent property and the general welfare of the neighborhood and
the public.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-146)  (Ord. No. 917, 1491, 1513, 1671, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-531.  REQUIREMENTS FOR GRANTING.



   Before a special use permit may be granted, the applicant must show and
the commission must find that the proposed use is in conformance with the
general plan and other adopted standards and that the following conditions
are met:



   (A)   The nature, condition and development of adjacent uses,
buildings and structures shall be considered, and no proposed special use
permit shall be granted if the approval body finds such use will adversely
affect or be materially detrimental to such adjacent uses, buildings or
structures or to the public health, safety or general welfare.



   (B)   The site that is subject to the special use permit shall be
adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, walls, fences, parking
and loading facilities, landscaping and items which may be required by
section 16-532.



   (C)   The site that is subject to the special use permit shall be
served by highways adequate in width and improved as necessary to carry the
kind and quantity of traffic such use would generate.



   (D)   The site that is subject to the special use permit shall be
provided with adequate sewerage, water, fire protection and storm drainage
facilities.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-147)  (Ord. No. 917, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-532.  CONDITIONS.



   The conditions imposed on a special use permit may involve any factors
affecting the establishment, operation or maintenance of the requested use,
including, but not limited to:



   (A)   Special yards, open spaces and buffer areas;



   (B)   Fences and walls;



   (C)   Traffic circulation and parking facilities, including
vehicular ingress and egress and the surfacing and lighting of parking areas
to specified standards;



   (D)   Street and alley dedications and improvements, including
sidewalks, curbs and gutters;



   (E)   Water supply, fire protection, sewerage service and storm
drainage facilities;



   (F)   Landscaping and maintenance of grounds;



   (G)   Regulation of nuisance factors such as noise, vibrations,
smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, noxious matter, heat, glare, electromagnetic
disturbances and radiation;



   (H)   Regulation of operating hours for activities affecting normal
neighborhood schedules and functions;



   (I)   Regulation of signs and outdoor advertising;



   (J)   A specified period limiting the time in which development may
begin;



   (K)   Provision for a bond or other surety that the proposed special
use will be removed on or before a special date;



   (L)   Height limitations to protect the character and integrity of
abutting parcels or the general welfare;



   (M)   Residential density, by specifying the number of dwelling
units per acre; and



   (N)   Such other conditions as will make possible the development of
the proposed special use in an orderly and efficient manner and in general
accordance with the intent of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-148)  (Ord. No. 917, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-533.  FORM AND CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.



   The application for a special use permit shall be on forms prescribed
by the city staff and shall furnish a description of the property for which
the special use permit is sought and a map or site plan showing the exterior
boundaries of the area to be included in the use permit.  The director may
require the applicant to show elevations, perspective drawings of the
proposed improvements, or building plans if such information is pertinent to
determining the application.  Plans or other supporting data may be required
by city staff.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-149)  (Ord. No. 917)



SEC. 16-534.  MANNER OF INITIATING PROCEEDINGS TO OBTAIN PERMIT;
REAPPLICATION.



   (A)   Application for a special use permit, variance, or planned
development permit may be initiated by:



      (1)   A resolution of intention by the commission or city
council;



      (2)   An owner of the affected property or the owner’s
designated attorney in fact;



      (3)   A lessee who holds a lease, the terms of which permit
the use applied for, or the lessee’s designated attorney in fact; and



      (4)   A plaintiff in an action in eminent domain to acquire
the property as to which the special use permit, variance or planned
development permit is sought.



   (B)   If an application for a special use permit, variance or
planned development permit has been denied, a new application for the same
entitlement relating to the same property shall not be accepted within 12
months of the denial.  This provision may be waived by a majority of the
city council on finding that, by reason of changed physical, legal or
sociological circumstances, consideration of a new application for same
entitlement would be in the public interest.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-150)  (Ord. No. 917, 1541, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-535.  APPLICATION FEE.



   (A)   Fees for filing an application for a special use permit shall
be set by resolution of the city council.



   (B)   Fees for submitting a project for preliminary review and
evaluation by city staff before submitting a formal application shall be set
by resolution of the city council.



   (C)   When an application for any project, including but not limited
to a special use permit, a planned development permit, a variance, a map, a
zone boundary change or a change of classification or zone uses, requires
special evaluation by a consultant or legal counsel or an unusual amount of
special study and evaluation by city staff beyond routine analysis, the
applicant shall reimburse the city for the cost of such work.  The director
shall give the applicant a written estimate of such cost, and the applicant
shall deposit the amount of such estimate with the director, before any such
work is done.  If, after work is begun, the director estimates that more
costs will be incurred than originally estimated, the director shall give the
applicant a revised written estimate and the applicant shall deposit the
amount of the revised estimate with the director, deducting deposits
previously made.  If the final actual cost of the work exceeds the amount so
deposited, the applicant shall deposit the remaining costs before the city
takes action on the application.  If the actual final cost of the work is
less than the amount so deposited, the director shall refund the excess
deposit after the city takes action on the application or the application is
withdrawn.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-151)  (Ord. No. 917, 1060, 1367, 1671)



SEC. 16-536.  HEARING ON APPLICATION; REQUIRED.



   All applications for special use permits shall be heard by the
commission during a public hearing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-152)  (Ord. No. 917, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-537.  NOTICE OF HEARING.



   Notice of the hearing shall be given by the secretary of the commission
pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Section 65091.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-152.1)  (Ord. No. 917, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-538.  TIME FOR HOLDING.



   The date of hearing on the application shall be set within the time
provided by State law.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-152.2)  (Ord. No. 917, 1316)



SEC. 16-539.  CONTINUANCE OF HEARINGS.



   If for any reason, any hearing cannot be completed on the day set
therefor, the presiding commissioner, before adjournment or recess, may
continue the hearing by publically announcing the time and place to which the
hearing is continued.  No other form of notice of such continuance shall be
required.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-152.3)  (Ord. No. 917, 1847, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-540.  DECISION.



   (A)   Not more than 30 days following the termination of public
hearings on an application for a special use permit or a modification or
revocation thereof, the commission shall render a decision by written
resolution, reciting any findings on which the decision is based and any
conditions imposed on the permit, if granted.



   (B)   A resolution granting or denying an application for a special
use permit or modifying or revoking a special use permit or denying an
application to modify or revoke a special use permit may not be reconsidered
or modified or vacated except as provided hereinafter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-153)  (Ord. No. 917, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-541.  NOTICE TO APPLICANT.



   (A)   Not later than ten days following the day a resolution of
decision is adopted, the secretary of the commission shall mail a copy of the
resolution to the applicant at the address appearing on the application or
such other address as is designated in writing by the applicant.



   (B)   With such resolution the secretary of the commission shall
mail a copy of section 16-545, setting forth the procedure for an applicant
to appeal the decision.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-153.1)  (Ord. No. 917, 1078, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-542.  EFFECTIVE DATE OF RESOLUTION.



   A resolution granting or denying an application for a special use
permit or modifying or revoking a special use permit or denying an
application for modification or revocation of a special use permit is
effective upon adoption, but is subject to the right of appeal to the city
council as hereinafter provided.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-154)  (Ord. No. 917, 2367)



SEC. 16-543.  WHEN APPLICANT MAY EXERCISE SPECIAL USE PERMIT.



   No person obtains any right or privilege to use property for any
purpose or in any manner described in an application for a special use permit
or a modification thereof or in a resolution granting a special use permit or
modification thereof unless and until the resolution granting the special use
permit or modification becomes final.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-154.1)  (Ord. No. 917, 2367)



SEC. 16-544.  FINALITY OF DECISION.



   A decision of the commission shall become final and conclusive at the
time of expiration of the appeal period provided in section 16-545 unless
prior to the expiration of such period a timely appeal or notice requesting
review in proper form is filed with the city council.  The filing of such an
appeal or notice requesting review shall automatically stay the execution of
the decision of the commission pending rendition of a decision by the city
council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-154.2)  (Ord. No. 917, 1078, 1253, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-545.  APPEAL OF DECISION TO COUNCIL; WHO MAY APPEAL; FILING
PROCEDURES; FEE.



   (A)   A person may file an appeal from or request a review of a
decision of the planning commission not later than 18 days after the date of
the decision.



   (B)   A review of a decision of the commission may be commenced by
the city manager or designee or a member of the city council by filing with
the city clerk an original and two copies of a notice requesting review.



   (C)   An appeal may be commenced by any person or entity aggrieved
or directly affected by a decision of the commission by filing with the city
clerk an original and two copies of a notice of appeal that specifies the
grounds for appeal and the relief requested.



   (D)   The city clerk shall note on the original notice the date and
time of filing and shall transmit copies of the notice to the director and
the city attorney.  The city clerk shall collect from the appellant the
appeal fee set by resolution of the city council.  The city clerk shall not
collect an appeal fee for a notice filed on behalf of the city by a city
officer or employee or a member of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-155)  (Ord. No. 917, 1046, 1060, 1253, 1446, 1671, 2367,
2374, 2445, 2508)



SEC. 16-546.  NOTICE AND TIME OF HEARING; CERTAIN ACTIONS SUSPENDED PENDING
CONCLUSION OF APPEAL.



   (A)   A review or appeal hearing shall be held by the city council
no more than 30 days following the date of filing of the notice; provided,
however, that if there is no regular meeting on the fourth Tuesday following
the date of filing of the notice, the hearing shall be scheduled for the next
regular meeting after the thirtieth day.



   (B)   Upon receipt of a notice of request for review or appeal, the
city clerk shall fix the date, place, and time of the review or appeal
hearing.  Written notice of the date, place, and time of the review or
appeal hearing shall be given by the city clerk to the applicant or
appellant, to the director, to any person of record directly affected by the
review or appeal, and if applicable, to the city officer, department, or
entity whose action is the subject of review or appeal.



   (C)   Additional notice of the hearing on review or appeal shall be
given by the city clerk pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Section 65091.



   (D)   During the pendency of review or appeal and until its
conclusion, the action of the commission shall be suspended and no permits
relating to the matter subject to review or appeal shall issue from any city
department.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-155.1)  (Ord. No. 917, 1446, 1970, 1986, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-547.  DELIVERY OF RECORDS TO COUNCIL.



   Unless otherwise directed by the council, the director shall deliver to
the city council at the time of hearing, all documents constituting the
commission's record of the matter subject to review or appeal.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-155.2)  (Ord. No. 917, 1446, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-548.  REVIEW AND HEARING PROCEDURES; QUORUM.



   (A)   A review of an appeal from a decision of the commission may be
heard de novo.



   (B)   On hearing the review or appeal, the city council shall
primarily consider the issues raised by the grounds specified in the notice
of review or appeal, but shall not be restricted thereto.



   (C)   The city council may promulgate additional rules of procedure
for review or appeal hearings.



   (D)   Rules governing evidence and procedure relating to review and
appeal hearings shall be liberally construed to effect enlightened
consideration and determination by the city council.



   (E)   Three council members constitute a quorum for holding a review
or appeal hearing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-155.3)  (Ord. No. 917, 1446, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-549.  DECISION OF COUNCIL GENERALLY; REFERRAL BACK TO COMMISSION; NO
WITHDRAWAL BEFORE HEARING.



   (A)   Prior to deciding a review or appeal, the city council may
refer a matter back to the commission for information, further report or
study.



   (B)   A matter subject to review or appeal shall not be withdrawn or
dismissed before a public hearing is had thereon.



   (C)   Within 14 days following the conclusion of the public hearing,
the city council shall adopt a resolution by a majority of the members of the
city council who were present at the public hearing; provided, however, that
if the city council refers the matter back to the commission, the city
council shall adopt a resolution of decision within 14 days following the
conclusion of a public hearing held by the city council to consider the
commission’s report.



   (D)   A resolution of the city council deciding a review or appeal
may affirm, reverse, modify, limit or condition the action of the commission.



   (E)   A resolution of the city council deciding a review or appeal
shall state the findings on which the decision is based and shall state with
particularity any limitations or conditions imposed; provided, however, that
a resolution of the city council referring the matter back to the commission
need not state any findings, limitations or conditions.



   (F)   If the city council does not adopt a resolution within the
time prescribed, or if there is a tie vote of the members of the city council
present at the public hearing, the action of the commission shall be
reinstated and given effect, and no further action thereon shall be taken by
the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-156)  (Ord. No. 917, 1446, 2367, 2445, 2482)



SEC. 16-550.  NOTICE.



   Not later than ten days following the day on which the decision of the
council is rendered, the clerk shall mail a copy of the resolution to the
appellant, the applicant and the commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-156.1)  (Ord. No. 917, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-551.  FINALITY.



   After rendition, such decision shall become final and conclusive and
cannot thereafter be reconsidered or modified or vacated except as herein
provided.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-156.2)  (Ord. No. 917)



SEC. 16-552.  REVOCATION.



   (A)   Any special use permit heretofore or hereafter granted may be
revoked by the commission, after a public hearing has been held with notice
given as provided in section 16-537, for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Where any permit or condition of the special use permit
has not been complied with;



      (2)   Where the property subject to the special use permit or
any portion thereof is used or maintained in violation of any statute,
ordinance, law or regulation;



      (3)   Where the use for which the special use permit was
granted has not been exercised for at least 12 consecutive months or has
ceased to exist or has been abandoned;



      (4)   Where the use for which the special use permit was
granted has been so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or
safety or as to constitute a nuisance;



      (5)   Where the applicant made a false or erroneous statement
in a material matter either in the application for the special use permit or
in testimony before the commission or the city council upon appeal.



   (B)   After revocation of a special use permit, the property
affected thereby shall be subject to the regulations of the applicable zone
classification.



   (C)   A decision of the commission or city council not to revoke a
special use permit whenever cause therefor exists or occurs does not
constitute a waiver of such right with respect to any subsequent cause for
revocation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-157)  (Ord. No. 917, 1046, 1087, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-553.  EXPIRATION.



   If a time limitation is specified in a special use permit, the special
use permit shall expire as so specified.  If no date is specified, a special
use permit shall expire within one year from the date of issuance unless the
use has been substantially developed or diligently pursued; provided,
however, that if there be an express waiver in any such special use permit of
the condition of such one-year time limitation, such one-year time limitation
shall not apply.  After expiration of a special use permit, the property
affected thereby shall be subject to the regulations of the applicable zone
classification.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-157.1)  (Ord. No. 917)



DIVISION 4.  MODIFICATIONS TO SPECIAL USE PERMITS



SEC. 16-560.  MINOR MODIFICATIONS; WHEN REQUIRED; PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Modifications to special use permits that do not intensify the
use of the parcel or have any additional adverse effect on abutting parcels
or the general health, safety, or welfare are minor modifications.



   (B)   An  application for a minor modification shall be filed with
the director.  Three copies of the site plan, elevation and landscape plan,
if applicable, shall be submitted with a letter outlining the requested
modification.



   (C)   Fees for filing an application for a minor modification to a
special use permit shall be set by resolution of the city council.



   (D)   Upon review of the application, the director shall issue a
written decision approving,  conditionally approving or denying the
application within the time period prescribed by State law.



   (E)   The decision of the manager may be appealed to the commission
within ten days of the date of issuance, in accordance with the procedure for
hearing an application for a special use permit as provided in this
chapter.  The decision of the commission shall be final.



SEC. 16-561.  MAJOR MODIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Major modifications to a special use permit shall be handled
in a manner similar to the initial application.  Major modifications are
those that involve substantial increases in coverage, major additions to the
buildings or structures, creation of extra parking needs, traffic or other
site problems and shall be heard by the commission.



   (B)   Applications describing the same as required for a special use
permit shall be submitted to the planning division, the requested
modification.



   (C)   Fees for filing an application for a major modification to a
special use permit shall be set by resolution of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-110.2)  (Ord. No. 916, 1409)



DIVISION 5.  VARIANCES



SEC. 16-565.  VARIANCES; WHEN PERMITTED.



   (A)   Variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be
granted only when, because of special circumstances applicable to certain
property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the
approval body finds that the strict application of such requirements deprives
such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and in
the same zoning classification.



   (B)   Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, the approval
body may grant a variance from the parking requirements of this chapter
pertaining to a nonresidential project, so that some or all of the required
parking spaces are located off-site, or so that in-lieu fees or facilities
are provided instead of the required parking spaces, if both the following
conditions are met:



      (1)   The variance will be an incentive to, and a benefit for,
the project; and



      (2)   The variance will facilitate access to the project by
patrons of public transit, particularly guideway facilities.



   (C)   The commission shall not grant a variance authorizing a use or
activity that this chapter does not expressly authorize for the subject
property.



   (D)   The commission shall not grant a variance that is contrary to
the general plan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-158)  (Ord. No. 917, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-566.  CONDITIONS ON VARIANCES.



   The commission granting a variance shall impose conditions that will
assure that the variance does not constitute a grant of special privileges
inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and
zone in which the subject property is located.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-158.1)  (Ord. No. 917, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-567.  INFORMATION ACCOMPANYING APPLICATION.



   (A)   The application for a variance shall be accompanied by a
description of the property for which the variance is sought and a map or
site plan showing the proposed development of the property and the variance
requested.  The commission may require the applicant to show additional
elevations and perspective drawings of the proposed improvements or building
plans if such information is pertinent to granting the variance.



   (B)   Fees for filing an application for a variance shall be set by
resolution of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-158.3)  (Ord. No. 917, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-568.  PROCEDURE.



   The application process, fees, notice of hearing, date of hearing,
decision, notice of decision, effective date, vested rights, finality of
decision, appeals to city council and related procedures and revocation shall
be in accordance with the procedure set forth for special use permits as
provided in sections 16-530 to 16-553.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-158.4)  (Ord. No. 917)



SEC. 16-569.  EXPIRATION.



   A variance shall normally be granted in perpetuity except that a change
in the conditions justifying a variance shall be cause to reconsider the
variance according to the procedure set forth in the foregoing sections. 
When the conditions justifying a variance are temporary, the commission or,
on appeal, the city council may set a time  after which the variance shall
be null and void, and the property shall be subject to the regulations of the
applicable zone classification.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-158.5)  (Ord. No. 917, 2367, 2445, 2445)



ARTICLE VIII.  CHANGE OF BOUNDARIES AND USES



SEC. 16-575.  AUTHORIZED.



   Whenever public necessity and convenience and the general welfare
require, boundaries of the zones established by this chapter or the
classification of property uses therein may be amended.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-123)



SEC. 16-576.  PROCEDURE–HOW INITIATED; REAPPLICATION.



   (A)   Zone boundary amendments may be initiated by:



      (1)   A resolution of intention by the city council;



      (2)   A resolution of intention by the commission;



      (3)   An application by an owner of the affected property or
the owner’s designated attorney in fact; or



      (4)   An application by a plaintiff in an action in eminent
domain to acquire the property as to which the zone boundary or property use
amendment is proposed.



   (B)   If an application for an amendment is denied by the city
council, a reapplication seeking an amendment that affects the same property
shall not be initiated within 12 months of the denial.  This provision may
be waived by affirmative vote of a majority of the city council if the city
council finds that, by reason of changed physical, legal or sociological
circumstances, reconsideration of the amendment would be in the public
interest.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-124)  (Ord. No. 767, 1541)



SEC. 16-577.  APPLICATION FORM AND CONTENTS.



   The form of application and the contents thereof shall be prescribed by
city staff.  No application shall be received or deemed complete that does
not comply therewith.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-125)



SEC. 16-578.  FEE.



   (A)   A fee, as set by city council resolution, shall be paid upon
the filing of each application.



   (B)   An additional fee, as set by city council resolution, shall be
deposited upon the filing of the application for a change of boundaries to
defray the cost of printing the zoning map amendment.  The deposit shall be
refunded if the change of boundaries is denied.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-126)  (Ord. No. 1060, 1367, 1702)



SEC. 16-579.  HEARING.



   Applications to change any property from one zone to another or to
impose any regulation listed in Cal. Gov't Code, Section 65850 not then
imposed or to remove or modify any such regulation then imposed shall be
heard as hereinafter provided.  Any other application affecting zone
boundaries or classification of property uses shall be heard by the city
council in the manner that other ordinances or amendments thereto are heard.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-127)



SEC. 16-580.  NOTICE.



   The commission shall hold a public hearing on the application.  Notice
of the time and place of such hearing shall be given by the secretary of the
commission in accordance with Cal. Gov't Code, Section 65854.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-128)



SEC. 16-581.  RECOMMENDATION TO CITY COUNCIL.



   After the public hearing, the commission shall adopt a resolution
recommending the action to be taken on the application by the city council,
including the reasons for the recommendation and the relationship of the
proposed ordinance or amendment to applicable general and specific plans.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-132)



SEC. 16-582.  CONTINUANCE OF HEARING.



   If, for any reason, any hearing cannot be completed on the day set
therefor, the presiding commissioner, before the adjournment or recess, may
continue the hearing by publicly announcing the time and place to which the
hearing is continued.  No other form of notice of such continuance shall be
required.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-136)



SEC. 16-583.  WHEN DECISION RENDERED.



   The commission shall adopt a resolution making a recommendation to the
city council not later than 30 days after the final termination of the
hearing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-139)



SEC. 16-584.  REPORT TO COUNCIL.



   Within ten days of the rendition of the commission’s  decision, the
secretary of the commission shall report the decision in writing to the city
council, including a copy of the resolution containing the findings and
decision of the commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-140)



SEC. 16-585.  DECISION TO BE SENT TO APPLICANT.



   Within ten days of the rendition of the commission’s decision, the
secretary of the commission shall mail a notice of the decision, together
with a copy of the resolution containing the findings and decision, to the
applicant.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-141)



SEC. 16-586.  EFFECT OF FAILURE OF COMMISSION TO ACT.



   If the commission fails to render a decision or adopt a resolution of
decision in the time required, the proceedings shall automatically be
transferred to the city council for further action, and the secretary of the
commission shall immediately deliver to the city council all the records of
the cases.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-142)



SEC. 16-587.  COMMISSION DECISION ADVISORY ONLY.



   The decision of the commission in the matter of amending zone
boundaries or use classifications shall be advisory to the city council only.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-143)



SEC. 16-588.  REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.



   The city council shall review the findings and decisions of the
commission and shall hold a public hearing thereon in accordance with State
law and shall make a final decision on the proposed amendment, sustaining,
modifying or overruling the decision of the commission; provided, however,
that if the matter under consideration is an amendment to the zoning
ordinance to change property from one zone to another, and the commission has
recommended against adoption of such amendment, the city council need not
take any action on the proposed amendment unless an interested person
requests a hearing by filing a written request with the city clerk within
five days after the commission’s decision is reported to the city council
pursuant to section 16-585.  If the decision of the city council changes
zoning boundaries or any classifications of zoning uses, such decision shall
be made by ordinance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-144)  (Ord. No. 494, 1084)



SEC. 16-589.  NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The city clerk shall give notice of the public hearing by the
city council pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Section 65090 and shall also give
written notice to the applicant of the date, time and place of the hearing.



   (B)   When appeals are made to the city council of a decision
rendered by the commission on special use permits, planned development
permits and variances, the city clerk shall give notice of the public hearing
by the city council pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Section 65091 and shall also
give written notice to the applicant of the date, time and place of the
hearing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-144.1)  (Ord. No. 1084, 2367, 2445)



SEC. 16-590.  CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF RECLASSIFICATION OF PROPERTY.



   The city council may impose conditions of approval upon the
reclassification of any property from one zone classification to another in
order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-144.2)  (Ord. No. 1324)



ARTICLE IX.  ADVERTISING SIGNS



DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY



SEC. 16-595.  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this article are as follows:



   (A)   To enhance the city's appearance, promote the growth of the
city in an orderly, efficient and attractive manner, promote traffic safety,
and provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property and public
welfare by regulating and controlling the design, materials, construction,
illumination, number, size, location and maintenance of signs.



   (B)   To protect and improve pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety
by reducing hazards and visual clutter and obstructions of the line by sight
caused by signs.



   (C)   To implement the city's design and aesthetic standards, as set
out in the city's general plan, specific plans, zoning ordinances and other
regulations.



   (D)   To allow the exercise of free speech by signs, while
reasonably regulating the structural, locational and other noncommunicative
aspects of signs to serve the foregoing public interests in city aesthetics
and traffic and pedestrian safety.



   (E)   To exempt from this article those signs listed in subsections
(A) through (E) of the definition of "sign" because such signs are exempt by
law or are required by law or provide public benefits that outweigh any
adverse impacts.



   (F)   To exempt election signs from the requirement for a sign
permit because such signs must be removed within 10 days after the election
so that the adverse impacts of such signs are short term and are outweighed
by the public benefits of informing the electorate.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-179)  (Ord. No. 1573, 2687)



SEC. 16-596.  SIGN DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   As used in this article, the following words have the
following meanings:



      (1)   ATTACHED SIGN - Any sign attached parallel to any face
of a building or to any face of a canopy.



      (2)   BACKLIGHTED SIGN - Any sign attached to the face of a
building, canopy or wall and lighted by means of an external source
illuminating the building, canopy face or wall containing the sign.



      (3)   BUILDING FRONTAGE - Building elevations that face upon a
public street or a parking area between a building and a public street where
access to the building is provided from said frontage.  If a building is
curved or triangular, the building frontage shall be the shortest distance
between the points on the outside extremity of the building elevation
measured parallel to the public street or parking area upon which said
building fronts.



      (4)   CANOPY - A permanent, roofed structure projecting from a
wall with or without supporting columns.



      (5)   COMMERCIAL SIGN - Any sign, wording, logo, picture,
transparency, mechanical device or other representation that is intended to
attract attention to a commercial or industrial business, occupancy, product,
goods, service or other commercial or industrial activity for a commercial or
industrial purpose.



      (6)   CONSTRUCTION SIGN - A sign stating the names of
individuals or firms directly connected with a construction project which may
include the name of the city in which the construction business is located
and emergency telephone numbers.



      (7)   DIRECTIONAL SIGN - A sign containing words, arrows or
other characters indicating the traffic direction and containing no
advertising or trade name identification, except that subdivision directional
signs may include tract identification.



      (8)   DOUBLE-FACED SIGN -  An outdoor advertising sign where
both sign faces are parallel or the interior angle is less than ten degrees,
are of essentially similar design, and the faces are not more than 48 inches
apart in the case of free-standing signs.



      (9)   ELECTION SIGN - A sign pertaining to an election for
public office or to a ballot measure to be placed before the voters in a
federal, state or local election.



      (10)   FLAG - Any cloth or fabric banner that is not exempt
under the definition of ‘sign.’



      (11)   FLASHING SIGN - Any sign containing or illuminated by
lights which are intermittently on and off, change in intensity, or create
the illusion of flashing in any manner.



      (12)   FREE-STANDING SIGN - A sign permanently supported by
one or more uprights, braces, poles, or other similar structural components
when utilizing earth, rock, the ground, or any foundation set in the ground
as a primary holding base and not attached to or enclosed by any building.



      (13)   GROUND SIGN - A sign placed upon a foundation or a slab
or placed upon or attached to an ornamental wall, and not supported by
uprights, braces, poles, or other similar structural components.



      (14)   HEIGHT OF A SIGN - The distance from the lowest
horizontal surface grade immediately within five feet of the base of the sign
to the top of its highest element, including any structural element.



      (15)   ILLUMINATED SIGN - Any sign lighted by an internal
light source.



      (16)   MANAGER - The planning and environmental services
manager.



      (17)   MASTER SIGN PROGRAM - A plan showing the location,
dimensions, area, color and materials of all signs located on a single parcel
or parcels under the same ownership.



      (18)   NONCOMMERCIAL SIGN - A sign that does not name,
advertise or call attention to a commercial or industrial business,
commodity, product, goods, service or other commercial or industrial activity
for a commercial or industrial purpose.



      (19)   NONCONFORMING SIGN - A sign which was issued a valid
permit at the time the sign was erected, but which does not accord or comply
with the requirements of this article and which was made nonconforming by
annexation, rezoning or ordinance amendment.



      (20)   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN - Any sign painted on or
affixed to any structure, or erected as a free-standing sign, which
advertises a person, product or service not located on the same parcel of
record as the sign.  This definition includes such terms as “off-site
sign” and “nonaccessory sign.”  This definition does not include
subdivision tract directional signs.



      (21)   ON-SITE SIGN or ACCESSORY SIGN - A sign which directs
attention to a business, commodity, service, industry, or other activity
which is sold, offered or conducted on the premises upon which such sign is
located, or to which it is affixed.



      (22)   PAINTED SIGN - Any sign painted directly onto the
surface of building wall or face.



      (23)   A PARCEL OF PROPERTY or A PARCEL - Any separate parcel
of property as shown on the latest available assessor's maps; provided,
however, that a shopping center divided into separate parcels shall be
considered as one parcel, and provided further that  two or more contiguous
parcels occupied by one tenant, business or enterprise shall be considered as
one parcel.



      (24)   PRINCIPAL STREET - The single street which provides the
most access and/or the predominant business exposure for a particular
business.



      (25)   PORTABLE, MOVABLE, OR TEMPORARY SIGN - Any sign for
which a building permit has not been issued and which is not permanently
affixed or erected in accordance with the provisions of the building
regulations of the city, or any sign which is intended to be movable or
capable of being moved from place to place, whether or not wheels or other
special supports are provided.



      (26)   ROOF - The cover of a building, including the eaves and
similar projections.  Elevator or equipment housing, penthouses, or similar
structures shall not be considered in determining the roof location unless
they comprise more than 60% of the roof area.



      (27)   ROOF SIGN - Any sign erected, constructed, and placed
upon or over the roof of a building or any architectural feature which
appears to be the roof of a building.



      (28)   ROTATING SIGN - Any sign or part thereof that moves or
rotates in any manner.



      (29)   SIGN - Any device, fixture, placard or structure,
including its component parts, which draws attention to an object, product,
place, activity, opinion, person, institution, organization, or place of
business, or which identifies or promotes the interests of any person, and
which can be viewed from any public street, road, highway, right-of-way or
parking area; provided, however, that the following are not included for the
regulatory purposes of this article:



         (a)   Public or legal notices required by a court or
public agency;



         (b)   Signs on street legal vehicles;



         (c)   Flags that solely identify a government or other
noncommercial organization or that solely carry a noncommercial message, when
such flags are used for noncommercial purposes;



         (d)   Traffic, directional, emergency, warning or
informational signs required or authorized by a government agency having
jurisdiction of the subject matter; and



         (e)   Signs consisting of the name and logo of the city,
erected near city boundaries by city staff.



      (30)   UNDER-CANOPY SIGN - A sign attached to the bottom of a
canopy or similar architectural feature.



      (31)   SIGN AREA - The sum of the area enclosed within a
geometric form or forms drawn around all writing, representations, emblems or
designs on all sides of the sign which contains or is designed to contain the
copy. If the frame forms an integral part of the sign, the sign area shall be
the total area within the frame and shall include all sides of the sign.



      (32)   SHOPPING CENTER - A group of at least three businesses
which function as an integral unit on a single parcel or on contiguous
parcels under the same ownership and which utilize common off-street parking
and access.



      (33)   STREET FRONTAGE - The linear frontage of a parcel of
property abutting a public street.



      (34)   VEE-SHAPED SIGN - An outdoor advertising sign with two
faces having an interior angle in excess of ten degrees.



      (35)   WALL SIGN - Any sign attached parallel to any face of a
wall or solid fence.



      (36)   WINDOW SIGN - Any sign printed, attached, glued, or
otherwise affixed to or located behind and within two feet of a window and
designed to be viewed from adjoining streets, sidewalks, malls or parking
lots available for public use.



   (B)   These definitions shall apply herein unless expressly
otherwise provided.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-180)  (Ord. No. 1573, 1861, 2152, 2687)



SEC. 16-597.  NONCOMMERCIAL SIGNS.



   (A)   Noncommercial signs are allowed in non-residential zones
wherever commercial signs are allowed and are subject to the same standards
and total maximum allowances per site or building of each sign type specified
in this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the designation of signs as
"on-site" or "off-site" shall not apply to noncommercial signs, which are
allowed without regard to such designations.



   (B)   Noncommercial signs are allowed in residential zones as
provided in subdivisions (1) and (2) of subsection (A) of section 16-605.



(Ord. No. 2687)



DIVISION 2.  PERMITS AND SPECIFICATIONS



SEC. 16-600.  SIGN PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   No sign shall be painted, placed, pasted, posted, printed,
tacked, fastened, or maintained, except as provided in this article.



   (B)   Except for election signs, no sign shall be erected,
re-erected, constructed, altered or maintained without a sign permit approved
by the development services manager as well as by the manager; provided,
however, that signs painted or letters pasted on a window or wall do not
require approval by the development services manager.



   (C)   On receiving an application for a sign permit, the development
services manager shall determine whether to approve the permit in accordance
with article X of chapter 14 of the city code.



   (D)   On receiving an application for a sign permit, the manager
shall determine whether the application contains all information and items
required to determine whether the proposed sign complies with the provisions
of the city code, an approved sign program, or an applicable specific plan.
If the manager determines that the application is not complete, the manager
shall notify the applicant in writing within 30 calendar days of the date of
receipt of the application that the application is not complete and the
reasons for such determination, including any additional information or items
necessary to render the application complete. The applicant shall have 30
calendar days to submit such additional information and items. Failure to do
so within such period renders the application void.



   (E)   Within 30 calendar days following receipt of such required
additional information or items, the manager shall again determine whether
the application is complete in accordance with the same procedures until the
manager finds the application to be complete ('the application date').



   (F)   The manager shall not accept a sign permit application if:



      (1)   The applicant has installed one or more other signs in
violation of the provisions of the city code at the same location or at other
locations and, at the time the application is submitted, each such illegal
sign has not been legalized, removed or included in the application;



      (2)   Another violation of the city code exists on the site of
the proposed sign (other than an illegal sign that is not owned or controlled
by the applicant and is located at a different business location on the site
from that for which the sign permit is sought) that has not been cured at the
time the application is submitted;



      (3)   The application is substantially the same as an
application previously denied, unless 12 months have elapsed since the date
of the previous denial or new evidence or proof of changed conditions is
provided in the new application; or



      (4)   The applicant has not obtained any required use permit
or downtown design review permit.



   (G)   Within 30 calendar days of the application date, the manager
shall notify the applicant in writing that the application is approved or
denied. If the application is denied, the written decision shall specify the
grounds for denial. The manager shall approve the application if the proposed
sign conforms to all design, size, height and other sign standards imposed by
the city code, an approved sign program, or an applicable specific plan. An
application for more than one sign or location may be granted or denied in
whole or in part.



   (H)   Approval of a sign permit does not relieve the permit holder
of the duty to obtain any other required permits and approvals, including but
not limited to a downtown design review permit for a sign in the CBD zone.



   (I)   The manager may revoke any sign permit on failure of the
permit holder to comply with the provisions of the city code, an approved
sign program or an applicable specific plan, after the manager gives the
permit holder written notice of noncompliance and at least 15 calendar days
to cure the noncompliance. If the manager revokes the permit, the manager
shall adopt a written decision stating the reasons for revocation and shall
mail or deliver a copy thereof to the permit holder, along with a statement
of the permit holder's right to appeal.



   (J)   Any person may appeal to a hearing officer a decision of the
manager approving or denying an application for a sign permit or revoking a
sign permit. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state the grounds for
appeal, and shall be filed with the city clerk within 15 calendar days of the
date of the manager's decision, together with the appeal fee adopted by
resolution of the city council.



   (K)   The city clerk shall schedule the appeal for hearing no later
than 30 days thereafter, unless the appellant requests or concurs with a
later date, and shall notify the appellant and the manager of the date, time
and place of hearing. The hearing may be continued to a later date on the
request of or with the concurrence of the appellant.



   (L)   The hearing officer shall render a decision on the day of the
hearing and shall adopt a written decision on that day or within 15 calendar
days thereafter. The hearing officer's decision is final and is not subject
to administrative appeal. The manager's decision shall be stayed during the
pendency of the time to appeal and, if an appeal is filed, the time before
the hearing officer renders a written decision.



   (M)   All written notices and decisions required to be given to the
applicant or permit holder may be prepared on forms or otherwise and may be
given by personal delivery to the applicant or permit holder; by depositing
the notice and/or decision in the United States mail, first class postage
prepaid, addressed to the applicant or permit holder at the address stated on
the application; or by e-mail to the applicant or permit holder at the e-mail
address stated on the application.



   (N)   An applicant or permit holder dissatisfied with the decision
of the hearing officer may seek judicial review of that decision in
accordance with applicable provisions of Sections 1094.5, 1094.6 and 1094.8
of the Cal. Code of Civil Procedure.



   (O)   All rights, duties and responsibilities related to signs
attach to the property on which the sign is placed and run with the land. The
city may demand compliance with this chapter and with the terms of any sign
permit from the permit holder, the owner of the sign, the property owner, the
person in control or possession of the property, or the person placing the
sign.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-181)  (Ord. No. 1573, 2687)



SEC. 16-601.  SIGN AREA.



   (A)   Sign area shall include the spaces between the components of
the sign as well as the area of the sign components themselves.  Where
components of a sign are not parallel, the sign area shall be the surface of
the regular geometric shape which most nearly encloses the components.



   (B)   After calculating permitted sign area, the following rules for
allocation shall apply:



      (1)   For single ownership or ground leases, sign area shall
be based on the ownership or lease.  Where more than one building is owned
or leased, sign area may be allocated to one or all buildings.  Where
property is divided by sale or lease, signs which are no longer conforming
shall be eliminated as provided elsewhere in this article.



      (2)   For building leases as in a shopping center, the sign
area allocated to each building or business within a building shall be based
on building frontage.  Sign area calculated from one building or business
frontage, even if unused, shall not be allocated to another building or
business unless a master sign program is submitted for all signs in the
shopping center and approved by the commission as provided in sections 16-530
to 16-553.  Where property is divided by sale or lease, signs which are no
longer conforming shall be eliminated as provided elsewhere in this article.



   (C)   The commission may approve by special use permit the
installation of a nonconforming sign to provide uniform signs among
contiguous commercial development in a shopping center or multiple use
commercial buildings where the majority of existing businesses have
nonconforming signs; provided, however, that such sign shall be substantially
similar in size, type and location and shall be abated within the time period
applicable to existing nonconforming signs in the development.  The
commission shall consider the relative type, size, location and economic
advantage of the sign proposed to be installed and existing signs in the
development.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-181.1)  (Ord. No. 173)



SEC. 16-602.  SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Every sign and all parts, portions, units and materials
comprising the same, together with the frame, background, supports or
anchorage therefor, shall be manufactured, fabricated, assembled,
constructed, and erected in compliance with all applicable ordinances of the
city.



   (B)   Materials as permitted by the Uniform Building Code governing
structural materials and equipment or as approved by the building official as
complying with standard engineering practices only shall be used in the
manufacturing and erection of on-premise signs.  All electrically or
electronically energized signs shall bear the seal or signification of
approval of an approved testing laboratory.  Every sign shall be kept in
good condition, maintenance and repair.  Any improperly maintained
conforming or nonconforming sign (temporary or permanent) shall be repaired
or removed within a period of 30 days from the receipt of a written notice by
the building official.



   (C)   The display surface of all signs shall be kept legibly painted
or posted.  Conforming signs pertaining to enterprises or occupants that are
no longer using the premises to which the sign relates shall be removed by
permittee or owner of the premises within six months after the enterprise or
occupant has vacated the premises, except that painted conforming signs shall
be removed within 60 days.



   (D)   Temporary signs shall be removed within 60 days after
installation or within 10 days following the occurrence or completion of the
event or other purpose served by the sign, whichever comes first; provided,
however, that election signs shall be removed within 10 days following the
election. In the case of construction signs for new buildings, issuance of a
certificate of occupancy shall be deemed completion of the event.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-182)  (Ord. No. 1573, 2687)



DIVISION 3.  SIGN REGULATIONS IN SPECIFIC ZONES



SEC. 16-605.  SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.



   (A)   The following signs are permitted in the C-R, R-1, R-B-1,
R-W-1, R-W-2, and R-2 zones:



      (1)   One temporary unlighted single- or double-faced
free-standing sign not more than six square feet in area per side or one
temporary attached sign not more than six square feet in area, and not
located closer than 10 feet to any property line, pertaining to the sale or
lease of the property or premises upon which displayed. A noncommercial sign
may be substituted for either such sign, subject to the same criteria.



      (2)   Signs not more than one square foot in area, identifying
the property, owner, or tenant; prohibiting trespassing or solicitation or
like activities; or a noncommercial sign not more than one square foot in
area.



      (3)   Churches and other related uses allowed by special use
permit in the foregoing residential zones may be allowed free-standing,
attached or wall signs as part of a special use permit, provided that said
signs do not exceed 8 feet in height and 24 square feet in area.  Such signs
shall not project above the top of the building face or wall.



      (4)   Subdivision signs as permitted in section 16-612.



      (5)   One unlighted or softly backlighted sign attached to the
building no larger than one square foot per dwelling unit, and in no case
exceeding a total of 25 square feet for each project, identifying the name
and address of an apartment or condominium project and containing no other
information.



      (6)   Where walls or solid fences are permitted by this
chapter for residential projects of five or more units, unlighted or
backlighted wall signs may be attached to such walls provided that such signs
do not project above the top of the wall and the total area of the signs does
not exceed one square foot per dwelling unit or a total of 35 square feet. 
Such signs may display only the name and address of the residential project.



   (B)   Only the following signs are permitted in the MH-PD, R-3 and
R-4 zones:



      (1)   All signs permitted in subsection (A) above.



      (2)   One unlighted or softly backlighted sign attached to the
building no larger than one square foot per dwelling unit, and in no case
exceeding a total of 50 square feet, identifying the name and address of an
apartment or condominium project and containing no other information.



      (3)   Where walls or solid fences are permitted by this
chapter for residential projects of five or more units, unlighted or
backlighted wall signs may be attached to such walls or fences, provided that
signs do not project above the top of the wall or fence and that the total
area of the signs does not exceed an area equal to the sign area permitted in
subsection (A)(6) above.  Such signs may display the name and address of the
residential project only.



      (4)   One unlighted “rental information” sign per street
frontage, attached to the building face, no larger than one square foot per
unit and not exceeding 15 square feet of total sign area.



   (C)   Monument signs which meet the following standards are
permitted in the R-2, R-3, R-4 and M-H-PD zones:



      (1)   One sign for each street frontage or two signs per major
entrance to the development are permitted for townhouse, condominium and
apartment projects containing at least 12 residential units.



      (2)   The maximum height of the sign shall not exceed five
feet as measured from grade level.  The sign shall be located a minimum of
five feet from any property line and in a landscaped area.



      (3)   The total aggregate sign area shall not exceed 24 square
feet.  The sign copy shall be limited to the name and address of the
proposed residential development.



      (4)   The style and building materials of the sign shall be
compatible with the building and shall be subject to approval by the director.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-183)  (Ord. No. 1573, 1861, 1914, 2687)



SEC. 16-606.  SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL OFFICE ZONE.



   Only the following signs are permitted in the C-O zone:



   (A)   Unlighted or softly backlighted attached signs not to exceed
one square foot in area for each lineal foot building frontage on the
principal street and not exceeding 50 square feet of total sign area.  Such
signs shall display only the name and address of the office building and/or
the tenants therein and shall not project above the top of the building face.



   (B)   Where walls or solid fences are permitted by this chapter for
commercial office projects, one unlighted or backlighted wall sign may be
attached to such wall or fence, provided that the sign does not project above
the top of the wall or fence and that the total area of the sign does not
exceed the sign area permitted in subsection (A) above.  Said sign may
display only the name and address of the commercial office project.



   (C)   Where buildings in excess of one story are allowed by a
special use permit, a sign exceeding 50 square feet in area may be permitted
as part of the special use permit, provided the sign area does not exceed ten
percent of the area of the building face upon which the sign is located.



   (D)   One unlighted sign not more than six square feet in area per
side, pertaining only to the sale or lease of the property or premises upon
which displayed, provided that the sign is not located closer than ten feet
to any property line.



   (E)   Subdivision signs as permitted in section 16-612.



   (F)   Monument signs which meet the following standards are
permitted in the C-O zone:



      (1)   One sign on the principal street frontage, provided that
the parcel or parcel group has at least 100 lineal feet of frontage.  The
sign shall be located in the center 80 percent portion of the frontage of the
subject property.



      (2)   The height of the sign shall not exceed four feet. 
However, if the sign is located more than 35 feet from curb return area, the
height shall not exceed six feet.



      (3)   The total sign area shall not exceed 50 square feet.



      (4)   The sign shall be located no closer than ten feet from
the established property line and in a landscaped area.



      (5)   The sign copy shall be limited to identification of the
building and tenants and shall contain no other advertising.



      (6)   The style and building materials of the sign shall be
compatible with the building and shall be subject to approval by the director.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-184)  (Ord. No. 1573, 1861, 1914)



SEC. 16-607.  SIGNS IN NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONES.



   Only the following signs are permitted in the C-1 zone:



   (A)   The total aggregate sign area of all signs permitted pursuant
to this section shall not exceed ½ square foot of sign area for each lineal
foot on the principal street frontage.  If two or more businesses are
located upon a parcel of property, the permissible sign area shall be divided
as follows:  the total aggregate sign area for each business entity shall
not exceed one square foot of sign area for each lineal foot of building
frontage on its principal street, except that a minimum of ten  square feet
shall be permitted for any business regardless of frontage.



   (B)   Window signs shall not cover more than 20 percent of any
window.



   (C)   Attached building signs shall not project above any portion of
the wall upon which they are displayed.  Signs attached to the face of the
canopy shall be parallel to the building and shall not project above the top
of the canopy.



   (D)   Free-standing signs are not permitted.



   (E)   A sign not more than 30 inches in height attached to the
fascia of a hip or gable roof overhang if such overhang is 30 inches or more
and parallel to a public street.



   (F)   One unlighted sign not more than six square feet in area per
side pertaining only to the sale or lease of the property or premises upon
which displayed, provided that such sign shall not be located closer than ten
feet to any property line.



   (G)   Subdivision signs as permitted in section 16-612.



   (H)   Nonilluminated or backlighted ground signs subject to the
following conditions:



      (1)   Sign area shall be as determined in subsection (A)
above, but shall not exceed a total permitted sign area of 20 square feet.



      (2)   For businesses not located in a shopping center, one
ground sign shall be permitted for any parcel having 100 lineal feet or more
of continuous street frontage.



      (3)   For businesses located in a shopping center, one ground
sign is permitted for each street frontage on different streets if each
frontage is 100 lineal feet or more.



      (4)   Sign height shall not exceed 42 inches measured from the
average grade within six feet of the sign.



      (5)   Ground signs shall be located within the center 80
percent of the property frontage as measured from the side property lines. 
On a corner lot, the 80 percent may be measured with the corner representing
the center of the property, at the option of the owner.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-185)  (Ord. No. 1573, 1861)



SEC. 16-608.  SIGNS IN GENERAL COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES.



   Only the following signs are permitted in the C-2, C-P-D, CBD, C-M,
M-L, M-1, M-2, BRP and M-P-D zones, with or without planned development
additive zones:



   (A)   The total aggregate sign area shall be as follows:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided below, the total aggregate
sign area shall not exceed two square feet for each lineal foot of building
on the principal street or one square foot of sign area for each lineal foot
of lot frontage on the principal street, whichever is larger, provided that
the maximum sign area for any individual business shall be 1,200 square feet.



      (2)   When a business has a second or third building frontage
and an entrance facing a pedestrian arcade or mall, the business may have an
additional ½ square foot of sign area per linear foot of building frontage
facing said arcade or mall, to be used only on such frontage and subject to
all other conditions contained herein, provided no other sign appears on said
frontage.



      (3)   In a shopping center, businesses having no frontage on a
public road, street, or highway, may provide signs as allowed in subdivision
(2) above.



      (4)   The foregoing notwithstanding, a building with four or
more stories shall be allowed an additional one square foot of sign area per
lineal foot of building frontage on the principal street.



   (B)   Attached signs are subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   No individual sign or group of signs on one building
face or canopy face of any business shall exceed 300 square feet except as
provided below.



      (2)   Attached signs may exceed 300 square feet in accordance
with the graph below where the major buildings have in excess of 40,000
square feet of floor area; where such building is set back more than 150 feet
from the street; and where the bottom of the attached sign is at least 16
feet above the average finished grade.







 



      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter,
signs on any one elevation of a building shall not exceed 10 % of the total
wall surface of that elevation.



      (4)   All signs for multi-story buildings shall be located on
the ground floor or in an area above the first story specifically designed to
display signs, provided the bottom of any such sign is located within 15 feet
of ground level.  Notwithstanding the previous sentence, building or primary
tenant identification signs may also be located on the uppermost story, or as
provided below.



      (5)   An under canopy sign is permitted for each business, as
long as the sign does not exceed five feet in length or one foot in height. 
Such under canopy signs may be located either perpendicular to the face of
the building or parallel to the face of the building under the canopy. 
There shall be at least an eight-foot clearance between the bottom of the
sign and the sidewalk or other pedestrian way.



      (6)   Window signs placed entirely within a building shall not
cover more than 20 % of any window of the ground floor.  No window signs
shall be permitted above the ground floor.



      (7)   Wall signs are permitted subject to the following
conditions:



         (a)   Where a single parcel or a group of abutting
parcels are enclosed by a solid wall or fence along a public street, one
unlighted sign may be permitted thereon.



         (b)   Sign area shall be as determined in subsection (A)
above but not to exceed 50 square feet per sign.



   (C)   On-site, freestanding signs in accordance with the overall
area limitations of subsection (A) above and pursuant to the following
requirements:



      (1)   On-site, free-standing signs shall be located within the
center 80 % of the property frontage as measured from the side property
lines.  On a corner lot, the 80 % may be measured from the corner to one
side line or from the respective side lines and around the corner, at the
option of the property owner.



      (2)   For those businesses not located in a shopping center,
one on-site free-standing sign shall be permitted for any one parcel or group
of abutting parcels having 300 lineal feet of continuous street frontage. 
One additional free-standing sign shall be permitted for parcels with more
than 500 lineal feet of continuous street frontage.  The second
free-standing sign shall be no closer than 300 feet to the first sign,
measured along the street frontage.



      (3)   In a shopping center, one free-standing sign shall be
allowed for each street upon which the shopping center fronts, where each
street frontage exceeds 300 lineal feet.  Such signs shall be 300 feet apart.



      (4)   The height of a free-standing sign shall not exceed 24
feet except that a special use permit may allow a height of up to 32 feet for
freeway-oriented businesses.  The area of a free-standing sign shall not
exceed 300 square feet except as provided by the size bonus figure below. 
In no case shall a single-faced free-standing sign exceed 50 percent of the
total permitted sign area provided by the figure above.



      (5)   On-site free-standing signs shall be located in a
planted, landscaped island which is at least equal in area to the sign, but
need not exceed 200 square feet.



[Click here to view Size Bonus* - Free-Standing Signs.]



[Click here to view Height Bonus* - Free-Standing Signs.]



   (D)   For sale or lease signs not exceeding six square feet in area,
and not more than two such signs per business.



   (E)   Subdivision directional signs, as permitted in section 16-612.



   (F)   Auxiliary signs identifying trading stamps, charge plans,
promotional events or State authorized service emblems (but excluding
advertising for products or other services sold on the premises) shall be
permitted in locations specified in this section without regard to the area
requirements specified in subsection (A).  Auxiliary signs shall be limited
to one sign for each auxiliary event not to exceed three square feet in
area.  The total area of all such auxiliary event signs shall not exceed 12
square feet in area.  Auxiliary signs shall be made of rigid materials such
as metal, plastic or wood; paper, cardboard or cloth signs are not
permitted.  Auxiliary signs shall not be located on light standards.



   (G)   Off-site advertising signs, also known as billboards and
outdoor advertising, where conditionally permitted by this chapter, may be
approved, subject to the following provisions:



      (1)   The maximum height of any portion of an off-site sign
shall be 32 feet along any major thoroughfare or highway, except for areas
adjacent to residential neighborhoods.  In those areas and in any other
location, the maximum height shall be 24 feet.  All heights shall be
measured from adjacent street grade.



      (2)   The maximum size of advertising panels shall be 12 feet
by 25 feet and shall not exceed 300 square feet per face.



      (3)   No off-site sign shall be located closer than 1,000 feet
from any other off-site sign or public park.



      (4)   No off-site sign shall be located within 1,000 feet of
any street or route designated as a scenic highway in the general plan;
provided, however, that one advertising structure may be permitted on
Assessor’s Parcel No. 149-0-021-13, subject to approval of a special use
permit.



      (5)   No off-site sign shall be permitted in the coastal zone.



      (6)   No off-site sign shall be permitted within 300 feet of
any structure or property designated as a cultural or historic landmark or a
site of historic or cultural interest or significance.



      (7)   No off-site sign shall be permitted within 500 feet of
any residentially zoned property.



      (8)   All lighting shall be shielded from view from any public
right-of-way, park, or residentially zoned property and shall not spill over
beyond the sign face.



      (9)   The commission may impose additional conditions on a
special use permit, including, but not limited to, internal lighting,
landscaping, and reductions in size or height.



      (10)   No portion of any off-site sign shall be closer than 30
feet to any public street, right-of- way, or publicly owned property.



      (11)   Signs may be illuminated only between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and midnight.



      (12)   All outdoor advertising structures shall utilize a
painted or architecturally treated monopole support structure.



      (13)   Outdoor advertising which does not conform to the
provisions of this chapter shall be considered for acquisition by the city,
subject to such State and federal regulations as may apply.



   (H)   Ground signs subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   Sign area shall be determined as set out in subsection
(A) above, but shall not exceed a total sign area of 50 square feet.



      (2)   For businesses not located in a shopping center, one
ground sign shall be permitted for any parcel having 100 feet of contiguous
street frontage or greater.



      (3)   For businesses located in a shopping center, one ground
sign shall be permitted for each street frontage on different streets if each
frontage is 100 lineal feet or greater.



      (4)   Ground signs shall be located within the center 80
percent of the property frontage as measured from the side property lines. 
On a corner lot, the 80 percent may be measured with the corner representing
the center of the property, at the option of the property owner.



      (5)   For any one parcel or group of abutting parcels
permitted a free-standing sign, a ground sign may be permitted in lieu of but
not in addition to the free-standing sign,  unless the ground sign is
located on a street frontage of 500 lineal feet or more and separated by 150
feet or more from the free-standing sign.



      (6)   Sign height shall not exceed 42 inches except that a
sign not exceeding six feet in height shall be permitted if located 35 feet
or more from the center of a curb return at any street intersection or
intersection of a private drive, alley or street.



   (I)   In the M-L zone, the following provisions shall apply in
addition to the other requirements of this article:



      (1)   Only such signs as serve to identify a use or group of
uses permitted by this chapter shall be allowed;



      (2)   Signs on the walls of buildings shall not be placed 20
feet or more above the adjacent finished grade elevations;



      (3)   Monument or ground signs and freestanding signs shall be
set back from the public right-of-way a minimum of ten feet;



      (4)   All signs shall be approved as part of the special use
permit to assure architectural conformance;



      (5)   Billboards or off-site signs are not permitted; and



      (6)   Pole signs which are not architecturally similar to the
main structure are not permitted.



   (J)   (1)   As part of a special use permit for master planned
commercial and industrial projects, the commission may approve master sign
programs that include sign types and configurations not otherwise permitted
by this chapter, provided the projects involve mixed uses or several
buildings in a planned development zone or master-planned environments, or
development in specific plan areas.



      (2)   In approving a master sign program that includes unique
or alternative advertising forms, the commission shall find that:



         (a)   The project subject to the master sign program has
been approved subject to a specific plan, development plan, planned
development permit, or special use permit;



         (b)   The amount of sign area does not exceed that which
would be allowed by this chapter and otherwise meets the intent of the sign
provisions of this chapter;



         (c)   The type and appearance of the proposed signs is
consistent with the design guidelines or architectural character of the
development; and



         (d)   The master sign program provides for a unique and
unified sign program that cannot be accommodated through strict application
of the provisions of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-186)  (Ord. No. 1573, 1861, 1867, 2152, 2408, 2687)



DIVISION 4.  SIGN REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ZONES



SEC. 16-610.  GENERAL RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   General requirements and limitations for all zones are as
follows:



      (1)   A sign shall not flash, scintillate, move, change color,
appear to change color or change intensity, or contain any part or attachment
which does the same; provided, however, this subsection shall not apply to
public service time and temperature signs in commercial and industrial zones.



      (2)   (a)   Banners, pennants, flags and captive balloons
are not permitted except pursuant to a temporary use permit as authorized by
the director for a period not to exceed one month for grand opening purposes.



         (b)   Grand opening purposes allow promotional signs or
devices displayed only when an existing permanent business changes ownership
or a new permanent business opens.  Grand opening purposes arise only within
three months of the issuance of a city business license.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided herein, portable or movable
signs are not permitted,  and paper, cloth or similar temporary signs are
not permitted on the exterior of any building unless placed within a glass
showcase or permanent framed area designed for that purpose.



      (4)   Flood lighting used for illumination of any sign is
permitted only when such lighting is installed on private property and is
hooded or shielded so that the light source is not visible from the public
streets, alleys, or highways of any residentially zoned property.



      (5)   The director shall permit one double-faced permanent
directional sign per vehicular entrance, provided such signs do not exceed
three square feet in area each, in addition to signs permitted elsewhere in
this article, if such signs are needed for traffic safety.



      (6)   Two construction signs not exceeding 32 square feet in
area each are permitted on a parcel of property, providing that such signs
are located and regulated in accordance with this chapter.



      (7)   Where the public convenience and necessity require, the
commission may grant a special use permit allowing identification signs along
major thoroughfares entering the city within 1,000 feet of the city boundary
showing the name of the city and the names of nonprofit, civic organizations
such as the Chamber of Commerce, provided the overall size of the sign,
including all riders, is not larger than 50 square feet.



      (8)   No sign shall be permitted in or over a public street
right-of-way except that signs constructed on the face of a building that is
located on the property line and parallel to a public street may project over
such right-of-way a maximum of 12 inches.



      (9)   Roof signs are not permitted in any zone.



      (10)   Any attached sign which projects over a public
right-of-way or any driveway or walkway shall have a minimum vertical
clearance of eight feet above said right-of-way, driveway or walkway.



      (11)   No attached sign or wall sign shall project more than
12 inches from the building face, canopy face or wall upon which it is
displayed.



      (12)   No illuminated signs shall be permitted within 100 feet
of and facing residentially zoned property.



      (13)   In addition to any signs permitted by other sections of
this article, gasoline service stations may be permitted the following signs:



         (a)   A red, yellow or green availability flag;



         (b)   Gasoline price panels on gasoline pumps provided
that the panels do not exceed 8 inches by 12 inches in size; and



         (c)   Not more than two signs which are either a
portable, ground-mounted or landscaped monument type sign.  The total
combined sign area for all such signs shall not exceed 80 square feet.  Such
signs shall be used exclusively for displaying grades of motor fuel, prices
and hours of operation.  No such sign shall have a greater width than five
feet or a greater height than five feet as measured from the ground.



         (d)   The signs referred to in subsection (c) above
shall be made of weather-resistant materials and not of  paper, cloth or
similar materials.  The permitted portable ground-mounted, or landscaped
ground monument sign shall not be located so as to create an obstruction to
traffic visibility, shall be adequately anchored or supported to prevent
overturning, and shall not be located upon or within any public
right-of-way.  A ground-mounted or monument sign requires building permit
approval.



   (B)   Signs permitted by this section shall not be included in
determining the total allowable sign area permitted by this article, nor
shall permits be required for such signs.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-187)  (Ord. No. 1573, 1633, 1861, 1945)



SEC. 16-611.  NONCONFORMING SIGNS; ABATEMENT REQUIRED; TERMS OF ABATEMENT.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to provide for the continuity
of display property rights in existing nonconforming advertising signs by
continuing in effect the former abatement removal requirement applicable to
nonconforming advertising signs erected or displayed prior to May 10, 1968. 
This section is intended to preserve the existing display property rights in
other nonconforming advertising signs by ensuring full return of investment
to owners or lessees who are required by this article to conform or remove
advertising signs in the future.  The abatement procedure of this section
has been considered by the commission and the city council at public
hearings, and both bodies find the classification and methods of this section
to be reasonable after weighing and considering the public interest to be
served with the private property rights to be affected.



   (B)   Every owner or lessee of a nonconforming advertising sign
shall terminate the nonconformity of the sign within the following terms of
abatement:



      (1)   Banners, pennants, flags, captive balloons, and similar
portable, moveable or temporary signs not treated by section 16-610 shall be
removed within six months.



      (2)   Signs with nonconforming attachments or parts which are
not integral parts of the sign structure or message (e.g., flashing beacons,
flashing arrows, wind activated devices, and similar attachments or parts)
shall be brought into conformance with the article within six months.



      (3)   Any nonconforming sign erected or displayed prior to May
10, 1968, shall be conformed to the requirements of this article or shall be
removed by May 10, 1978.



      (4)   Other nonconforming signs shall be conformed to the
requirements of this article or removed by April 1, 1992.



   (C)   (1)   The commission may grant the owner or lessee of a
nonconforming sign permission to abate the nonconformity within an extended
period greater than that limited by this section; provided, however, the
extended abatement period shall not exceed 15 years in any case. 
Applications for extended sign abatement shall be made and granted by special
use permit.  The commission, in establishing the extended abatement period,
shall consider the depreciation schedule initially computed or calculated and
actually employed for the purpose of taxation by the owner or lessee during
the display life of the sign.



      (2)   The following criteria shall also be considered in the
consideration of any application for a special use permit or an appeal
therefrom:



         (a)   Cost of the sign structure;



         (b)   The age of the sign in place and the date of its
construction;



         (c)   Secondary meaning of the sign;



         (d)   The degree of the sign's deviation from the
standards of this article;



         (e)   Encroachment and potential hazard to safety; and



         (f)   The remaining economic value of the sign.



   (D)   A nonconforming sign shall not be structurally altered,
reconstructed, expanded in area or moved unless it conforms to the
requirements of this article, nor shall a damaged, nonconforming sign be
repaired without conformance to this article if the cost of repair exceeds 50
percent of the sign's depreciated book value immediately prior to damage. 
Sign panels of nonconforming signs may be replaced, repainted or changed in
copy, provided that a permit is issued by the building official.  Such
replacement or change will not be used as justification to prolong a
nonconforming sign as provided in subsections (B) or (C) above.



   (E)   Cessation of a nonconforming sign's use or purpose exceeding
30 days, regardless of the owner's or lessee’s intent not to abandon or of
intent to resume the sign's use or purpose, shall require the sign's
conformance or removal; provided, however, that damage or destruction due to
an act of God or cessation required by a public agency (other than for
financial problems of the business) shall not require a sign's removal or
conformance under this section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-188)  (Ord. No. 1673)



SEC. 16-612.  SUBDIVISION SIGNS.



   (A)   In the case of the simultaneous offering for sale of a group
of five or more new houses or improved lots which are under a single
ownership and within the final map of single subdivision, the following signs
shall be permitted subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit pursuant
to sections 16-475 through 16-483.



   (B)  Only subdivision directional signs shall be permitted in
locations other than within the subdivision site boundaries.  Subdivision
directional signs provide information about travel direction to arrive at the
subdivision and display the name of the project and any trademark, insignia
or other device identifying the developer.  Subdivision directional signs
may be located only on vacant parcels.



   (C)   All subdivision signs, as permitted in this section, shall
advertise the sale of houses or lots within the city only.



   (D)   One on-site advertising sign and two off-site subdivision
directional signs, subject to all of the following provisions:



      (1)   The signs may be either single- or double-faced. 
Vee-shaped signs are not permitted.



      (2)   Neither the horizontal nor the vertical dimension of an
on-site advertising sign shall exceed 25 feet, including supporting
structures, and the total area of the sign face shall not exceed 210 square
feet per side.



      (3)   The maximum area of any sign face of a subdivision
directional sign shall not exceed 60 square feet with a maximum vertical
dimension of six feet and a horizontal dimension of ten feet.  Such signs
shall not exceed a total height of 12 feet above the ground level.



      (4)   No riders are permitted.  Additions, tag signs,
streamers, devices, display boards, or appurtenances shall not be added to
the signs.



      (5)   A sign approved for a particular subdivision shall not
be changed to advertise another subdivision without at least ten days' prior
written notice to the director.



      (6)   Signs may be established along, but not within, the
right-of-way of any highway, street, or thoroughfare, except such signs may
not be established along established and existing freeways which have been
designated as freeway routes by the division of highways of the State, or
along streets and roads designated as scenic by the city council.



      (7)   Such signs may be maintained until all of the lots in
the subdivision have been initially sold, so long as there is an occupied
sales office on the site.  Upon discontinuance of use of said sales office
facility or the sale of the last lot in the subdivision, whichever comes
first, all signs permitted pursuant to this section shall be removed.



   (E)   Where subdivision directional signs are not located within the
tract or on property owned by the subdivider, approval of such directional
signs shall be at the discretion of the director.  The subdivider shall
submit to the director the written approval of the owner of the property on
which the directional sign is to be located.



   (F)   (1)   Prior to erecting any subdivision sign authorized by
a temporary use permit the subdivider shall deposit with the director cash in
the amount of $250 per sign.  The subdivider shall also file a written
statement from the property owner authorizing erection of the sign and
further authorizing both the applicant and city staff to go onto the property
to remove the sign.



      (2)   If a sign for which a temporary use permit is granted is
not removed by the subdivider or property owner upon expiration of the period
of time stated in the temporary use permit, the director shall declare that
the cash deposit is forfeited, and city shall remove the sign.  If a sign
for which a temporary use permit is granted is removed within the time stated
in the use permit, the director shall return the cash deposit to the
subdivider.



   (G)   During the sale of houses in a subdivision, one feature sign
and one model home sign identifying the particular model, not exceeding two
feet by three feet in size and three flags on each lot on which a model home
is located and which fronts on an interior road shall be permitted.  Such
signs shall not exceed three feet in height and shall not be located closer
than ten feet from any property line.



(`64 Code, Sec. 34-189)  (Ord. No. 1573, 1633)



ARTICLE X.  OFF-STREET PARKING



DIVISION 1.  GENERAL



SEC. 16-615.  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this article is to protect the general welfare
and aid public convenience by providing for suitable off-street parking
facilities for various property uses, to ensure the safe movement of traffic
on the public streets, and protect adjacent residential and institutional
uses from the adverse impacts of vehicular uses.



   (B)   This article establishes the minimum standards for the
development of parking areas.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.1)  (Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-616.  APPLICABILITY OF REQUIREMENTS.



   Both vehicle and bicycle off-street parking facilities shall be
provided for any new building constructed, for any new use established, and
for any change in use in an existing building that would result in additional
parking spaces being required.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.3)  (Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-617.  STATUS OF EXISTING DEVELOPMENTS.  [RESERVED]



SEC. 16-618.  STATUS OF PREVIOUS APPROVALS.



   Projects with unexpired building permits or conditional use permits,
planned development permits, or variances approved prior to the date of this
section must only meet the requirements of the parking ordinance in effect on
the date those permits were approved.  Permits for which applications for
renewal were not made prior to the expiration of that permit shall be subject
to the provisions required herein.  Permits for which complete applications
have been filed prior to the effective date of this section shall be subject
to the parking standards and design requirements in effect as of the
completeness date of their application.



(‘64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.5)  (Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-619.  SCHEDULES OF VEHICLE OFF-STREET PARKING.  [RESERVED]



DIVISION 2.  PARKING SPACE AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS



SEC. 16-620.  COMPUTATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES.



   When the computation of the number off-street parking spaces required
by this section results in a fractional parking space requirement, any
fraction less than ½ may be disregarded, and any fraction equaling ½ or
more shall be construed as requiring one full parking space.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.7)  (Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-621.  INCREASES AND DECREASES IN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Increases - The number of parking spaces required by this
article may be increased as a condition of the development permit approval if
it can be demonstrated through a parking study that the proposed use would
have a parking demand in excess of the requirements of this article.



   (B)   Decreases - The number of parking spaces required by this
article may be decreased pursuant to sections 16-650 and 16-651.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.8)  (Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-622.  SCHEDULE OF VEHICLE OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The table on the following pages contains the minimum vehicle
off-street parking requirements.  Special requirements for each use are
provided under the “Notes” columns where appropriate.



   (B)   The parking requirement for uses not specifically listed in
the table shall be determined by the approval body for the proposed use on
the basis of requirements for similar uses, and on any traffic engineering
and planning data that is appropriate to the establishment of a minimum
requirement.



   (C)   Several uses listed in the table require that the parking be
determined by the approval body for the proposed use.  An applicant
proposing to develop or expand one of these uses must submit four copies of a
parking study to the development services department which provides
justification for the parking requirement proposed.  The approval body for
the proposed use will review this study along with any traffic engineering
and planning data that is appropriate to the establishment of a parking
requirement for the use proposed.



   (D)   In situations where a combination of uses are developed on a
site, parking shall be provided for each of the uses on the site according to
this article unless a reduction is granted pursuant to sections 16-650 and
16-651.



   (E)   (1)   An applicant may propose to provide tandem parking
spaces for a proposed use, but tandem parking spaces, whether or not in
garages, and whether for residents, visitors or customers of the proposed
use, shall not be counted toward satisfaction of the parking requirement for
the proposed use.



      (2)   The amount, configuration, design and location of
proposed tandem parking shall be subject to the approval of the director.



   (F)   The following table lists the minimum off-street parking
requirements for the city.



 


Uses

 

Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements

 

Notes





Residential:


Detached single-family units:
 
 


Detached single-family units on separate lots
 
Two garage spaces for up to five bedrooms
Three garage spaces for six bedrooms; four garage spaces for seven bedrooms;
five garage spaces for eight or more bedrooms
 
Administrative review and approval is required for single-family additions
resulting in a requirement for four or more garage spaces.  No more than
three garage spaces may face any public street.  All garage spaces shall be
provided onsite.


Detached single-family dwelling with either (1) detached accessory dwelling
unit or (2) the construction of additional square footage to accommodate an
attached accessory dwelling unit
 
Same as above for the single family dwelling.

For accessory dwelling units: In addition to the required parking for the
single family dwelling, there shall also be a number of vehicle parking
spaces equal to the greater of : (a) one; or (b) the number of bedrooms in
the accessory dwelling unit.

The vehicular access to the parking area for the accessory dwelling unit
shall be at least ten feet wide and paved. The required parking space(s) for
an accessory dwelling unit are not required to be covered.
 
Parking for accessory units may be provided either as (1) tandem parking on
an existing driveway or in an existing garage; or (2) in a setback area.

The accessory dwelling unit parking space(s) may not be located in the
required front yard setback.

The parking shall be located on the same lot as the  primary residential
dwelling unit.

The director may, however, disapprove such tandem/setback parking if the
director finds that the tandem/setback parking is not feasible based upon
specific site or regional topographical or fire and life safety conditions,
or that it is not permitted anywhere else in the jurisdiction.

The accessory dwelling unit parking space(s) may not be located in the front
yard.

The parking shall be located on the same lot as the primary residential
dwelling unit.


Note:   To the extend required by Cal. Govt’ Code, Section 65852.2, as
it may be amended from time to time, none of the following accessory dwelling
units require additional parking for the accessory dwelling unit:

      (1)   The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half
mile of public transit;

      (2)   The accessory dwelling unit is located within a
city-recognized historic district;

      (3)   The accessory dwelling unit is constructed entirely
within legally existing primary residence or a legally existing accessory
structure;

      (4)   When on-street parking permits are required by not
offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit;

      (5)   When there is a car share vehicle located within one
block of the accessory dwelling unit.


Townhouses
 
Two garage spaces
 
 


Apartments:
 
Garage for second unit may not be in an arrangement with garage for primary
residential unit.  All required garages shall be assigned to a specific
unit.  Covered spaces are not permitted.  All visitor spaces shall be
striped “Visitors Only.”  Developments having three units or less may
count driveway parking as required visitor spaces.

 

Developments having four or more units may count driveway parking as required
visitor spaces provided not more than 50% of the required visitor spaces are
provided in this manner and all units counting driveway parking have
individual driveways.


Studio and one bedroom
 
One garage space per unit


Two or more bedrooms
 
Two garage spaces per unit


Visitor spaces
 
One visitor space per unit which need not be covered for the first 30 units;
after the 31st unit, 0.5 visitor space per unit required




 



 


Uses

 

Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements

 

Notes



Multi-family cluster development including units with at least one common
wall such as condominium, stock cooperative or townhouse condominium
developments on lots less than 6,000 square feet:
 
All required garages shall be assigned to a specific unit.  Covered spaces
are not permitted.  All visitor spaces shall be striped “Visitors Only.”

 

Developments having three units or less may count driveway parking as
required visitor spaces. 

 

Developments having four or more units may count driveway parking as required
visitor spaces provided not more than 50% of the required visitor spaces are
provided in this manner and all units counting driveway parking have
individual driveways.


Studio and one bedroom
 
One garage space per unit


Two or more bedrooms
 
Two garage spaces per unit


Visitor requirement
 
One visitor space per unit which need not be covered for the first 30 units;
after the 31st unit, 0.5 visitor space per unit required


Boarding homes, etc.:


Rooming, boarding homes, clubs or fraternity-type housing with sleeping
facilities
 
One off-street space for each bedroom or boarder, whichever is more
 
The official building occupancy load shall be used to determine the number of
boarders permitted. 



 



 


Uses

 

Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements

 

Notes





Mobile home park:
 
These requirements may be modified by the commission in order to provide a
better design of the mobile home park


Mobile home space
 
Two off-street spaces per mobile home space; one space shall be covered
 



Visitor parking
 
One space for every five mobile home pads;  visitor parking must be in
centralized bays located no further than 150 feet from mobile homes being
served


Community recreation facilities
 
One space for every 15 mobile homes
 
 


Recreational vehicle parking
 
Centralized storage areas for recreational vehicles shall be provided at
ratio of one storage space for each four mobile home spaces
 
 


Group quarters style facility
 
One off-street space for every four farm workers.

One space for every four facility employees, up to four maximum.
 
The official building occupancy load shall be used to determine the number of
farm workers permitted.


Single and multi-family housing units
 
The same as required elsewhere in this table
 
 










 


Uses

 

Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements

 

Notes





Commercial:  Commercial and service uses located in independent structures
or independent parcels shall provide parking according to the following
standards.


Auto repair, automobile service station and auto parts sales
 
Three spaces for each service bay, plus one space for every 300 square feet
of retail parts sales areas
 
Automobile repair facilities providing service bays may count the service
bays towards the parking requirement when the areas conform to these sections
of the code and adequate parking on-site and adequate circulation is
provided.  If towing service is provided, space shall be provided to
accommodate the tow truck.

All required customer spaces shall be striped “Customers Only.”


Auto sales
 
One customer space per 400 square feet of gross floor area for automobile
sales area


Auto washing (self-service or coin-operated)
 
Two spaces for each washing stall exclusive of vacuum unit space
 
 


Barber shop or beauty parlor
 
Two spaces for each barber chair; three spaces for each beautician station
 
 


Banks and commercial savings and loan institutions
 
One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
 
Special design requirements apply if drive-through facilities are proposed.



Hotel/motel

 

One space for each room where no cooking facilities are provided; living
units with cooking facilities shall provide two spaces per each unit

 

When banquet or convention facilities are to be provided in addition to room
facilities, they shall be considered separately in determining the required
number of spaces at the ratio of one space per five seats or one space per 35
square feet of gross floor area.




Lumberyards and plant nurseries

 

One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area for indoor retail area and
one space per 1,000 square feet of outdoor area devoted to displays and
storage

 






Offices

 

One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area

 






Non-fast-food restaurants

 

One space per 75 square feet of gross floor area up to 6,000 square feet of
gross floor area; thereafter, one space per 180 square feet of gross floor
area

 

Restaurant facilities which contain dance floor areas shall provide
additional parking spaces based upon one space per 35 square feet of dance
floor area.




Fast-food restaurants

 

One space per 50 square feet of gross floor area

 

Special design requirements are required if a drive- through facility is
proposed.  Stacking credit in drive through lane may count toward the
required parking at basis of one auto per each 23 lineal feet of striped
stacking line.  A maximum credit not to exceed 30 percent of total
requirement or no more than 20 spaces may be applied for stacking credit,
whichever is less.




Retail, general merchandising which is not located in a shopping center

 

One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area

 






Retail, furniture and appliance

 

One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area display and one space per
800 square feet of warehouse storage area

 






Shopping centers

 



 

The following additional parking spaces are required when the described uses
are located in shopping centers.




Neighborhood

 

One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area

 

Cinemas:  A center with less than 100,000 square feet of gross floor area
requires three additional parking spaces for every 100 cinema seats for
cinemas occupying up to 10 percent of the total gross floor area. 



Centers having 100,000 to 200,000 square feet of gross floor area can
accommodate up to 450 cinema seats without providing additional parking. 
For every 100 seats above the initial 450 seats, three additional spaces per
100 seats are required.



A shopping center with over 200,000 square feet of gross floor area can
accommodate up to 750 seats without providing additional parking spaces. 
For every 100 seats above the initial 750 seats, three additional spaces are
required.



Office spaces comprising up to 10 percent of the total gross floor area can
be accommodated without increasing the parking spaces required to serve the
center.  Office space exceeding 10 percent of the center will require
additional parking based on the professional office service standards.




District

 

One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area




Community

 

One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area




Regional

 

One space per 225 square feet of gross floor area for regional shopping
centers not exceeding 600,000 square feet of gross floor area; one space per
200 square feet of gross floor area for shopping centers exceeding 600,000
square feet of gross floor area




Educational:




Libraries

 

One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area

 






Day-care preschool and nursery schools

 

One space per staff member, plus one space per five children or one space per
ten children if adequate drop-off facilities are provided

 

Drop-off facilities must be designed to accommodate a continuous flow of
passenger vehicles to safely load and unload children.  The adequacy of
drop-off facilities shall be determined by the approval body for the proposed
use.




Private elementary and junior high schools

 

One space for each classroom, plus one space for each five fixed seats of any
area utilized for auditorium purposes or for each 35 square feet of seating
area where there are no fixed seats in any area utilized for auditorium
purposes

 






Private high schools

 

Five spaces for each classroom, plus one space for each five fixed seats of
any area utilized for auditorium purposes or for each 35 square feet of
seating area where there are no fixed seats for areas used as an auditorium

 






Private colleges and universities

 

Seven spaces for each classroom, plus one space for each five fixed seats of
any area utilized for auditorium purposes or for each 35 square feet of
seating area where there are no fixed seats for areas used as an auditorium

 






Professional business or trade schools, including beauty colleges and dance
schools

 

One space for each 75 square feet of gross floor area of classroom, plus one
space for each 250 square feet of office space or other floor area

 






Health Services:




Assisted living

 

One space for every two units plus one shuttle van parking space.

 






Convalescent and nursing homes

 

One space per three beds for nursing and convalescent homes which do not
contain separate living quarters containing individual kitchens, plus one
space for every two employees required on largest shift.

 






Hospitals

 

1.75 spaces per each bed

 

A parking study may be required.  Adequacy of facilities shall be determined
by the approval body for the proposed use.




Medical and dental offices and clinics

 

One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area

 






Veterinarians, animal and veterinary hospitals

 

One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area exclusive of kennel
boarding area

 






Industrial:




Light and limited industrial manufacturing

 

One space per 500 square feet of gross floor area devoted to manufacturing,
plus the required parking for gross floor area devoted to other uses

 






Research and development

 

One space per 350 square feet of gross floor area, plus the required parking
for gross floor area devoted to other uses

 






Heavy industrial manufacturing

 

One space per 500 square feet of gross floor area, plus the required parking
for gross floor area devoted to other uses

 






Warehousing

 

One space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for the first 20,000
square feet devoted to warehousing, plus the required parking for square
footage devoted to other uses; one space per 2,000 square feet for the second
20,000 square feet; one space per 4,000 square feet for floor area in excess
of 40,000 square feet

 

No conversion of any portion of a warehouse use to any other use shall be
permitted unless the parking requirement for such other uses are met.




Exterior industrial uses in only approved industrial area

 

One space per 2,500 square feet of open area being utilized for storage area
exclusive of access, landscaping, etc.

 





Calculation of parking for industrial use
 
 
 
The number of parking areas required by these schedules may be reduced or
increased as a condition of a development permit procedures if it can be
demonstrated through a parking study that the proposed use would have a
parking demand less than or in excess of the requirements stated in this
article.


Entertainment and Recreation:


Arcades, including video and electronic games
 
One space per 175 square feet of gross floor area
 
 


Bowling alleys and billiard halls
 
Five spaces per alley and two spaces for each billiard table, plus
requirements for ancillary uses (restaurants, etc.)
 
 


Commercial stables
 
One space per five horses boarded on-site
 
 


Golf courses
 
Six spaces per hole, plus ancillary uses
 
Ancillary uses such as a pro shop and coffee shop are included in this
parking ratio.


Miniature golf with amusement rides and similar uses
 
Three spaces per hole, plus one space per five fixed seats of all amusement
rides, plus required parking for ancillary uses
 
 


Driving range (golf)
 
One space per tee, plus ancillary uses
 
 


Skating rinks
 
One space per 100 square feet of skating rink, plus required parking for
ancillary uses
 
 


Tennis, handball and racquetball facilities
 
Three spaces per court, plus required parking for ancillary uses
 
 


Theaters and movies; single screen and multi-screen
 
One space per three seats, plus five spaces for employees
 
 


Health spas and gymnasiums
 
Ten spaces are required for each spa health club, plus an additional one
space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 1,000 gross
square feet
 
 


Miscellaneous:


Churches and other places of public assembly, including mortuaries, banquet
facilities and convention facilities
 
One space per five seats within the main auditorium or one space per 35
square feet of gross floor area. Where pews or benches are provided, one
space required for every ten lineal feet of pew or bench
 
Twenty-four inches shall be considered one seat where pews or benches are
provided.  Ancillary uses such as offices shall provide additional parking
spaces as required.




 



(Ord. No. 2021, 2026, 2513, 2695, 2713, 2914, 2925, 2928)



SEC. 16-623.  SCHEDULE OF BICYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   The following table lists the minimum parking requirements for
bicycles.  Only those uses listed in this table are required to install
bicycle parking.



 

Use
 
Requirements
 
Notes




Regional shopping center
 
Five spaces at each mall entrance
 
 


Shopping center with more than 50,000 square feet of gross floor area
 
One space per 33 automobile parking spaces
 
 


Restaurants:
 
 
 
 


   Fast-food or coffee shop
 
Five spaces
 
 


   Pizza parlor
 
Five spaces
 
 


Commercial recreation:
 
 
 
 


   Arcades, games or videos
 
One space per one game or amusement device
 
Need not exceed 30 spaces


Bowling alleys, miniature golf, skating rinks, movie theaters and similar
commercial recreation activities as determined by the director of planning
and building services
 
One space per 33 automobile spaces required
 
Nearest space shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from the building entrance


Community facilities:
 
 
 
 


Swim clubs, racquet and tennis clubs, community centers and similar uses as
determined by the director of planning and building services
 
One space per 33 automobile spaces required
 
 


Libraries
 
One space per each 1,000 square feet of floor area
 
 


Office developments, over 100,000 square feet of floor area
 
Five spaces
 
 


Banks, savings and loans
 
Two spaces
 
 


Hospitals
 
Four spaces
 
 


Medical and dental buildings
 
Two spaces
 
 


Industrial
 
Five spaces
 
 


Churches
 
Four spaces
 
 




 



(Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-624.  SCHEDULE OF MOTORCYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   This table contains the minimum required parking for motorcycles.



 

Use
 
Requirements
 
Notes


Motorcycle parking areas shall be provided for all uses, except residential,
at the following rate:
 

 
Motorcycle spaces shall be located at the end of parking aisles and located
as near as practical to the primary building entrance



 
Uses with more than 25 automobile parking spaces shall provide one designated
space for use by motorcycles
 




 
Uses with more than 100 automobile parking spaces shall provide motorcycle
parking areas at the rate of three motorcycle parking spaces for every 100
automobile parking spaces required.  Thereafter, one designated motorcycle
space shall be required for each additional 40 spaces required.
 




 
Motorcycle parking areas required by this article shall count toward
fulfilling automobile parking requirements.
 




 



(Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-625.  PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS IN REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS IN
A REDEVELOPMENT AREA.



   The parking and loading requirements within a redevelopment project
area shall be the same as the requirements set forth in this article except
as such requirements may be modified by an adopted redevelopment plan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.12)  (Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-626.  RESIDENTIAL SUBTERRANEAN GARAGES.



   Subterranean garages for residential developments shall be permitted
only where the lot of record is a minimum of 25,000 square feet in size or
greater.  All visitor parking required of a residential development must be
provided at grade level and shall not be permitted in the subterranean garage.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.13)  (Ord. No. 2021)



DIVISION 3.  VEHICLE TRIP REDUCTION



SEC. 16-630.  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this division, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   CARPOOL - A vehicle occupied by more than two persons aged 16
years or older commuting to or from work and/or school.



   (B)   DEVELOPMENT - The construction of or addition to new buildings.



   (C)   PUBLIC TRANSIT - Regular transit services in vehicles such as
buses or trains provided by public agencies for the general public on a
regular basis,  usually on a fare-paying basis.



   (D)   VANPOOL - A group of 7 or more persons traveling to work in a
vehicle designed for carrying more than 6 but fewer than 16 persons,
including the driver, and maintained and used primarily for the work-related
transportation of adults for the purpose of ridesharing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.14.3)  (Ord. No. 2334)



SEC. 16-631.  TRIP REDUCTION MEASURES.



   Commercial and industrial developments shall:



   (A)   Provide adequate transportation demand management and trip
reduction measures as required by the city's traffic and transportation
manager;



   (B)   Provide bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking in
accordance with the provisions of sections 16-623 and 16-637;



   (C)   Provide an adequate number of vanpool and carpool parking
spaces as determined and required by the city's traffic and transportation
manager; and



   (D)   Provide, where feasible and appropriate, for transit stop
improvements (e.g., bus pullouts, bus pads and shelters).



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.14.4)  (Ord. No. 2334)



SEC. 16-632.  TRANSPORTATION INFORMATION.



   Commercial and industrial developments with 50 or more employees shall
provide a bulletin board, display case, or kiosk displaying transportation
information including, but not limited to, the following:



   (A)   Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes
serving the site;



   (B)   Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented
organizations;



   (C)   Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information,
including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency, dial-a-route, and
local transit operators; and



   (D)   A listing of facilities and services available for carpoolers,
vanpoolers, bicyclists, and public transit riders.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.14.5)  (Ord. No. 2334)



SEC. 16-633.  CARPOOL AND VANPOOL SPACES.



   (A)   Each carpool/vanpool space shall be individually so designated
in letters not less than 12 inches long and 7 inches wide reading
CARPOOL/VANPOOL.



   (B)   A symbol maybe used in lieu of letters if approved by the
traffic and transportation manager.



   (C)   Signs shall be provided to indicate the location of a
carpool/vanpool space.



   (D)   All carpool/vanpool spaces shall be in convenient and
preferred locations within required parking lot areas.



   (E)   All parking areas containing carpool/vanpool spaces shall be
approved by the traffic and transportation manager.



[Click here to view image.]



DIVISION 4.  PARKING AREA DESIGN



SEC. 16-635.  PARKING PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Applications for development for which parking is required or
provided shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:



      (1)   A vicinity map locating the proposed development;



      (2)   Dimensioned property lines;



      (3)   Street addresses and names of streets bordering the
parking area;



      (4)   Name and telephone number of the designer;



      (5)   Scale and north arrow;



      (6)   Existing or proposed obstructions (e.g., buildings,
trees, landscaping, poles, walls, drainage structures);



      (7)   Width and existing configuration of street (including
striping layout, if any) from which development has access;



      (8)   Location and dimensions of proposed and existing curb
cuts on-site and curb cuts within the 50 feet on either side of proposed
development and across the street;



      (9)   Intended users (e.g., employees, customers, general
public);



      (10)   Loading and unloading areas;



      (11)   Type of paving materials to be used;



      (12)   On-site directional signing, pavement striping, and
standard and compact striping and identification as well as location and
identification of handicapped spaces;



      (13)   Number of spaces required and number of spaces provided
(by type); and



      (14)   The location of median channelization (i.e., left turn
pockets, raised islands).



   (B)   The above information shall be shown on a separate parking
plan or combined with a master site plan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.16)  (Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-636.  DESIGN STANDARDS FOR VEHICLE PARKING AREAS.



   The following standards are the minimum requirements for parking areas:



   (A)   Backing out onto a public street or sidewalk from a parking
space shall be permitted only for a single-family residence and for a
multi-family development of four units or less.



   (B)   When a parking stall allows vehicles parked there to overhang
an adjacent sidewalk, a clear  area of 48 inches must be provided.  When
because of right-of-way restrictions, natural barriers, or other existing
conditions, the development services department determines that providing 48
inches of clear sidewalk would create unreasonable hardship, the clear
sidewalk area may be reduced to 36 inches.  Vehicles may not intrude into or
onto a public sidewalk or public right-of-way.



   (C)   A vehicle may overhang a landscaped planter area a maximum of
two feet provided the landscape planter has a minimum width of five feet
measured from the inside curb face.



   (D)   Curbs and wheel stops shall be located in such a position as
to:



      (1)   Stop a parked vehicle within a distance that complies
with vehicle overhang standards; and



      (2)   Protect the adjacent property from damage by the vehicle.



   (E)   All properties shall provide attractive, direct and safe
pedestrian access to parking.  The layout of the parking areas shall relate
to building entrances or important architectural elements.



   (F)   For parking lots with 40 or more parking stalls, a 40-foot
deep driveway “throat” shall be provided (measured from the property
line) for all principal driveways to or from major or minor thoroughfares.



   (G)   Parking lots for commercial or industrial uses shall be
designed to provide for internal circulation that allows each parking space
to be accessible to all other parking spaces without using a public street or
alley.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.17)  (Ord. No. 2021, 2132, 2642)



SEC. 16-637.  DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BICYCLE PARKING.



   (A)   Location criteria -



      (1)   Bicycle racks shall be located to be highly visible from
the street or building entrance where bicyclists approach.



      (2)   No bicycle rack shall be installed in an isolated
location but rather near the main entrance of the building for which they are
intended or in a comparably convenient location.



      (3)   Bicycle racks are intended for use by the general public
as well as employees.



      (4)   Development shall provide safe and convenient access for
bicyclists from the external circulation system to on-site buildings or
internal streets and bicycle parking areas must be separated from motor
vehicle parking areas by at least a curb barrier which would prevent vehicles
from damaging bicycles.



   (B)   Bicycle racks -



      (1)   Bicycle racks shall be constructed to allow a bicycle to
be locked to the rack and to support the bicycle in an upright position when
either a “U” type bike lock or a “Cable I Chain” type bike lock is
used.



      (2)   Bicycle racks shall be securely anchored to a supporting
surface.



      (3)   Bicycle racks shall be installed in conformance with the
requirements of by the bicycle rack manufacturer and shall be installed in a
rectangular space no less than 2½ feet wide by 6 feet long per bicycle,
unless a locker or a permanent device to stand the bicycle on end is
provided. 



      (4)   Bicycle racks shall be readily visible to pedestrians,
and the rack must be at least three feet high, unless the bicycle parking
area is surrounded by railing, hedge or chain at least three feet in height.



      (5)   Bicycle racks shall be installed with adequate space (12
inches minimum) beside the parked bicycle so that a bicyclist will be able to
reach and operate the locking mechanism.



      (6)   Bicycle lockers and racks shall be located near the
primary building entrance, but not in the main walkway area.



   (C)   Surface - A hard-surfaced parking area is required.



   (D)   Ramp - A ramp, at least two feet wide, shall connect all
bicycle parking areas to the nearest roadway in order to provide safe and
convenient access from the external circulation system to on-site buildings
and internal streets and sidewalks.



[Click here to view image.]



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.18)  (Ord. No. 2021, 2334)



SEC. 16-638.  DIMENSIONS OF VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES.



   (A)   Full-size space - A full-sized space shall be an unobstructed
rectangle at least 9 feet wide by 19 feet long.



   (B)   Motorcycle size space - A motorcycle space shall be at least
4½ feet wide by 7 feet long.



   (C)   Recreational vehicle size space - A recreational vehicle
parking space shall be at least 10 feet wide and 25 feet long.  Recreational
vehicle parking areas for cluster projects, townhouse projects, apartment
projects, and mobile home parks shall be enclosed by a six-foot high
decorative block wall with a solid metal or wood gate.  The design of the
wall and gate shall be subject to the approval of the director.



   (D)   Carport space - A carport space shall be at least 9 feet wide
and 20 feet deep.  Bays of grouped carports shall be enclosed on three sides.



   (E)   Garage construction standards -



      (1)   Single-car garage - A single-car garage shall be at
least 10 feet 6 inches wide by 20 feet long as measured from the interior of
the structure.  A garage door shall be at least seven feet high by eight
feet wide.



      (2)   Two-car garage - A two-car garage shall be a minimum of
20 feet wide by 20 feet long measured from the interior of the structure. 
The dimensions for a garage door shall be a minimum trade size of 7 feet high
by 16 feet wide.



      (3)   Interior height - The interior height of all garages
shall be not less than seven feet.  Where storage cabinets are provided, a
height of four feet is allowed within four feet of the rear of the garage
structure.



      (4)   Pavement - Driveway pavement areas shall remain free and
clear of all obstructions.



      (5)   Obstructions - Obstructions within one foot of interior
(side) garage walls shall be six inches or less in height.



   (F)   Operation and maintenance of vehicle parking areas -



      (1)   All required parking facilities shall be maintained for
the duration of the use requiring such facilities.  Such facilities shall be
used exclusively for the parking of vehicles.  The parking facilities shall
not be used for the storage of merchandise, or for the storage or repair of
vehicles or equipment.  Parking facilities shall not be used for the sale of
merchandise, except on a temporary basis for special events subject to the
approval of the director.



      (2)   The owner or operator of a specific use shall ensure
that required parking facilities are maintained in good operating condition
and are periodically swept and cleaned.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.19)  (Ord. No. 2021, 2513)



SEC. 16-639.  DIMENSIONS OF VEHICLE PARKING BAYS AND AISLES.



   The minimum dimensions of parking bays and maneuvering aisles for a
range of parking aisles for full-size spaces are contained herein.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.20)  (Ord. No. 2021, 2513)



FIGURE 1.  40 ft. driveway “throat.”







 



FIGURE 2. Regular “full size” vehicle parking lot striping and signing.







 



FIGURE 3. Motorcycle parking lot striping and signing.







 



FIGURE 4.  Garage construction.







 



FIGURE 5.  Dimensions of parking stalls and aisles.







 



FIGURE 6.  Parking lot landscape requirements.







 



FIGURE 7.  Driveway curb cut standards.







 



FIGURE 8.  Curb cut spacing requirements.



[Click here to view image in PDF]



INFORMATION.  Industrial loading zones.







 



SEC. 16-640.  PARKING AREA LANDSCAPE PLANS.



   (A)   The purpose of a parking area landscape plan is to identify
the placement and type of plants as features of project design, by detailing
the plantings and method of irrigation proposed.



   (B)   A landscape plan provides an effective means for evaluating
whether chosen plants will survive in the climate and soils of a given site;
for satisfying the functional objectives of landscaping (such as erosion
control, screening and shade) within a reasonable time; and for determining
whether a proposed irrigation system will adequately support landscaping
while conserving water.



      (1)   Method of review - The city's park and facilities
superintendent shall be responsible for the review and approval of all
landscape and irrigation plans.  In addition, the public works department
shall review and approve the irrigation plans for water meter sizing prior to
the issuance of building permits.



      (2)   Criteria for approval - Landscape and irrigation plans
shall be approved when the city landscape architect finds that the proposed
plant materials will survive in the climate and soils of the site, the
proposed plants and their planned locations will satisfy the landscape
requirements, and the proposed means of irrigation will adequately support
the proposed landscaping and will conserve water.  The parking lot
landscaping must be installed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit or
use of the parking lot.  All landscape material shall be of drought tolerant
species.



      (3)   Landscape plan content - Landscape plans shall be neatly
and accurately drawn at an appropriate scale that will enable ready
identification and recognition of information submitted. Landscape plans
shall be prepared in accordance with the following requirements:



         (a)   The plans and specifications for landscaping and
irrigation systems shall be prepared by a design professional.



         (b)   The site plan shall contain the following
information:



            (i)   A scale which is clearly indicated on each
plan;



            (ii)   Street names;



            (iii)   North arrow;



            (iv)   Title block with applicant's name and
telephone number and plan preparer's name with address and telephone number;



            (v)   Identification of the location of all trees
on site or within 50 feet of areas proposed for grading and trees proposed to
be removed; and



            (vi)   Landscaping details, including the
location, species, container size and number of trees, shrubs and ground
cover and provisions for irrigation.



         (c)   Irrigation system plans shall include:



            (i)   A plan and schedule of equipment, including
gate valve, backflow preventer, control valves, piping, sprinkler heads,
meter size and location; and



            (ii)   Water source, including type, size of
service connection, flow in gallons per minute (gpm) and psi at city mainline.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.22)  (Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-641.  PARKING AREA LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS.



   Automobile parking areas shall be landscaped as follows:



   (A)   A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided
along the property lines parallel to any public or private street and alley
(except within the approved exit and entrance ways) when the parking or
circulation area abuts such street or alley.  Five percent of the off-street
parking and access area, exclusive of any other required landscaped area
abutting a street or alley, shall also be landscaped.



   (B)   For every ten parking spaces in single-loading parking bay
row, at least one perpendicular or diagonal landscape planter shall be
provided, having minimum dimensions of 9 feet by 20 feet measured from
outside curb face to outside curb face, and containing two trees.  For every
20 parking spaces in double-loaded parking bays at least one landscape
planter shall be provided, having minimum dimensions of 9 feet by 40 feet
measured from outside curb face to outside curb face.  Configurations other
than perpendicular or diagonal planters may be approved by the parks and
facilities superintendent, planning director or planning commission.



   (C)   For commercial and industrial parking lots containing 20 or
more spaces, peripheral landscaping shall be provided along any interior
(side) property line not along a public right-of-way.  Peripheral
landscaping shall:



      (1)   Have a five-foot wide landscape strip located between
the parking area and the abutting property line;



      (2)   Have at least one tree planted for each 40 linear feet
of property line;



      (3)   Be irrigated with an automatic irrigation system.



   (D)   Parking lot landscaping design shall:



      (1)   Have trees as the primary landscaping material;



      (2)   Have shrubs and ground cover to compliment trees;



      (3)   Effectively use earthen berms and existing topography as
a component of the landscape plan;



      (4)   Be uniformly dispersed throughout the parking lot;



      (5)   If approved by the parks and facilities superintendent,
use existing landscaping that meets the requirements of this article;



      (6)   Have all planting areas bounded by a concrete curb at
least six inches high.  The finished grade of the planted area shall be at
least three inches below the top of the planter curbing where curbing abuts a
public right-of-way;



      (7)   Have all plant material within a 30-foot triangle at the
intersection of two streets no more than three feet in height at maturity
above curb level;



      (8)   Not propose landscape materials contiguous to curb cuts
in a manner that will hamper the line of sight of drivers of vehicles
entering or leaving parking lot areas;



      (9)   Have a low wall and/or landscape berm or hedge, an
average of three feet high, capable of screening fronts of vehicles from
public streets.



   (E)   Parking areas located adjacent to residentially zoned property
shall have:



      (1)   A front yard parking setback for any parking area equal
to at least one-half of that required for the adjacent residentially zoned
property, but in no case less than ten feet;



      (2)   A wall or hedge at least three feet high along the
required front setback line of the parking area.  A three-foot high earth
berm may be placed in the landscaped area in lieu of a wall or hedge;



      (3)   A masonry wall, at least six feet high, erected on the
property line abutting all residentially zoned parcels, except where property
abuts a required front setback area for a residential structure in which case
a three-foot high wall is required;



      (4)   A planter strip, at least five feet wide, along the wall
abutting all residentially zoned parcels.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.23)  (Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-642.  PARKING AREA LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE.



   All landscaping shall be kept free from weeds and debris, and all
vegetation shall be maintained free of physical damage or injury arising from
lack of water, chemical damage, insects, diseases or other causes. 
Vegetation showing such damage shall be replaced with the same or similar
vegetation which will be comparable at full growth.  Whenever a property
owner fails to comply with this section, the parks and facilities
superintendent shall send written notice to such person, requiring compliance
within 30 days.  Such person may within such time appeal the notice to the
city council.  In the event noncompliance continues thereafter, the parks
and facilities superintendent shall cause the work to be done and plantings
to be made to bring the landscaped area into compliance and the property
owner shall pay the cost thereof.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.24)  (Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-643.  PARKING AREA PAVING AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Surfacing -



      (1)   Automobile and handicapped spaces - All parking spaces
and maneuvering areas shall be paved and permanently maintained with asphalt,
concrete, or any other all-weather surfacing approved by the public works
director.



      (2)   Motorcycle - All motorcycle parking areas shall be paved
with concrete or equivalent surfacing approved by the public works
director.  The concrete surfacing is intended to prevent motorcycle kick
stands from damaging the pavement.



      (3)   Bicycle - All bicycle parking areas shall be surfaced
with a.c. or concrete so as to keep the area in a dust-free condition.



   (B)   Driveway location - Curb cuts and driveways shall be placed
and configured in accordance with this chapter.



   (C)   Wheel stops - A continuous six-inch high concrete curb shall
be installed above the level of a parking lot to serve as a wheel stop for
vehicles on all periphery areas of the parking lot and as an edging for
planting areas, islands, protection for walls and for entrances and exits. 
Where concrete curbs are not installed adjacent to public sidewalks, wheel
stops shall be installed to prevent vehicles from encroaching into a public
right-of-way.



   (D)   Directional arrows and signage -



      (1)   Aisles, approach lanes, and maneuvering areas shall be
clearly marked with directional arrows and lines to expedite traffic movement.



      (2)   The public works director shall require a developer to
install signage in addition to directional arrows to ensure the safe and
efficient flow of vehicles in a parking facility prior to the issuance of a
building permit.



   (E)   Drainage - All parking facilities shall be graded and drained
so as to provide for the disposal of all surface water within the site
boundaries.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.25)  (Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-644.  OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING AREAS.



   (A)   Loading spaces required - All commercial and industrial uses
shall provide and maintain off-street loading spaces as provided herein.



 



Use (gross floor area)
 
Loading Spaces Required


Commercial and Industrial


0 - 15,000
 
1


15,001 - 40,000
 
2


40,000 - 90,000
 
3


90,000 - 150,000
 
4


150,000 and over
 
5


Hospitals and Institutions


0 - 50,000
 
1


50,001 - 100,000
 
2


100,000 and over
 
3


Hotels, motels, and restaurants
 
1




 



   (B)   General provisions -



      (1)   Loading spaces shall be at least 12 feet wide, 40 feet
long, and have 14 feet in vertical clearance.  Loading zone requirements may
be modified by the planning commission or the director in special
circumstances based on the nature of the use or combination of uses, as well
as the specific design characteristics of the project.



      (2)   When the lot upon which loading spaces are located abuts
an alley, the loading spaces shall have access from the alley.  Where the
loading area is parallel to the alley and the lot is 50 feet or less in
width, the loading area shall extend across the full width of the lot.



      (3)   Loading spaces shall be located so commercial vehicles
shall not back into a public street or alley.



      (4)   Industrial developments shall include at least one
driveway approach capable of accommodating a 48-foot wheel track turning
radius and at least one on-site maneuvering area which provides a 48-foot
wheel track turning radius through the parking area.



      (5)   Loading doors in industrial developments shall not be
visible from a public street.



   (C)   Industrial service and loading area requirements -



      (1)   Loading facilities shall be located either on the rear
or side of the industrial structure to alleviate unsightly appearances often
created by loading facilities.  Where this is not feasible, loading docks
and doors shall be screened from the street by landscaping or walls.



      (2)   Each industrial site shall be self-contained and capable
of handling its own truck maneuvering and docking requirements.  The use of
public streets for commercial vehicles staging and/or maneuvering is
prohibited.



      (3)   Warehouse-type operations shall provide an area at least
85 feet deep for commercial vehicle docking and maneuvering.  Truck
terminals using larger vehicles (45-foot trailer length) shall provide a
vehicle docking and maneuvering area at least 130 feet deep.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.26)  (Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-645.  LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES.



   (A)   All parking spaces required by this chapter shall be located
on the same site they are intended to serve, except as authorized by
administrative relief.



   (B)   All vehicle spaces required for residential uses shall be
located no more that the following distances from the units they serve:



 


 
Single-family (feet)
 
Condominium (feet)
 
Apartment (feet)


Resident parking
 
50
 
50
 
200


Visitor parking
 
N/A
 
100
 
250



 



   (C)   Distances shall be measured from a dwelling unit's entry to
the parking space serving that unit.  When a stairway or elevator provides
access to dwelling units, that stairway or elevator shall be considered to be
the entrance to the dwelling units for the purpose of computing distances.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.27)  (Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-646.  LANDSCAPING FOR ABOVE-GRADE PARKING STRUCTURES.



   (A)   The exterior elevations of above-grade parking structures
shall be designed to minimize the use of blank concrete facades.  Textured
concrete, planters or trellises, or other architectural treatments shall be
required.



   (B)   The perimeter of the above-grade parking structure shall be
landscaped at ground level with a minimum of one tree of at least 24 gallons
for every 20 feet of parking structure, in addition to any required
streetscape or boundary landscaping.



   (C)   No parking lot landscaping shall be required for parking
spaces located in parking structures.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.28)  (Ord. No. 2021)



SEC. 16-647.  DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES.



   The following requirements apply to any use with drive-through
facilities:



   (A)   Each drive-through lane shall be separated from the
circulation routes necessary for ingress or egress from the property, or
access to any parking space.



   (B)   Each drive-through lane shall be striped, marked, or otherwise
distinctly delineated.



   (C)   The principal pedestrian access to the entrance of the
drive-through facility shall not cross the drive-through lane.



   (D)   The vehicle stacking capacity for uses containing
drive-through facilities shall be as follows:



 

Use
 
Stacking Requirements


Fast-food restaurant
 
Stacking for three cars between the order board and the pickup window and
stacking for five cars behind the order board.


Bank drive-thru windows
 
Stacking for five cars for each window.



 



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.29)  (Ord. No. 2021)



DIVISION 5.  RELIEF FROM PARKING REQUIREMENTS



SEC. 16-650.  APPEAL OF DECISION REGARDING ADMINISTRATIVE RELIEF.



   A decision of the commission granting or denying a request for
administrative relief made pursuant to section 16-651 may be appealed in
accordance with the procedures for appealing the grant or denial of the
permit, license or entitlement for the use that is subject to the parking
provisions from which administrative relief was requested.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.30)  (Ord. No. 2021, 2327)



SEC. 16-651.  ADMINISTRATIVE RELIEF FROM PARKING PROVISIONS.



   (A)   An application for administrative relief from the parking
provisions of this article shall be filed and processed in the same manner as
the application for the permit or approval for the project, activity or
business as to which administrative relief is sought.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing sentence, when an application for administrative relief is filed in
connection with an application for an adult business permit, within ten days
after the application is filed city staff shall accept the application as
complete or reject the application as incomplete and mail the applicant
notice of acceptance or rejection, and the commission shall decide the
application within 30 days after the application is accepted as complete. 
If city staff or the approval body should fail to act within such time limits
on an application for administrative relief filed in connection with an
application for an adult business permit, the application shall be deemed
accepted as complete or deemed granted, respectively.



   (B)   Administrative relief from the parking provisions of this
article shall be granted by the commission for the proposed use under the
following circumstances.



      (1)   Shared parking - Parking spaces may be used jointly by
uses with different hours of operation or different peak hours of
operation.  Requests for shared parking shall meet the following
requirements:



         (a)   The applicant shall submit a parking study
prepared by a professional traffic engineer registered by the State,
demonstrating that the parking demands for the uses for which shared parking
is requested will not conflict.  The parking study shall be prepared in
accordance with the parking study guidelines, on file with the development
services department.



         (b)   The parking study shall address the following
items:



            (i)   Size and type of uses;



            (ii)   Composition of tenants, patrons, clients,
employees and visitors of uses;



            (iii)   Rate of turnover of proposed shared
spaces; and



            (iv)   Traffic and parking loads for uses,
including peak hours.



         (c)   The number of parking spaces that may be credited
against the requirements for the uses or structures involved shall not exceed
the number of spaces reasonably anticipated to be available during the
different hours of operation of each joint use.



         (d)   Shared parking spaces shall not be located farther
away from any use served than 500 feet.



         (e)   A written agreement in the form on file with the
city clerk shall be executed by all landowners and tenants affected by the
agreement.  The agreement shall specify that the city is a third- party
beneficiary to the agreement and shall state that the user agrees to vacate
the use within 12 months if a landowner or tenant should amend or terminate
the agreement so that the user no longer has sufficient parking to satisfy
the parking requirements in effect at the time the agreement was accepted by
the city.



      (2)   Off-site parking - Except for high turnover retail uses,
parking may be located off-site.  Requests for off-site parking shall meet
the following requirements:



         (a)   Off-site parking shall not be located farther away
from the use served than 500 feet.



         (b)   Use of off-site parking shall not expose
pedestrians to hazardous traffic safety conditions.



         (c)   A written agreement in the form on file with the
city clerk shall be executed by all landowners affected by the agreement. 
The agreement shall specify that the city is a third-party beneficiary to the
agreement and shall state that the user agrees to vacate the use within 12
months if a landowner should amend or terminate the agreement so that the
user no longer has sufficient parking to satisfy the parking requirements in
effect at the time the agreement was accepted by the city.



      (3)   Compact parking spaces - An applicant may request
administrative relief in the form of providing compact parking spaces in lieu
of some of the full-size parking spaces required for a proposed use, or in
the form of converting some full-size parking spaces existing on the site of
a proposed use to compact parking spaces; provided, however, that no more
than 25 percent of required full-size parking spaces shall be replaced by
compact parking spaces.  The applicant shall accompany the request for
administrative relief with a landscaping plan and a parking plan as required
by this article and a parking study prepared by a professional traffic
engineer registered by the State, demonstrating that a certain amount of
compact parking is appropriate for the site and the proposed use.  The
proposed compact parking spaces, parking bays and parking aisles shall be
designed in accordance with standards adopted by the director.  The
commission may deny all or part of the requested administrative relief on the
ground that compact parking spaces create inconvenience to drivers, impair
safety or traffic circulation on the site, or do not meet the parking needs
anticipated for the proposed use.



      (4)   Decrease in required parking spaces - Required parking
may be decreased when the requirement is shown to be excessive.  A request
for a decrease in required parking spaces shall meet the following
requirements:



         (a)   The applicant shall submit a parking study
prepared by a professional traffic engineer registered by the State,
demonstrating that the required parking is excessive and showing the amount
of parking that should be required for the use.  The parking study shall be
prepared in accordance with the parking study guidelines, on file with the
development services department.



         (b)   The parking study shall address the following
items:



            (i)   Size and type of use;



            (ii)   Composition of tenants, patrons, clients,
employees and visitors of use;



            (iii)   Rate of turnover of parking spaces;



            (iv)   Peak traffic and parking loads for use; and



            (v)   Availability of public transportation,
including carpools or employer-provided transportation.



      (5)   Waiver of requirement that parking spaces be in garages
- When the parking provisions of this article require that parking spaces for
apartments or multi-family residential projects be provided in garages, some
parking spaces may be provided uncovered or in carports, as determined by the
commission on the basis of findings that uncovered parking spaces or carports
will improve the appearance of the project by reducing the number of garages
and creating more open vistas or landscaped or recreational areas within the
project; provided, however, that despite such waiver at least one parking
space shall be provided in a garage for each residential unit; and further
provided that the commission may deny all or part of the requested
administrative relief on the ground that the benefits of providing some or
all required parking spaces in garages are more important than an improvement
in the appearance of the project or an increase in open vistas or landscaped
or recreational areas in the project.  If administrative relief is granted
to allow some parking spaces to be provided in carports, the carports shall
be open on all sides, and the design and construction of the carports shall
be subject to the approval of the director.



(`64 Code, Sec. 36-7.1.31)  (Ord. No. 2021, 2327, 2513, 2718)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 17:  COASTAL ZONING



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   17-1.   Title



   17-2.   Purpose



   17-3.   Definitions



   17-4.   Establishment of coastal sub-zone districts



   17-5.   General requirements



ARTICLE II.  COASTAL SUB-ZONES



   17-10.   R-B-1, Single-Family Beach, Sub-Zone



   17-11.   R-W-1, Single-Family Water-Oriented, Sub-Zone



   17-12.   R-W-2, Townhouse Water-Oriented, Sub-Zone



   17-13.   R-2-C, Coastal Multiple-Family, Sub-Zone



   17-14.   R-3-C, Coastal Medium Density Multiple-Family, Sub-Zone



   17-15.   CPC, Coastal Planned Community, Sub-Zone



   17-16.   MHP-C, Coastal Mobile Home Park, Sub-Zone



   17-17.   CNC, Coastal Neighborhood Commercial, Sub-Zone



   17-18.   CVC, Coastal Visitor-Serving Commercial, Sub-Zone



   17-19.   CDI, Coastal Dependent Industrial, Sub-Zone



   17-20.   EC, Coastal Energy Facilities, Sub-Zone



   17-21.   COD, Coastal Oil Development, Sub-Zone



   17-22.   RC, Coastal Recreation, Sub-Zone



   17-23.   RP, Coastal Resource Protection, Sub-Zone



   17-24.   HCI, Harbor Channel Islands, Sub-Zone



   17-25.   R-BF, Beachfront Residential, Sub-Zone



ARTICLE III.  SPECIFIC COASTAL DEVELOPMENT AND RESOURCE STANDARDS



   17-30.   Purpose



   17-31.   Habitat areas



   17-32.   Diking, dredging, filling, and shoreline structures



   17-33.   Visual resources



   17-34.   Wetland restoration plan



   17-35.   Hazards



   17-36.   Service inventories



   17-37.   Cultural resources



   17-38.   Oil/energy recovery



   17-39.   Coastal access and recreation



   17-40.   Housing demolition, conversion or replacement



   17-41.   Recordation of land restrictions



ARTICLE IV.  GENERAL COASTAL DEVELOPMENT AND RESOURCE STANDARDS



   17-45.   Condominium conversions



   17-46.   Design standards



   17-47.   Landscaping standards



   17-48.   Sign standards



   17-49.   Off-street parking and loading standards



   17-50.   Nonconforming buildings and uses



   17-51.   General standards



   17-52.   Wireless communication facilities



ARTICLE V.  ADMINISTRATION



   17-55.   Home occupations



   17-56.   Temporary use permits



   17-57.   Coastal permit procedures



   17-58.   Hearings and appeals



   17-59.   Interpretation of chapter



   17-60.   Enforcement of provisions



   17-61.   Applications and fees



ARTICLE VI.  TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS



   17-65.   Purpose and findings



   17-66.   Definitions



   17-67.   Sending areas



   17-68.   Receiving areas



   17-69.   In-lieu fee contributions



   17-70.   Procedures and requirements for approval of transfer of
development rights



   17-71.   Exemption from fees



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 17-1.  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the “Oxnard Coastal Zoning
Ordinance,” and shall apply only to properties within the city's coastal
zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.0.0)  (Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-2.  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this article is to implement the policies of
the California Coastal Act of 1976, as amended (“coastal act”) as
identified in the Oxnard coastal land use plan as well as the following
policies:



      (1)   To assure orderly balance utilization and conservation
of coastal zone resources taking into account the social and economic needs
of the residents of this city and of the State;



      (2)   To assure priority for coastal-dependent and
coastal-related development over other development on the coast; and



      (3)   To provide a specific city program to implement
development so as to guide the future growth of the city within the coastal
zone.



   (B)   The intent of this article is to effectively integrate the
Oxnard coastal land use plan with the officially adopted Oxnard General Plan
and Zoning Ordinance, as applied to the defined coastal zone.  The Oxnard
Coastal Zoning Ordinance in terms of this chapter and related official city
zoning maps has a boundary as determined by the coastal act.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.0.1)  (Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-3.  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings.  In the event of a conflict between the definitions of
chapter 16 and this chapter, the definitions provided in this section shall
have priority with respect to matters related to the coastal zone of Oxnard.



      (1)   ABUTTING LAND - A parcel of land having a common
property line with another parcel.



      (2)   ACCESS, LATERAL - An area of land providing public
access along the shoreline.



      (3)   ACCESS, VERTICAL - An area of land providing a
connection between the first public road or use area nearest the sea and the
publicly owned tidelands or established lateral accessway. 



      (4)   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE - A detached building or
structure containing no kitchen or cooking facilities, and located upon the
same lot as the building use to which it is accessory, and the use of which
is customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the use of the
principal building, or to the principal use of the land.



      (5)   ACCESSORY USE - A use customarily incidental,
appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings located
on the same lot.



      (6)   ADULT DAY CARE FACILITY - A State-licensed facility that
provides less than 24-hour per day care to persons 18 years of age or older
in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for
sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of these
individuals.



      (7)   APPEALABLE DEVELOPMENT - In accordance with Cal. Pub.
Res. Code, Section 30603(2), any of the following shall constitute an
appealable development:



         (a)   Developments approved by the city which are
located between the sea and the first public road paralleling the sea or
within 300 feet of the inland extent of any beach or of the mean high tide
line of the sea where there is no beach, whichever is the greater distance;



         (b)   Developments approved by the city not included
within subdivision (1) of this section, located in tidelands, submerged
lands, or public trust lands, any of which are within 100 feet of any
wetland, estuary or stream; and



         (c)   Any development which constitutes a major public
works project or a major energy facility.  The phrase “major public works
project or a major energy facility,” as used in Cal. Pub. Res. Code,
Section 30603(a)(5) and in this chapter shall mean any proposed public works
project, as defined by Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 14, Division 5.5,
Coastal Commission Regulations Section 13012, or energy facility, as defined
by Cal. Pub. Res. Code, Section 30107.



      (8)   APPROVING AUTHORITY - The city officer, planning
commission or city council approving a coastal development permit.



      (9)   CATEGORICALLY EXCLUDED DEVELOPMENT - A development which
the coastal commission has determined pursuant to Cal. Pub. Res. Code,
Section 30610(e) to have no potential for significant adverse environmental
effects.



      (10)   CHILD CARE CENTER - A State-licensed child care
facility other than a family day care home, in which less than 24-hour per
day nonmedical care and supervision is provided in a group setting for
children.



      (11)   COASTAL COMMISSION - The California Coastal Commission.



      (12)   COASTAL DEPENDENT DEVELOPMENT OR USE - Any development
or use which requires a location on, or adjacent to, the sea to be able to
function at all.



      (13)   COASTAL DEPENDENT RECREATION - Activities which require
a coastal location in order to occur (e.g., ocean swimming, surfing, scuba
diving, fishing, boating, beach activities and nature study).



      (14)   COASTAL LAND USE PLAN - Maps and text which indicate
the kinds, location and intensity of land uses, and including resource
protection and development policies.



      (15)   COASTAL-RELATED DEVELOPMENT OR USE - Any development or
use that is associated by both proximity to and dependence on coastal
dependent development or use.



      (16)   COASTAL-RELATED RECREATION - Activities which are
popular in coastal locations but also occur inland (e.g., picnicking,
bicycling, walking, jogging, and camping).



      (17)   COASTAL ZONE - That portion of the land and water area
of the city shown on the official land use maps of the certified Oxnard
coastal land use plan, as defined by the coastal zone maps adopted by the
Coastal Commission.



      (18)   COMMISSION - The planning commission of the city.



      (19)   COMMUNITY CARE FACILITY - A State-licensed facility
maintained and operated to provide nonmedical residential care, day
treatment, adult day care, or foster family agency services for children
and/or adults, including, but not limited to, the physically handicapped,
mentally impaired, incompetent persons, and abused or neglected children, as
further defined in Section 1502 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code.



      (20)   CONGREGATE LIVING HEALTH FACILITY - A State-licensed
residential home with a non-institutional home-like environment that provides
24-hour medical supervision and skilled nursing with services for persons who
are physically disabled, have a diagnosis of terminal illness, or are
catastrophically and severely disabled, as further defined in Cal. Health and
Safety Code Section 1250.



      (21)   CUMULATIVE EFFECT - The incremental effects of an
individual project to be reviewed in connection with the effects of past
projects, the effects of other current projects, and the effects of probable
future projects.



      (22)   DEVELOPMENT - Pursuant to Cal. Pub. Res. Code Section
30106, the placement or erection of any solid material or structure in or
under water; discharge or disposal of any dredged material or of any gaseous
liquid, solid or thermal waste; grading, removing, dredging, mining or
extraction of any materials; change in the density or intensity of use of
land, including, but not limited to, subdivision pursuant to the Subdivision
Map Act, commencing with Cal. Gov't Code, Section 66410, and any other
division of land, including lot splits, except where the land division is
brought about in connection with the purchase of such land by a public agency
for public recreational use; change in the intensity of use of water, or of
access thereto; construction, reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of
the size of any structure including any facility of any private, public or
municipal utility; and the removal or harvesting of any major vegetation
other than for agricultural purposes, and kelp harvesting.  As used in this
section, “structure” includes but is not limited to any building, road,
pipe, flume, conduit, siphon, aqueduct, telephone line, and electrical power
transmission and distribution line.



      (23)   DECISION, MINISTERIAL - Decisions approved by a
decision-making authority based upon a given state of facts in a prescribed
manner in obedience to the mandate of legal authority.  In such cases, the
authority must act upon the given facts without regard to its own judgment or
opinion concerning the propriety or wisdom of the act although the statute,
ordinance or regulation may require, in some degree, a construction of its
language by the decision-making authority.  In summary, a ministerial
decision involves only the use of fixed standards or objective measurements
without personal judgment.  Examples of ministerial decisions made by the
director are development review permits, zone clearances, and sign permits.



      (24)   DIRECTOR - The development services director of the
city.



      (25)   ENERGY FACILITY - Any public or private processing,
producing, generating, storing, transmitting or recovering facility for
electricity, natural gas, petroleum, coal or other sources of energy.



      (26)   ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE HABITAT AREA - Any area, as
identified by the Oxnard coastal land use plan, in which plant or animal life
or their habitats are rare or especially valuable because of their special
nature or role in an ecosystem and which could be easily disturbed or
degraded by human activities and development.



      (27)   FEASIBLE - Capable of being accomplished in a
successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account
economic, environmental, social and technological factors.



      (28)   FILL - Earth or any other substance or material
including pilings placed in a submerged area for the purpose of erecting
structures thereon.



      (29)   FIRST PUBLIC ROAD PARALLELING THE SEA - The nearest
road to the sea that is dedicated and suitable for public use and that
connects with another public road providing a continuous access system
paralleling the shoreline.



      (30)   LARGE FAMILY DAY CARE HOME - A State-licensed facility
that provides care, protection and supervision for seven to 14 children in
the provider's own home for periods less than 24 hours per day, as further
defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78.



      (31)   LATERAL ACCESSWAYS - Areas of land to be used for
public pass and repass, passive recreational use or as otherwise designated
in the Oxnard land use plan.



      (32)   LOCAL COASTAL PROGRAM (LCP) - The city's:



         (a)   Land use plans (including maps and texts);



         (b)   Zoning ordinances;



         (c)   Zoning district maps; and



         (d)   Other implementing actions required by the coastal
act.



      (33)   MEAN HIGH TIDE LINE - High watermark of the Pacific
Ocean, which is the normal or average inland extent of tidal action, as
officially determined by the State Lands Commission.



      (34)   PRIME AGRICULTURAL LAND - Those lands defined in Cal.
Gov't Code, Section 51201.



      (35)   PUBLIC WORKS -



         (a)   All production, storage, transmission, and
recovery facilities for water, sewage, telephone, and other similar utilities
owned or operated by any public agency or by any utility subject to the
jurisdiction of the public utilities commission, except for energy facilities;



         (b)   All public transportation facilities including
streets, roads, highways, public parking lots and structures, ports, harbors,
airports, railroads and mass transit facilities and stations, bridges,
trolley wires and other related facilities;



         (c)   All publicly financed recreational facilities, all
projects of the State coastal conservancy, and any development by a special
district; and



         (d)   All community college facilities.



      (36)   RECREATION, ACTIVE - Recreational activities of a group
nature, such as team sports, which require permanent aboveground
improvements, such as campgrounds, recreational vehicle parking, restrooms
and picnic tables.



      (37)   RECREATION, PASSIVE - Recreational activities of an
individual nature, such as sunbathing, walking, hiking and nature study,
which do not require permanent above ground improvements.



      (38)   RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY FOR THE ELDERLY - A housing
arrangement of residents at least 60 years of age, where care and supervision
are provided, as defined in Section 1569.2 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code.



      (39)   SEA - The Pacific Ocean and all harbors, bays, canals,
channels, estuaries, salt marshes, sloughs and other areas subject to tidal
action through any connection with the Pacific Ocean, excluding non-estuary
rivers, streams, tributaries, creeks, flood control and drainage channels.



      (40)   SMALL RESIDENTIAL HEALTH OR CARE FACILITY - A facility
licensed, authorized or certified by the State that provides nonmedical
health or care services to six or fewer persons (except as otherwise provided
herein), which State statutes identify as a residential use of property
subject only to standards and restrictions applicable to other dwellings of
the same type in the same zone, including but not limited to: a congregate
living facility, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code Section 1250,
having no more than six beds; an intermediate care facility/developmentally
disabled habilitative, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code Section
1250, serving no more than six persons; an intermediate care
facility/developmentally disabled-nursing, as defined in Cal. Health and
Safety Code Section 1250, having no more than six beds; a State-licensed
residential care facility, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code Section
1568.01, serving no more than six persons; a small family day care home
serving no more than eight children, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety
Code Section 1596.78; a pediatric day health and respite care facility, as
defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code Section 1760.2, having no more than
six beds; an alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility, as
defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code Section 11834.02, serving no more than
six persons; and a State-authorized, certified or licensed family care home,
foster home or group home providing care on a 24-hour a day basis to six or
fewer mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons or dependent and
neglected children, as referred to in Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code
Section 5116.



      (41)   SPECIAL DISTRICT - Any public agency other than a local
government formed pursuant to state statute for the purpose of performing
local governmental or proprietary functions within limited boundaries. 
Special district includes but is not limited to a county or city service
area, a maintenance district or area, an improvement district or improvement
zone, or any other zone or area formed for the purpose of designating an area
within which a special or additional property tax rate may be levied to pay
for a service or improvement benefitting that area.



      (42)   TIMESHARE - A timeshare unit or project involves the
marketing and sale of time segments of occupancy or ownership of dwelling
units or commercial transient quarters (such as hotels or motel rooms). 
Such time segments consist of a period of occupancy of not less than one week
or not greater than 30 days with the annual right to use extended over a
specified period of time.  A timeshare unit consists of at least 12
increments of ownership or rights-to-use per year.



      (43)   USE INAUGURATION - The use of land or structure in a
manner consistent with the approved application specifying the intended use,
including all conditions incorporated with project approval.  Preparatory
acts of engineering development or construction to that end do not constitute
use inauguration.



      (44)   VERTICAL ACCESSWAY - Areas of land to be used for
public pass and repass, passive recreation use or as otherwise designated in
the Oxnard coastal land use plan.



      (45)   VISITOR-SERVING SERVICE AND SALES - Public and private
developments that provide or accommodate food and service, including hotels,
motels, campgrounds, restaurants and commercial recreational developments,
such as shopping, eating and amusement areas for tourists.



      (46)   WETLANDS - These lands defined pursuant to Policy 9,
Chapter 3 of the Oxnard coastal land use plan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.2.0)  (Ord. No. 2034, 2122, 2671, 2716)



SEC. 17-4.  ESTABLISHMENT OF COASTAL SUB-ZONE DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Sub-zones established - The Oxnard Coastal Zone is divided
into the following sub-zone districts:



      (1)   R-B-1 (Single-Family Beach) Sub-Zone;



      (2)   R-W-1 (Single-Family Water-Oriented) Sub-Zone;



      (3)   R-W-2 (Townhouse Water-Oriented) Sub-Zone;



      (4)   R-2-C (Coastal Multiple-Family) Sub-Zone;



      (5)   R-3-C (Coastal Garden Apartment) Sub-Zone;



      (6)   CPC (Coastal Planned Community) Sub-Zone;



      (7)   MHP-C (Coastal Mobile Home Park) Sub-Zone;



      (8)   CNC  (Coastal Neighborhood Commercial) Sub-Zone;



      (9)   CVC (Coastal Visitor-Serving Commercial) Sub-Zone;



      (10)   CDI (Coastal Dependent Industrial) Sub-Zone;



      (11)   EC (Coastal Energy Facilities) Sub-Zone;



      (12)   COD (Coastal Oil Development) Sub-Zone;



      (13)   RC (Coastal Recreation) Sub-Zone; and



      (14)   RP (Coastal Resource Protection) Sub-Zone.



      (15)   HCI (Harbor, Channel Islands) Sub-Zone; and



      (16)   R-BF (Beachfront Residential) Sub-Zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.3.0)



   (B)   Adoption of zoning maps - The boundaries of the sub-zone
districts shall be as shown upon the official zoning map of the Oxnard
Coastal Zone. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.3.1)



   (C)   Rules applying to uncertain boundaries on land use maps and
zoning maps - Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any coastal
sub-zone district shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall
apply:



      (1)   Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately
following street and alley lines or lot lines, the center line of such
streets and alleys shall be construed to be such boundaries.



      (2)   In unsubdivided property or where a zone boundary
divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless indicated by dimension,
shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning map.



      (3)   In case any uncertainty exists not addressed by this
section, the commission shall determine the precise location of boundaries.



      (4)   Where any public street or alley is officially vacated
or abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting properties shall apply
to such vacated or abandoned street or alley.



      (5)   Where any dedicated or fee right-of-way of any street,
railroad, transportation or public utility company is vacated or abandoned,
said property shall be automatically classified as an RP sub-zone.  All
property not otherwise designated shall be classified as an RP sub-zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.3.2)  (Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-5.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Erection of buildings and structures - Except as hereinafter
otherwise provided, land or buildings may be used and structures may be
erected or altered only in accordance with the following provisions:



      (1)   No building shall be erected and no existing building
shall be moved, altered or enlarged, nor shall any land, building or premises
be used, designed or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner
other than a use listed in this article or amendments thereto, as permitted
in the sub-zone in which such land, building or premises is located.



      (2)   No building shall be erected nor shall any existing
building be moved, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height
the limit established by this chapter for the sub-zone in which such building
is located.  Furthermore, all such buildings shall conform to the city
building code.



      (3)   No building shall be erected nor shall any existing
building be moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt nor shall any open spaces
surrounding any buildings be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except
in conformity with the building setback requirements established article II
or amendments thereto for the sub-zone in which such building is located.



      (4)   No yard or open space provided adjacent to any buildings
for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this chapter, shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building or
structure.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.4.0)



   (B)   Conflicting permits and licenses to be voided - All
departments, officials and employees vested with the duty and authority to
issue permits or licenses shall act in conformance with the provisions of
this article and shall issue no permits or licenses for uses, buildings or
purposes in conflict with the provisions of this chapter.  Any permit or
license issued in conflict with this chapter shall be null and void. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.4.1)



   (C)   Administrative authority - The director may authorize a
representative to carry out any of the duties and responsibilities delegated
to the director by this article. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.4.2)



   (D)   Zoning clearance - Prior to issuance of a building permit, a
zone clearance shall be issued by the development services department
certifying that the permit or use complies with all provisions of this
chapter.  A zone clearance shall be required for all building permits other
than for interior modifications. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.4.3)



   (E)   Certificate of occupancy - No structure hereafter erected or
altered subject to a building permit shall be occupied or used until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the director of public works. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.4.4)



   (F)   Change of business or use - In the event of a proposed change
of use for commercial or industrial purposes on a parcel of land, or in a
building or portion thereof, no new use shall occupy or use any such parcel
of land or building until a zone clearance has been issued for such use or
tenancy. A zone clearance shall not be required for a change of residential
occupancy except as otherwise required in this chapter. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.4.5)



   (G)   Violations of ordinances - No certificate of occupancy shall
be issued for any occupancy or use which is in violation of any city
ordinance or State law. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.4.6)



   (H)   Nonconforming uses - Zone clearances for nonconforming uses
may be issued by the development services department and the certificate
shall state that the use is a nonconforming use and does not conform with the
provisions of this chapter. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.4.7)



   (I)   Uses not specifically permitted in stated sub-zones - If a
proposed use is not listed as permitted or conditionally permitted, such use
shall be assumed to be prohibited unless the city council determines,
following recommendations from the commission and a public hearing, that the
proposed use is substantially the same as a listed use.  (`64 Code, Sec.
37-1.4.8)



   (J)   Minimum requirements - In interpreting, analyzing and applying
the provisions of this chapter unless otherwise stated, the provisions shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for promotion of public health,
safety, peace and general welfare. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.4.9)



   (K)   Conflict with other provisions -



      (1)   Where conflicts occur between the provisions of this
chapter, the coastal land use plan, the coastal act and the building code or
other regulations in effect within the city, the more restrictive of any such
provision shall apply, unless the more restrictive provision is inconsistent
with the coastal act.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to
repeal or amend any provision of the city requiring a permit or license or
both, for any business, trade or occupation, nor shall anything in this
chapter be deemed to repeal or amend the building code.  If provisions of
this chapter overlap or conflict, the provision more protective of coastal
resources shall apply.



      (2)   This chapter shall not interfere with, abrogate or annul
any easement, covenant or other agreement now in effect; provided however,
that if this article imposes a greater restriction upon the use of the
buildings or land or upon the height of buildings or requires larger open
spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules or regulations
or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.4.10)



   (L)   Number of buildings on a residentially zoned lot - Except
multiple-family sub-zones, not more than one principal residential building
shall be situated on a single lot of record in any residential sub-zone. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.4.11)



   (M)   Consistency with the general plan and the coastal land use
plan - An application approved by any reviewing body must be found to be
consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs of
the city general plan and the coastal land use plan.  If there are any
conflicts between the provisions or land use designations of the coastal land
use plan and the general plan, the coastal land use plan shall prevail. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.4.12)



   (N)   Recordation of easements and dedication - Offers for or the
execution of dedications or easements for coastal access, recreation or open
space purposes shall be recorded prior to or simultaneously with the
recordation of the related land division.  Where no land division is
involved or required, such easements and dedications shall be recorded prior
to the issuance of building permits or initiation of use, whichever occurs
first. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-1.4.14)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



ARTICLE II.  COASTAL SUB-ZONES



SEC. 17-10.  R-B-1, SINGLE-FAMILY BEACH, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of the R-B-1 sub-zone is to provide
areas in which the low profile, small scale character of existing
single-family beach-oriented neighborhoods may be preserved, to provide
reasonable protection to existing low- to moderate-income housing and in
which to designate areas of future development for low density residential
use.  Development within the R-B-1 sub-zone shall be consistent with the
policies of the Oxnard coastal land use plan.  In particular, development
within North Shore at Mandalay Bay shall be consistent with LCP Land Use Plan
Policy No. 49.1. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.1.1)



   (B)   Permitted uses - The following are permitted uses in the R-B-1
sub-zone:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings;



      (2)   Accessory buildings and structures located on the same
lot;



      (3)   Adult day care facilities serving no more than six
adults;



      (4)   Home occupations;



      (5)   Child care centers serving no more than six children;



      (6)   Congregate living health facilities of no more than six
beds;



      (7)   Large family day care homes that the Planning Manager
finds to comply with the standards set out in section 16-440;



      (8)   Residential care facilities for the elderly serving no
more than six persons; and



      (9)   Small residential health or care facilities that conform
to city ordinances restricting building heights, setbacks, lot dimensions,
placement of signs and other matters applicable to dwellings of the same type
in the same zone, and that provide services to no more than six persons, or
to no more than eight children in the case of a small family day care home.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.1.2)



   (C)   Conditionally permitted uses - The following uses are
permitted subject to the approval of a coastal development permit pursuant to
the provisions of article V:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings;



      (2)   Public utility and municipal facilities; and



      (3)   Congregate living health facilities of seven to 15 beds.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.1.3)



   (D)   Property development standards -



      (1)   Maximum building height:  2 stories, not to exceed 25
feet.



      (2)   Minimum lot area:  4,000 square feet.



      (3)   Maximum lot coverage:  60%.



      (4)   Minimum distance between structures:  6 feet.



      (5)   Minimum lot width:



         (a)   For lots easterly of the first public road:  40
feet.



         (b)   For lots westerly of the first public road:  35
feet.



      (6)   Front yard setback:



         (a)   Defined.  Front yards in the R-B-1 zone shall be
defined as follows:



            (i)   For properties located between a public
walkway and a 26-foot wide public way or a 60-foot street, the front yard
shall be the area between the walkway and the main structure.



            (ii)   For properties located between a public way
or alley and a 50- or 60-foot wide public street, the front yard shall be the
area between the public street and the main structure.



         (b)   Required.



            (i)   For properties located easterly of the first
public road paralleling the sea:  15 feet.



            (ii)   For properties located between the Pacific
Ocean and the first public road paralleling the sea and which have a front
yard abutting a public beach, park, or similar facility dedicated by easement
or in feet:  20 feet.  A minimum 10-foot setback shall be required for lots
having a remaining length of 110 feet or less.



      (7)   Rear yard setback:  15 feet.



      (8)   Side yard setback:  five feet.



      (9)   Accessory buildings:  shall observe same setbacks as
main structure and shall be separated from main structure by a minimum of six
feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.1.4)



   (E)   Special requirements -



      (1)   Off-street parking.  For those lots which abut a
26-foot wide public way, a nine-foot paved parking strip shall be required
along the way for the width of the lot.  Fences and walls on side yard
property lines within this nine-foot area are permitted provided they do not
exceed 42 inches in height and are 50% or more open.  Walls and solid fences
which do not exceed 18 inches in height may also be located within the
subject area.



      (2)   Fencing in front yard.  Fences, walls, or hedges may be
permitted in front yards of lots along public walkways, may be of solid
construction and may exceed general height requirements, but shall not exceed
six feet in height and shall provide a permanent means of access to any
adjacent public right-of-way or access easement.



      (3)   Minimum distance between a garage door and the most
parallel rear or front property line shall be 20 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.1.5)



   (F)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General requirements;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resource
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.1.6)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2145, 2169, 2598, 2671, 2716)



SEC. 17-11.  R-W-1, SINGLE-FAMILY WATER-ORIENTED, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of the R-W-1 sub-zone is to provide
areas of low-density, single-family dwellings on parcels located in an
established neighborhood with close proximity to dedicated inland coastal
waterways.  The intent of this sub-zone is to protect established
single-family water-oriented neighborhoods from land uses of higher density
and intensity consistent with the policies of the Oxnard coastal land use
plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.2.1)



   (B)   Permitted uses - The following are permitted uses in the R-W-1
sub-zone:



      (1)   Single-family dwelling placed on a permanent foundation;



      (2)   Accessory buildings and structures located on the same
lot;



      (3)   Adult day care facilities serving no more than six
adults;



      (4)   Home occupations;



      (5)   Child care centers serving no more than six children;



      (6)   Congregate living health facilities of no more than six
beds;



      (7)   Large family day care homes that the Planning Manager
finds to comply with the standards set out in section 16-440;



      (8)   Residential care facilities for the elderly serving no
more than six persons; and



      (9)   Small residential health or care facilities that conform
to city ordinances restricting building heights, setbacks, lot dimensions,
placement of signs and other matters applicable to dwellings of the same type
in the same zone, and that provide services to no more than six persons, or
to no more than eight children in the case of a small family day care home.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.2.2)



   (C)   Property development standards -



      (1)   Maximum building height:  two stories, not to exceed 28
feet.



      (2)   Minimum lot area:  4,000 square feet for lots which
directly abut a waterway; 6,000 square feet for lots which do not abut a
waterway.



      (3)   Minimum lot width:  40 feet.



      (4)   Interior yard space:  15% of the lot area, which may
include the interior side yard.  One interior side yard shall be at least
eight feet, but need not exceed 600 square feet.



      (5)   Front yard setback:  15 feet; minimum of 20 feet to
center of garage door for back-out driveways.



      (6)   Rear yard setback:  12 feet for lots abutting a
waterway; 20 feet for lots which do not abut a waterway.



      (7)   Side yard setback:



         (a)   Interior side yard:  4 feet.  No side yard shall
be required on one side of a lot where an eight-foot side yard is provided on
the other side.



         (b)   Street side yard:  5 feet.



         (c)   Reverse corner side yard: ½ of front yard of
abutting lot.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.2.3)



   (D)   Special requirements -



      (1)   A mezzanine for attics may be constructed within roof
areas, provided that there are no window openings above the attic or
mezzanine floor except for openings facing the front property line and within
ten feet of the front setback.



      (2)   No exterior decks are permitted above the height of the
second floor.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.2.4)



   (E)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General requirements;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resource
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.2.5)



   (F)   Conditionally permitted use - Congregate Living health
facilities of seven to 15 beds are permitted subject to the approval of a
coastal development permit pursuant to the provisions of article V
(Administration).



(Ord. No. 2034, 2671, 2716)



SEC. 17-12.  R-W-2, TOWNHOUSE WATER-ORIENTED, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of the R-W-2 sub-zone is to provide
areas of moderate-density townhouse dwellings on parcels located in
neighborhoods in close proximity to dedicated inland coastal waterways.  The
intent of this sub-zone is to protect established townhouse water-oriented
neighborhoods from land uses of higher density and intensity consistent with
the policies of the Oxnard coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.3.1)



   (B)   Permitted uses - The following are permitted uses in the R-W-2
sub-zone:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings placed on a permanent foundation;



      (2)   Accessory buildings and structures located on the same
lot;



      (3)   Adult day care facilities serving no more than 6 adults;



      (4)   Home occupations;



      (5)   Child care centers serving no more than six children;



      (6)   Congregate living health facilities of no more than six
beds;



      (7)   Large family day care homes that the Planning Manager
finds to comply with the standards set out in section 16-440;



      (8)   Residential care facilities for the elderly serving no
more than six persons; and



      (9)   Small residential health or care facilities that conform
to city ordinances restricting building heights, setbacks, lot dimensions,
placement of signs and other matters applicable to dwellings of the same type
in the same zone, and that provide services to no more than six persons, or
to no more than eight children in the case of a small family day care home.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.3.2)



   (C)   Conditionally permitted uses - The following uses are
permitted subject to the approval of a coastal development permit pursuant to
the provisions of article V:  townhouses, condominiums, and attached and
semi-attached dwellings on a permanent foundation; and congregate living
health facilities of seven to 15 beds. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.3.3)



   (D)   Property development standards -



      (1)   Maximum building height:  2 stories, not to exceed 30
feet.



      (2)   Minimum lot area:  2,800 square feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot width:  28 feet.



      (4)   Interior yard space:  15% of lot area.  The minimum
dimension is 10 feet.



      (5)   Front yard setback:  15 feet; minimum of 20 feet to
center of garage door for back-out driveways.



      (6)   Rear yard setback:  12 feet for lots abutting an inland
waterway; 20 feet for lots which do not abut a waterway.



      (7)   Side yard setback:



         (a)   Interior side yard:  none required.



         (b)   Street side yard:  5 feet.



         (c)   Reverse corner side yard: ½ of front yard of
abutting lot.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.3.4)



   (E)   Special requirements for townhouse building cluster,
separation and parking - There shall be no more than six attached dwelling
units in any building cluster.  Building clusters shall have a 20-foot
minimum separation.  One off-street guest parking space shall be provided
for every three dwelling units unless on-street parking is provided at the
ratio of one space for each unit. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.3.5)



   (F)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General requirements;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resource
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.3.6)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2671, 2716)



SEC. 17-13.  R-2-C, COASTAL MULTIPLE-FAMILY, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of the R-2-C sub-zone is to provide an
area of moderate-density multiple-family dwellings suitable for legally
existing and new subdivisions located in areas adjacent to significant
coastal resources, both urban and natural in character. Development within
the R-2-C sub-zone shall be consistent with the policies of the Oxnard
coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.4.1)



   (B)   Permitted uses - The following are permitted uses in the R-2-C
sub-zone:



      (1)   Single-family dwelling placed on a permanent foundation;



      (2)   Accessory buildings and structures located on the same
lot;



      (3)   Adult day care facilities serving no more than six
adults;



      (4)   Home occupations;



      (5)   Child care centers serving no more than six children;



      (6)   Congregate living health facilities of no more than six
beds;



      (7)   Large family day care homes that the Planning Manager
finds to comply with the standards set out in section 16-440;



      (8)   Residential care facilities for the elderly serving no
more than six persons; and



      (9)   Small residential health or care facilities that conform
to city ordinances restricting building heights, setbacks, lot dimensions,
placement of signs and other matters applicable to dwellings of the same type
in the same zone, and that provide services to no more than six persons, or
to no more than eight children in the case of a small family day care home.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.4.2)



   (C)   Conditionally permitted uses - The following uses are
permitted subject to the approval of a coastal development permit pursuant to
article V:



      (1)   Duplex or multiple-family dwelling units either in
separate buildings or combined in one or more main buildings to a maximum of
six units per building;



      (2)   Townhouses, condominiums, and attached and semi-attached
dwellings on a permanent foundation;



      (3)   Residential stock cooperatives and community apartments;



      (4)   Adult day care facilities serving no more than 15 adults;



      (5)   Child care centers serving no more than 15 children;



      (6)   Congregate living health facilities of seven to 15 beds;
and



      (7)   Residential care facilities for the elderly serving no
more than 15 persons.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.4.3)



   (D)   Property development standards -



      (1)   Maximum building height:  two stories, not to exceed 25
feet.



      (2)   Minimum lot area:  3,500 square feet per dwelling
unit.  One unit only permitted on lots of less than 7,000 square feet or
with an average width less than 50 feet.  Lots of record prior to May 21,
1981, which have a minimum of 6,000 square feet, may contain two dwelling
units, provided minimum width is met.



      (3)   Minimum lot width:  50 feet.



      (4)   Interior yard space:  25% of lot area; minimum
dimension of 15 feet.



      (5)   Front yard setback:  20 feet.



      (6)   Rear yard setback:  25 feet.



      (7)   Side yard setback:



         (a)   Interior side yard:  five feet.



         (b)   Street side yard:  five feet.



         (c)   Reverse corner side yard: 1/2 of front yard of
abutting lot.



      (8)   Accessory buildings:  may occupy any portion of rear
yard if located at least six feet from main structure, if has no more than
one story in height, and if set back a minimum of 15 feet from any alley or
way.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.4.4)



   (E)   Special requirements for building clusters - There shall be no
more than six attached dwelling units in any building cluster. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.4.5)



   (F)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General requirements;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resource
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.4.6)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2145, 2671, 2716)



SEC. 17-14.  R-3-C, COASTAL MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of the R-3-C sub-zone is to provide an
area of medium-density family multiple dwellings and new development for
existing multiple-family residential neighborhoods, particularly in order to
preserve existing low- to moderate-income housing within the city's coastal
zone.  Development within the R-3-C sub-zone shall be consistent with the
policies of the Oxnard coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.5.1)



   (B)   Permitted uses - The following are permitted uses in the R-3-C
sub-zone:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings placed on a permanent foundation;



      (2)   Accessory buildings and structures located on the same
lot;



      (3)   Adult day care facilities serving no more than six
adults;



      (4)   Home occupations;



      (5)   Child care centers serving no more than six children;



      (6)   Congregate living health facilities of no more than six
beds;



      (7)   Large family day care homes that the Planning Manager
finds to comply with the standards set out in section 16-440;



      (8)   Residential care facilities for the elderly serving no
more than six persons; and



      (9)   Small residential health or care facilities that conform
to city ordinances restricting building heights, setbacks, lot dimensions,
placement of signs and other matters applicable to dwellings of the same type
in the same zone, and that provide services to no more than six persons, or
to no more than eight children in the case of a small family day care home.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.5.2)



   (C)   Conditionally permitted uses - The following uses are
permitted subject to the approval of a coastal development permit pursuant to
the provisions of article V:



      (1)   Multiple-family dwellings;



      (2)   Townhouses, condominiums, community ownership projects
and attached and semi-attached dwellings on a permanent foundation;



      (3)   Vacation timeshare developments that participate in the
transfer of development rights program;



      (4)   Adult day care facilities serving more than six adults;



      (5)   Child care centers serving more than six children;



      (6)   Congregate living health facilities of more than six
beds; and



      (7)   Residential care facilities for the elderly serving more
than six persons.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.5.3)



   (D)   Property development standards -



      (1)   Maximum building height:  three stories, not to exceed
35 feet.



      (2)   Minimum lot area:  2,400 square feet per dwelling
unit.  No more than two units on lots having an average width of less than
60 feet.  No more than one unit on lots having an average width of less than
40 feet.  Lots of record prior to May 21,1981, which have a minimum of 4,800
square feet may contain three dwelling units, provided minimum width is met.



      (3)   Minimum lot width:  60 feet.



      (4)   Interior yard space:  25% of lot area; minimum
dimension of 15 feet.



      (5)   Front yard setback:  20 feet; 15 feet if all vehicle
access is off alley.



      (6)   Rear yard setback:  25 feet.



      (7)   Side yard setback:



         (a)   Interior and street side yard:  five feet for
one- and two-story structures; 10 feet for three-story structures.



         (b)   Reverse corner side yards: 1/2 of front yard of
abutting lot, not to be less than 10 feet.



      (8)   Accessory buildings:  may occupy any portion of rear
yard if located at least six feet from main structure, if has no more than
one story in height, and if set back a minimum of 15 feet from any alley or
way.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.5.4)



   (E)   Special requirements - 25% of required interior yard space may
be on building decks having a minimum dimension of 10 feet and a minimum area
of 200 square feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.5.5)



   (F)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General requirements;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resource
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.5.6)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2122, 2145, 2671, 2716)



SEC. 17-15.  CPC, COASTAL PLANNED COMMUNITY, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose -



      (1)   The purpose of the CPC sub-zone is to provide a method
which will ensure the orderly development of a large scale mixed-use planned
development on property located in an area bounded by Wooley Road on the
north, Edison Canal on the west, Hemlock Street on the south and Victoria
Avenue on the east in accordance with the provisions of the Oxnard coastal
land use plan.



      (2)   The provisions of this sub-zone shall apply exclusively
to the property zoned CPC as designated on the official Oxnard Shores Land
Use Map of the certified Oxnard coastal land use plan.



      (3)   The CPC sub-zone is further intended to provide for the
integration of residential, visitor-serving commercial, school, and public
recreational and open space uses consistent with the certified Oxnard coastal
land use plan; to provide for appropriate public access to the extensions of
the inland waterway; and to provide a development which will optimize the
utilization of property to conserve energy and promote the efficient use of
limited resources.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.6.1)



   (B)   Permitted uses - The following are permitted uses in the CPC
sub-zone:



      (1)   Agriculture and aquiculture; and



      (2)   Passive recreation uses both on land and water.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.6.2)



   (C)   Other uses, coastal development permit or development review
required - Residential, visitor-serving commercial, school, and public
passive and active recreation uses may be permitted subject to the adoption
of a specific plan for the planned unit development which shall establish the
development pattern for the project site.  Permitted and conditionally
permitted uses shall then be allowed subject to the provisions of the Oxnard
coastal land use plan and the general provisions of this chapter.  Permitted
and conditionally permitted uses shall be only those allowed in the R-W-1,
R-W-2, R-2-C, R-3-C, CNC, CVC and RC zones.  In addition, a public
elementary school facility may be a conditionally permitted use subject to
the development standards and provisions of the CNC sub-zone and the Mandalay
Bay Specific Plan.  (`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.6.3)



   (D)   Specific plan required - Pursuant to the policies of the
Oxnard coastal land use plan, a specific plan for the entire property
designated PUD-C shall be prepared and adopted prior to the issuance of any
development permits or land divisions for development on the project site. 
The specific plan shall provide for development of the property in accordance
with Policies 4, 5, and 24 of the Oxnard coastal land use plan, specifically,
and with other general policies of the Oxnard coastal land use plan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.6.4)



   (E)   Specific plan contents -



      (1)   The specific plan shall contain the following components:



         (a)   Access and recreation component - The specific
plan shall contain a component which identifies standards for improvements
and quantifies the amount of land provided for lateral and vertical access,
public recreation, and open space facilities and areas, such as parks,
beaches, public marinas, and bikeways.  All access shall be in accordance
with the certified Oxnard coastal land use plan.



         (b)   Soil transfer program - The specific plan shall
require the provision of a soil transfer program upon submittal of the
tentative map for each phase as required by Policy 5 of the Oxnard coastal
land use plan.



         (c)   Project land use map - The specific plan shall
contain a map of the location and amount of specific uses and densities for
land and water areas for the entire CPC designated property required by the
Oxnard coastal land use plan.



         (d)   Circulation component - The specific plan shall
contain a circulation plan which identifies all public streets which will
support the proposed project and the location of bike paths and other
alternative circulation improvements, including those related to public
transportation.  An accompanying text shall identify the types of street and
intersection improvements that are necessary.  Street cross-sections shall
be provided, and the location of all required or proposed public parking
areas serving public accessways shall be shown.



         (e)   Buffering and setback component - The specific
plan shall contain illustrations and text establishing the nature and
location of building setbacks from thoroughfare and collector streets and
from the waterway.  In addition, the plan shall include descriptions and
cross-sections of urban use buffers as required for the project by the Oxnard
coastal land use plan in accordance with Policy 4.



         (f)   Urban design and landscape component - The
specific plan shall contain illustrations and text as necessary to identify
the relationships between major design elements which shall establish the
character of the development.  Elements to be identified shall include, but
not be limited to: view corridors; access and circulation corridors; public
recreation use areas and facilities (including beaches, plazas, boardwalks,
etc.); overall project landscaping character; overall project architectural
character; preliminary streetscape plan; project entries; and gateways.



         (g)   Master utility and drainage facility component -
The specific plan shall contain illustrations and text indicating the
preliminary proposals and phasing for interim and ultimate sewer and storm
water drainage facilities and street improvements.



         (h)   Phasing component - The specific plan shall
contain illustrations and text indicating the phasing sequence for
development and public access dedication and improvements.



      (2)   The specific plan for the planned unit development shall
consist of text and illustrations providing adequate data and criteria to
fully express the proposed standards and character of development.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.6.5)



   (F)   Land use access - The specific plan for the planned unit
development shall provide for the amounts of visitor-serving commercial,
public recreation, and water use areas required by Policy 24 of the Oxnard
coastal land use plan.  The specific plan shall also provide for the amounts
of vertical and lateral access required by Policy 24 of the coastal land use
plan and consistent with the access provisions of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.6.6)



   (G)   Findings - In addition to the findings contained in section
17-57, the specific plan for the planned unit development may be approved
only if the following findings of fact are made:



      (1)   The specific plan for the planned unit development
provides the appropriate percentage of visitor-serving commercial, public
recreation and water area as required by the Oxnard coastal land use plan.



      (2)   The specific plan for the planned unit development
provides the appropriate amount of area of vertical and lateral access as
required by the Oxnard coastal land use plan.



      (3)   The specific plan for the planned unit development
contains a soil transfer program consistent with the policies of the Oxnard
coastal land use plan.



      (4)   The specific plan for the planned unit development is
consistent with all other applicable policies of the Oxnard coastal land use
plan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.6.7)



   (H)   Permits required - No new development or initiation of any
conditionally permitted use shall be allowed on any area covered by the
planned unit development until the following actions have occurred:



      (1)   The property proposed for development has been zoned CPC.



      (2)   A specific plan that conforms with the provisions of
this article and the policies of the Oxnard coastal land use plan has been
prepared and adopted for the entire property designated CPC.



      (3)   A coastal development or development permit review has
been granted by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.6.8)



   (I)   Application of planned unit development - Concurrent with any
application for a land division, or as required above, a coastal development
permit shall be approved which shall serve as the application for a planned
unit development.  Development standards and regulations which differ or
vary from the standards of the coastal sub-zones to be applied may be
proposed and adopted as provisions of the coastal development permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.6.9)



   (J)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General requirements;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resource
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.6.10)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716, 2816, 2868)



SEC. 17-16.  MHP-C, COASTAL MOBILE HOME PARK, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of the MHP-C sub-zone is to implement
Policy No. 65 of the Oxnard coastal land use plan relating particularly to
the preservation of low to moderate income housing within the city's coastal
zone, which states: “Existing mobile home parks shall not be demolished or
converted to another use, including purchase mobile home lots, unless an
equal or greater number of comparably priced housing units are built in the
coastal zone to replace the demolished or converted units.” 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.7.1)



   (B)   Permitted uses - The following uses shall not result in the
reduction of two or more mobile home spaces and are permitted only within
existing mobile home parks:



      (1)   Mobile homes for single-family use only;



      (2)   Common recreation facilities and structures; and



      (3)   Accessory structures normally incidental to and
contained within mobile home parks.



      (4)   Adult day care facilities serving no more than six
adults;



      (5)   Child care centers serving no more than six children;



      (6)   Congregate living health facilities of no more than six
beds;



      (7)   Large family day care homes that the Planning Manager
finds to comply with the standards set out in section 16-440;



      (8)   Residential care facilities for the elderly serving no
more than six persons; and



      (9)   Small residential health or care facilities that conform
to city ordinances restricting building heights, setbacks, lot dimensions,
placement of signs and other matters applicable to dwellings of the same type
in the same zone, and that provide services to no more than six persons, or
to no more than eight children in the case of a small family day care home.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.7.2)



   (C)   Conditionally permitted uses - The following uses are
permitted subject to the approval of a coastal development plan pursuant to
the provisions of article V:  common recreational facilities, structures,
and accessory uses normally associated with a mobile home park which would
result in a reduction of two or more mobile home spaces within an existing
mobile home park; and congregate living health facilities of seven to 15
beds. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.7.3)



   (D)   Property development standards - Mobile home space
requirements:



      (1)   Minimum mobile home lot area:  3,000 square feet.



      (2)   Front yard setback:  10 feet from mobile home space
line.



      (3)   Side yard setback:  10 feet from mobile home space line.



      (4)   Rear yard setback:  10 feet from mobile home space line.



      (5)   Maximum space coverage:  75%.



      (6)   Interior yard space:  450-square-foot minimum; per
space minimum dimension of 15 feet.



      (7)   Off-street parking required:  2 spaces on each mobile
home lot; 1 guest parking space for each 5 mobile home lots.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.7.4)



   (E)   Special requirements -



      (1)   Patio covers and parking space covers may extend up to
five feet from side property line.



      (2)   A six-foot high masonry wall is required along all
exterior mobile home park property lines.  Such wall shall be set back a
minimum of ten feet from any public right-of-way.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.7.5)



   (F)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General regulations;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resource
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.7.6)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2671, 2716)



SEC. 17-17.  CNC, COASTAL NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of the CNC sub-zone is to protect an
area of established convenience shopping and personal services to serve the
existing coastal residential community of Oxnard Shores and the public who
visit the area.  Development within the CNC sub-zone shall be compatible
with the adjoining residential neighborhood and consistent with Policy 61 of
the certified Oxnard coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.8.1)



   (B)   Principally permitted uses - Uses within the following
categories are subject to the approval of a development review permit,
pursuant to the provisions of section 17-57 of this chapter.



      (1)   Neighborhood commercial services:  financial, banks,
savings and loans, personal, barber, beauty shop, health spa, laundry,
professional, real estate, medical, public parking, parks, library.



      (2)   Neighborhood commercial sales:  eating/drinking
(nonalcoholic) restaurant, café, neighborhood retail market, liquor,
pharmacy, stationery, florist, baker, book stores.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.8.2)



   (C)   Secondary permitted uses - The following categories are
subject to the approval of a coastal development permit, pursuant to the
provisions of section 17-57 of this chapter.



      (1)   Services:  commercial recreation, skating rink,
amusement center, entertainment, theater, night-club, motor vehicle service
station.



      (2)   Sales:  eating/drinking (serving alcoholic beverages)
restaurant, cocktail lounge.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.8.3)



   (D)   Property development standards -



      (1)   Maximum building height:  two stories or 35 feet;
additional stories or height may be permitted subject to the granting of a
coastal development permit.



      (2)   Minimum lot area:  15,000 square feet.



      (3)   Front yard setback:  10 feet.



      (4)   Rear yard setback:  for lots abutting a public way or
alley:  10 feet.  No setback is otherwise required.



      (5)   Side yard setback:



         (a)   Interior side yard:  none required.



         (b)   Street side yard:  10 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.8.4)



   (E)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General requirements;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resource
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.8.5)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-18.  CVC, COASTAL VISITOR-SERVING COMMERCIAL, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of the CVC sub-zone is to provide
coastal dependent visitor-serving commercial/recreational opportunities for
both the visiting public and the residents of the city.  This sub-zone is
designed to assure an orderly and balanced utilization of Oxnard's coastal
resources and provide maximum access, enjoyment, and use of these resources
by all segments of the public, while protecting scenic resources in
environmentally sensitive habitat areas.  Development within the CVC
sub-zone shall be consistent with the policies of the Oxnard coastal land use
plan, including Policy 46. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.9.1)



   (B)   Principally permitted uses - The principally permitted uses
are visitor-serving services and visitor-serving sales.  The following
categories are subject to the approval of a coastal development permit,
pursuant to the provision of section 17-57 of this chapter.



      (1)   Visitor-serving services:  commercial recreation,
skating rink, amusement center, campground, swim club, boat rentals, bike
rentals, entertainment, theater, night-club, motor vehicle service station,
tourist hotels, motels, convention and conference facilities, and vacation
timeshare developments.



      (2)   Visitor-serving sales:  eating/drinking (serving
alcoholic beverages) restaurant, cocktail lounge, marina facilities, sport
fishing, boat launching, yacht and boat sales, bait and tackle sales, marina
supply store, eating/drinking (nonalcoholic) restaurant, café.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.9.2)



   (C)   Secondary permitted uses - The following categories are
subject to the approval of a development review permit, pursuant to the
provisions of section 17-57 of this chapter.



      (1)   Services:  financial, banks, savings and loans,
personal, barber, beauty shop, health spa, laundry, professional, real
estate, medical, travel agency, public, parking, parks, library.



      (2)   Sales:  drive-through businesses and facilities,
restaurant, café, specialty shops, antiques, sporting goods, art, cameras,
souvenirs, general retail, off-sale liquor, florist, stationery, gifts,
automobile rental agency.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.9.3)



   (D)   Property development standards -



      (1)   Maximum building height:  3 stories or 35 feet;
additional stories or height may be permitted subject to the granting of a
coastal development permit.



      (2)   Minimum lot area:  15,000 square feet.



      (3)   Front yard setback:  10 feet.



      (4)   Rear yard setback:  for lots abutting a public way or
alley: 10 feet.  No setback is otherwise required.



      (5)   Side yard setback:



         (a)   Interior side yard:  none required.



         (b)   Street side yard:  10 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.9.4)



   (E)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General requirements;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resource
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.9.5)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-19.  CDI, COASTAL DEPENDENT INDUSTRIAL, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of the CDI sub-zone is to provide areas
for those types of energy and industrial activities that require location
adjacent to or in the vicinity of the sea to function.  The intent of this
sub-zone is to assure that energy and industrial land uses will neither
generate environmental degradation nor otherwise adversely affect the public
welfare. Development within the CDI sub-zone shall be consistent with
Policies 50, 54 and 56 of the Oxnard coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.10.1)



   (B)   Conditionally permitted uses - The following uses are
illustrative of those permitted subject to the approval of a coastal
development permit pursuant to the provisions of article V (Administration):



      (1)   Except in the Channel Islands Harbor, aquiculture and
agriculture with structures;



      (2)   Canneries and cold storage for ocean-based food
processing and packaging;



      (3)   Caretaker residence;



      (4)   Except in the Channel Islands Harbor, coastal dependent
industrial warehousing and outside storage;



      (5)   Boat repair and service and, except in the Channel
Islands Harbor, main facilities, including commercial fishing and boat
launching, sales, and storage;



      (6)   Oil and gas development, including storage of oil spill
containment equipment and, except in the Channel Islands Harbor, tanker,
refinery, and petrochemical facilities, and associated pipelines and storage
structures; and



      (7)   Except in the Channel Islands Harbor, saltwater
desalinization plant.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.10.2)



   (C)   Property development standards -



      (1)   Maximum building height:  55 feet (additional height
may be approved by coastal development permit).



      (2)   Minimum lot area:  15,000 square feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot width:  100 feet; corner lots 150 feet.



      (4)   Minimum lot depth:  150 feet.



      (5)   Front yard setback:



         (a)   Minor streets:  10 feet.



         (b)   Thoroughfares:  20 feet.



      (6)   Side yard setback:  for lots adjacent to residentially
zoned property, same as adjacent residential zone side yard setback.  No
setback otherwise required.



      (7)   Rear yard setback:  for lots adjacent to residentially
zoned property, same as adjacent residential zone rear yard setback.  No
setback otherwise required.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.10.3)



   (D)   Performance standards/special requirements -



      (1)   Electricity and radioactivity -



         (a)   No activity shall be permitted which causes
electrical disturbances affecting the operation of any equipment located
beyond the property line of such activity.  In no event shall radioactivity,
when measured at each lot line, be in excess of 2.7 x 10.11 microcuries per
milliliter of air at any moment of time.



         (b)   Radio and television transmitters shall be
operated at the regularly assigned wave lengths (or within the authorized
tolerances thereof) as assigned by the appropriate governmental agency.
Subject to such exception, such transmitters shall be suitably wired,
shielded and controlled so that in operation they shall not emit any
electrical impulses or waves beyond the lot lines which shall adversely
affect the operation and control of any domestic household equipment or any
other electronic devices and equipment.



      (2)   Liquid and solid wastes - Liquid or solid wastes
discharged from the premises shall be properly treated prior to discharge so
as not to contaminate or pollute any watercourse or groundwater supply or
interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment.  Such operations
shall comply with authorized governmental health and safety regulations of
agencies having jurisdiction over such disposal activities.  The disposal or
dumping of solid wastes, such as slag, paper or fiber wastes, or other
industrial wastes, shall not be permitted on any premises unless otherwise
provided for in these provisions.



      (3)   Performance standards, fire and explosive hazards - All
activities involving the use or storage of combustible, flammable or
explosive materials shall be in compliance with nationally recognized
state-of-the-art standards, and shall be provided with adequate firefighting
and fire-suppression equipment and devices in compliance with the current
edition of the National Fire Protection Association regulations.  Burning of
waste materials in open fires is prohibited.



      (4)   Smoke and particulates - Visible emissions of smoke
shall not be permitted which exceed Ringelmann No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart
of the U.S. Bureau of Mines, except for exhausts emitted by armored vehicles
or other transportation facilities.  This requirement shall also be
applicable to the disposal of trash and waste materials.  Windborne dust,
dirt, fly ash, airborne solids, sprays and mists (except water vapor)
originating from any use shall not be permitted.



      (5)   Toxic or noxious matter - Toxic gases or noxious matter
shall not be emitted which can cause any damage to human health, to animals,
vegetation or property, or which can cause any excessive soiling beyond the
lot lines of the use.



      (6)   Odorous matter - Operations, processes or products which
emit odors that are detectable at any point beyond the property line from any
use shall not be permitted.



      (7)   Glare or heat - Any operation producing intense glare or
heat shall be performed within an enclosed or screened area in such a manner
that the glare or heat emitted shall not be discernible from the property
line.



      (8)   Vibration - Every use shall be so operated that the
ground vibration generated by the use is not harmful or injurious to the use
of the surrounding properties.  No vibration shall be permitted which is
perceptible without instruments at any point along the property line on which
said use is located.



      (9)   Noise - Baffling or muffling devices or other
precautionary means shall be employed with processes or operations causing
objectionable noise characteristics to prevent their being objectionable when
measured at the property line during normal operation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.10.4)



   (E)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General requirements;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resource
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.10.5)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2095, 2716)



SEC. 17-20.  EC, COASTAL ENERGY FACILITIES, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of the EC sub-zone is to provide areas
that allow for siting, construction, modification and maintenance of power
generating facilities and electrical substations consistent with Policies 51,
52, 54, 55 and 56 of the Oxnard coastal land use plan.  Additionally, the EC
sub-zone is designed to provide a framework for coordinating the requirements
and responsibilities of applicable city, State and federal regulatory
agencies vested with the authority for reviewing energy facility
development.  To assure consistency with the Oxnard coastal land use plan,
the following coastal act provisions and land use plan policies shall apply:



      (1)   Coastal dependent energy facilities shall be encouraged
to locate or expand within existing sites and shall be permitted reasonable
long-term growth, where consistent with this article. (Coastal Act, Section
30260)



      (2)   All new energy related development shall conform to the
air quality regulations set forth by the Ventura County Air Pollution Control
District, the air quality management plan and new source review rule 26.
(Policy 29)



      (3)   Energy related development shall not be located in
coastal resource areas including sensitive habitats, recreational areas and
archeological sites.  All development adjacent to these resource areas or
agricultural areas shall be designed to mitigate any adverse impacts. (Policy
30)



      (4)   All new energy related development shall be located and
designed to minimize adverse effects upon public access to the beach. (Policy
54)



      (5)   No energy related development shall be located seaward
of the 100 year flood/wave run-up line as designated by the U.S. Department
of Housing Insurance Program Administration and the land use map of the
Oxnard coastal land use plan. (Policy 56)



      (6)   Wastewater from any energy related facilities shall be
treated as necessary and put to reuse including, but not limited to the
following:



         (a)   Re-injection into the aquifer or ground water
recharge system; and



         (b)   Recycling for industrial, agricultural or urban
use. (Policy 64)



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.11.1)



   (B)   Conditionally permitted uses - The following uses are
permitted subject to the approval of a coastal development permit pursuant to
the provisions of article V:



      (1)   Off-street public parking facility;



      (2)   Electrical power generating plant and accessory uses
normally associated with said power generating facility;



      (3)   Electrical substation; and



      (4)   Natural gas pump and extraction facilities.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.11.2)



   (C)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General requirements;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resources
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.11.3)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-21.  COD, COASTAL OIL DEVELOPMENT, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of the COD sub-zone is to provide areas
to explore for and develop known oil and natural gas resources.  This
sub-zone shall be applied only to existing known fields as designated by the
State Division of Oil and Gas, and shall not be applied in residential or
environmentally sensitive habitat areas (Policy 63).  In the event that oil
and/or gas deposits are believed to be present in an area not presently
designated for oil and gas production activities, an amendment to the coastal
land use plan and rezoning of the affected property will be required with
appropriate permits prior to commencing with the exploration or production
activities.  All development within the COD sub-zone shall be consistent
with the policies of the Oxnard coastal land use plan (Chapter 3), while
employing the best available control technology (BACT) to minimize adverse
effects upon public access to the beach, as well as to protect visual
resources and environmentally sensitive habitat areas. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.12.1)



   (B)   Conditionally permitted uses - The following uses are
permitted subject to the approval of a coastal development permit pursuant to
the provisions of article V:



      (1)   Off-street public parking facilities;



      (2)   Drilling, redrilling or reworking and pumping of wells
for the production of petroleum and petroleum byproducts;



      (3)   Structures, equipment and other facilities incidental to
subdivision (2) above;



      (4)   Injection wells and incidental equipment necessary for
enhanced oil recovery or disposal of production waste and equipment and
facilities necessary for enhanced oil recovery, including water flooding,
steam injection, air injection, carbon dioxide injection, or introduction or
polymers or other agents;



      (5)   Storage tanks necessary or incidental to
separation/treatment of oil and gas or temporary storage of separated
hydrocarbons, and equipment for transfer of the produced hydrocarbons to
pipelines or tanker trucks; and



      (6)   Pipelines necessary for oil and gas production
operations within the coastal zone.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.12.2)



   (C)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General requirements;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resource
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.12.3)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-22.  RC, COASTAL RECREATION, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose -



      (1)   The purpose of the RC sub-zone is to provide open space
for various forms of outdoor recreation of either a public or private
nature.  The intent is to encourage outdoor recreational uses which will
protect and enhance areas which have both active and passive recreation
potential.  Such uses should offer recreational activities which compliment
and are appropriate to the area because of their natural resources and
beauty.  This sub-zone is designed to implement the recreational policies of
the Oxnard coastal land use plan, as outlined in Chapter 3.7.1.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall restrict public and
private access to the recreational opportunities provided within the coastal
zone of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.13.1)



      (3)   In particular, public coastal and recreation within
North Shore at Mandalay Bay shall be consistent with LCP Land Use Plan Policy
No. 82.1.



   (B)   Permitted uses - The following uses which are coastal
dependent, open space, and nonstructural in nature are permitted in the RC
sub-zone:



      (1)   Unimproved outdoor public and private passive
recreational uses, e.g., parks and playgrounds;



      (2)   Unimproved riding, hiking, biking, and walking trails;



      (3)   Unlighted sand volleyball courts;



      (4)   Portable lifeguard stations of a seasonal nature;



      (5)   Temporary wind fences for seasonal beach sand
stabilization not to exceed 36 inches in height, which will not interfere
with lateral or vertical public access and related permitted uses; and



      (6)   Unimproved, open air educational and scientific research.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.13.2)



   (C)   Conditionally permitted uses - The following uses are
permitted subject to the approval of a coastal development permit pursuant to
the provisions of article V of this chapter.



      (1)   Structures and facilities of an accessory nature
required to support the recreational uses permitted in this sub-zone,
including, but not limited to, parking areas, water and sanitary facilities,
boat launching facilities, barbeques and fire rings, bicycle parking
facilities, ranger stations, and limited concession facilities;



      (2)   Swimming and tennis clubs;



      (3)   Public and private day use picnic facilities;



      (4)   Public and private camp grounds (nonvehicular);



      (5)   Recreational vehicle parks;



      (6)   Residential structure for a caretaker to protect human
life and property; and



      (7)   Oil and gas production activities within existing known
fields, as identified by the California Division of Oil and Gas. (Policies 37
and 38)



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.13.3)



      (8)   Improved (paved) riding, hiking, biking and walking
trails for North Shore at Mandalay Bay.



   (D)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General requirements;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resource
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.13.4)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2598, 2716)



SEC. 17-23.  RP, COASTAL RESOURCE PROTECTION, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of the RP sub-zone is to protect,
preserve and restore environmentally sensitive habitat areas within the
coastal zone of the city.  The major resource or habitat areas within the
city’s coastal zone include but are not limited to wetlands, sand dunes,
riparian habitats, endangered species habitats and marine habitats. 
Development within the RP sub-zone shall be consistent with Policies 6, 8,
10, 11, 12 and 13 of the certified Oxnard coastal land use plan, and Sections
30230, 30231, 30236 and 30240 of the 1976 Coastal Act.  Additionally,
resource protection and development within North Shore at Mandalay Bay shall
be consistent with LCP Land Use Plan Policy No. 10.1. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.14.1)



   (B)   Conditionally permitted uses - The following uses which are
nonstructural in nature are permitted subject to the approval of a coastal
development permit, pursuant to the provisions of article V of this chapter:



      (1)   Formal ongoing education and scientific study;



      (2)   Formal ongoing light recreation activities (e.g.,
bird-watching or nature study);



      (3)   Primitive nonvehicular day use picnic facilities; and



      (4)   Diking, filling or dredging for restoration purposes
only.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.14.2)



   (C)   RP sub-zone when used as an interim zoning designation -



      (1)   Undeveloped parcels of land designated with two or more
sub-zone categories (including resource protection) on the land use maps of
the Oxnard coastal land use plan shall be totally zoned RP on an interim
basis until a specific plan is approved which is consistent with both the
Oxnard coastal land use plan and all applicable provisions of this article.



      (2)   Where a sensitive resource area comprises only a part of
a parcel or parcels under contiguous ownership, the city may permit an
increase in the allowable density of the nonresource areas in return for the
permanent preservation of the resource area.  Density increases shall only
apply for allowable uses as designated by the land use map of the Oxnard
coastal land use plan, and such density increases shall only be granted if
the result will be less environmentally damaging than the project of
permitted density.  Development adjacent to the resource area shall be sited
and designed to mitigate any adverse impacts on the resource.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.14.3)



   (D)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General requirements;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resource
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.14.4)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2598, 2716)



SEC. 17-24.  HCI, HARBOR CHANNEL ISLANDS, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose -



      (1)   The purpose of the HCI sub-zone is to provide, protect
and encourage commercial fishing, sport fishing, recreational boating, and
related uses at the Channel Islands Harbor for both residents and
nonresidents of the city.



      (2)   This sub-zone is designed to assure that other uses do
not preclude these uses, while allowing visitor uses which are incidental or
subordinate to the principally permitted uses, consistent with the policies
of the Oxnard coastal land use plan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.15.1)



   (B)   Principally permitted uses - The principally permitted uses
are commercial/sport fishing and recreational boating.  The following
categories are subject to the approval of a coastal development permit,
pursuant to the provisions of section 17-57 of this chapter.



      (1)   Commercial sport fishing, launching, dry storage of
boats, fish receiving and transferring facilities including storage,
wholesale and retail sales, preparation for retail sales, and related office,
hoist facilities, net drying and repair areas; and



      (2)   Recreational boating, launching, dry storage of boats,
parking of boat trailers, washing of boats and saltwater engine cooling
systems (where launching systems exist), boat and boat equipment sales,
rentals, display, brokerage, charter offices, and minor repair.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.15.2)



   (C)   Secondary permitted uses - The following categories are
subject to the approval of a development review permit, pursuant to the
provisions of section 17-57 of this chapter.



      (1)   Visitor-serving uses:  When clearly subordinate in
their physical character and incidental to principally permitted uses: 
eating/drinking (serving alcoholic beverages) restaurant, cocktail lounge,
eating/drinking (nonalcoholic) restaurant, café, fast-food facilities,
marine and tourist-related retail shop, marine-related museum, tourist hotels
and motels;



      (2)   Commercial fishing support, restroom, shower, laundry,
caretaker's quarters, office, meeting room; and



      (3)   Other harbor-related uses:  bait and tackle sales,
boating and yacht club and clubhouse, boat sales yard, marine electronics
sales and repair, marine engineering sales and repair, marine fuel sales,
marine hardware and chandlery, marine supply store, sailing or scuba school.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.15.3)



   (D)   Property development standards -



      (1)   Maximum building height:  two stories, not to exceed 25
feet.



      (2)   Minimum lot area:  2,400 square feet per dwelling unit.



      (3)   Front yard setback:  10 feet.



      (4)   Rear yard setback for lots abutting a public way or
alley:  10 feet.  No setback is otherwise required.



      (5)   Side yard setback:



         (a)   Interior side yard:  none required.



         (b)   Street side yard:  10 feet.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.15.4)



   (E)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General requirements;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resource
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.15.5)



   (F)   Performance standards/special requirements - No conditional
use shall be permitted which causes the amount of harbor area developed for
visitor-serving uses not directly related to boating to exceed 30% of the
total harbor land area.  As used in this division, “harbor area” means
the land area of the Channel Islands Harbor owned and operated by the county,
and neither just the land zoned “Harbor” nor the entire area of the
city's Channel Islands Harbor LUP segment. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.15.6)



(Ord. No. 2095, 2716)



SEC. 17-25.  R-BF, BEACHFRONT RESIDENTIAL, SUB-ZONE.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of the R-BF sub-zone is to provide an
area for beachfront residential development consisting primarily of
single-family beachfront, located between the Pacific Ocean and the first
public road parallel thereto. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.16.1)



   (B)   Permitted uses - The following are permitted uses in the R-BF
sub-zone:



      (1)   Accessory buildings and structures;



      (2)   Adult day care facilities serving no more than six
adults;



      (3)   Home occupations;



      (4)   Child care centers serving no more than six children;



      (5)   Congregate living health facilities of no more than six
beds;



      (6)   Large family day care homes that the Planning Manager
finds to comply with the standards set out in section 16-440;



      (7)   Residential care facilities for the elderly serving no
more than six persons; and



      (8)   Small residential health or care facilities that conform
to city ordinances restricting building heights, setbacks, lot dimensions,
placement of signs and other matters applicable to dwellings of the same type
in the same zone, and that provide services to no more than six persons, or
to no more than eight children in the case of a small family day care home.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.16.2)



   (C)   Conditionally permitted uses - The following uses are
permitted subject to the approval of a coastal development permit pursuant to
the provisions of article V:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings subject to the Oxnard Shores
Settlement Agreement dated October 31, 1989, Doc. 89-174512, shall be
approved by the director;



      (2)   Lot 1 duplex or multiple-family dwelling units either in
separate buildings or combined in one or more main buildings with a maximum
of six units per building;



      (3)   Public utility and municipal facilities;



      (4)   Adult day care facilities serving no more than 15 adults;



      (5)   Child care centers serving no more than 15 children;



      (6)   Congregate living health facilities of more than six
beds; and



      (7)   Residential care facilities for the elderly serving no
more than 15 persons.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.16.3)



   (D)   Property development standards -



      (1)   The minimum elevation of the bottom of the lowest
structural member, with a shore parallel component greater than three feet in
length, shall be +14.0 feet NGVD (national geodetic vertical datum), or one
foot above the calculated maximum wave runup or wave crest elevation,
whichever produces the highest elevation.  The maximum elevation of the
bottom of the lowest shore parallel structural member shall be +17.0 feet
NGVD, unless a coastal engineering report substantiates the need for a higher
elevation based on wave runup and wave force ratio.



      (2)   For lots wider than 33 feet, two stories, not to exceed
22 feet from the bottom of the lowest shore parallel horizontal structural
member to the highest peak of roof.  For lots less than 33 feet wide, three
stories, not to exceed 30 feet from the bottom of the lowest shore parallel
horizontal structural member to the highest peak of roof, for up to a maximum
of 50% of any roof.  In no case shall the top of the roof elevation exceed
+47.0 feet NGVD.  The remainder of the roof, where sloped, shall have a
maximum average height of 27½ feet above the bottom of the lowest shore
parallel structural member.  Where the remainder of the roof is a deck, the
maximum average height of the top of the deck shall be 23 feet above the
bottom of the lowest shore parallel structural member, exclusive of a railing
not to exceed an additional four feet in height.



      (3)   Garage floors shall have a minimum elevation of +13.0
feet NGVD, and shall be high enough to provide a minimum downward slope of 2%
for the driveway surface towards the street.



      (4)   Minimum lot width:  30 feet.



      (5)   Front yard setback:



         (a)   Defined.  The front yard shall be the area
between the Pacific Ocean and the main structure.



         (b)   Required.



            (i)   Front yard setback:  0 feet.



            (ii)   Rear yard setback:  15 feet.  Minimum of
20 feet to center of garage door for back-out driveways,



      (6)   Side yard setback:  five feet for lots greater than 33
feet wide.  No side yard shall be required on one side of a lot where a
five-foot side yard is provided on the other side for lots less than 33 feet
wide.



      (7)   Accessory buildings:  shall observe same setback as
main structure, shall be separated from main structure by a minimum of six
feet, and shall not exceed one story in height.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.16.4)



   (E)   Special requirements -



      (1)   Off-street parking:  tandem driveway parking may be
permitted for guest parking spaces for multiple-family dwelling units.



      (2)   Fencing:  no fences, walls, or hedges may be permitted
as lot enclosures.



      (3)   Minimum distance between a garage door and the most
parallel rear property line shall be 20 feet.



      (4)   Multi-family development requirements:



         (a)   Lot No. 1, Tract No. 4380, may be developed to a
maximum of 12 multiple-family dwelling units.  There shall be no more than
six attached dwelling units on pilings in any building cluster and there
shall be a separation of at least 20 feet between building clusters.



         (b)   Maximum building height, front yard, rear yard,
side yard, and accessory building property development standards as required
in subsection (D) above shall apply to the multi-family development of Lot
No. 1.



      (5)   All dwellings shall be constructed on pilings.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.16.5)



   (F)   Applicable provisions - All uses shall be subject to the
applicable standards of this chapter, including standards contained in the
following sections:



      (1)   Section 17-5, General requirements;



      (2)   Article III, Specific Coastal Development and Resource
Standards;



      (3)   Article IV, General Coastal Development and Resource
Standards; and



      (4)   Article V, Administration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-2.16.6)



(Ord. No. 2169, 2314, 2671, 2716)



ARTICLE III.  SPECIFIC COASTAL DEVELOPMENT AND RESOURCE STANDARDS



SEC. 17-30.  PURPOSE.



   (A)   (1)   The purpose of this article is to provide specific
standards designed to protect, maintain, and enhance coastal resources,
consistent with the policies of the Oxnard coastal land use plan.



      (2)   The standards identified in this article are organized
under the following resource categories:



         (a)   Habitat areas, including but not limited to,
wetlands, estuaries, streams, riparian habitats, lakes, and portions of open
coastal waters;



         (b)   Diking, dredging, filling, and shoreline
structures;



         (c)   Visual resources;



         (d)   Hazards, including significant geologic, seismic,
beach erosion, storm wave run-up, and flooding;



         (e)   Service inventories relating to service
capacities, and their allocation on a priority basis;



         (f)   Development and its impact on cultural resources;



         (g)   Industrial and energy development relating to
exploration and production of oil and natural gas resources;



         (h)   Coastal access and recreation, to assure
opportunities for public access to the Pacific Ocean and related recreational
uses; and



         (i)   Housing, including demolition, conversion or
replacement, and preservation of sound and safe housing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.0.0)



   (B)   All development within the Oxnard Coastal Zone shall comply
with the provisions of this article. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.0.1)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-31.  HABITAT AREAS.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide standards
designed to protect and where possible restore Oxnard's environmentally
sensitive habitat areas which include, but are not limited to: wetlands,
estuaries, streams, riparian habitats, lakes and portions of open coastal
waters.  Moreover, the water quality of the coastal zone containing these
habitat areas shall be maintained and, where feasible, restored in a manner
consistent with the standards contained in this section, other general and
specific coastal development and resource standards contained in this
chapter, as well as all applicable provisions and policies of the Oxnard
coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.1.1)



   (B)   Applicability and specific standards - All development within
the Oxnard Coastal Zone which is in, adjacent to, or has an effect upon, an
environmentally sensitive habitat area shall comply with the provisions of
this section.  Refer to Policy Nos. 6, a, c, d, e, and f, and 10 a-g of the
Oxnard coastal land use plan for specific standards. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.1.2)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-32.  DIKING, DREDGING, FILLING, AND SHORELINE STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide standards
regarding diking, dredging, filling, shoreline structure, and restoration
activities within Oxnard's Coastal Zone, in a manner consistent with the
standards contained in this section, other general and specific coastal
development and resource standards contained in this chapter, as well as all
applicable provisions and policies of the Oxnard coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.2.1)



   (B)   Applicability and specific standards - All development and
restoration projects located within, adjacent to, or having a direct affect
upon Oxnard's Coastal Zone, shall comply with all provisions of this
section.  Furthermore, diking and filling shall be limited to uses
consistent with the provisions of article II (Coastal sub-zones) and shall be
permitted only when no other less environmentally damaging alternative
exists, and where feasible mitigation measures have been provided to minimize
adverse environmental impacts.  Specific standards are contained in Policy
Nos. 11, 12, 13 of the Oxnard coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.2.2)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2124, 2716)



SEC. 17-33.  VISUAL RESOURCES.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide standards
to ensure that the scenic and visual qualities of Oxnard's Coastal Zone are
considered and protected as a resource of public importance, in a manner
consistent with the standards contained in this section and other general and
specific coastal development and resource standards contained in this
chapter, as well as all applicable provisions and policies and the Oxnard
coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.3.1)



   (B)   Applicability and specific standards - All new development in
Oxnard’s Coastal Zone shall be designed to protect views to and along the
ocean and scenic coastal areas.  Specific standards are contained in Policy
Nos. 37 and 38 of the Oxnard coastal land use plan as well as those contained
in the Channel Islands Harbor Resubmittal. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.3.2)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2095, 2124, 2716)



SEC. 17-34.  WETLAND RESTORATION PLAN.



   (A)   The purpose of these procedures is to provide regulations for
the development, content, review and approval of a required wetland
restoration plan in conjunction with permitted wetland fills.



   (B)   These procedures shall apply to all wetland restoration as
required by Policy Nos. 11, 12, and 6a-e of the Oxnard coastal land use plan.



      (1)   Whenever wetland restoration is required by the Oxnard
coastal land use plan, a tentative wetland restoration plan shall be
submitted to the development services department along with the required
permit application for the related wetland fill.  The development services
department shall not accept the tentative restoration plan for review if the
plan does not comply with the form, information analysis, and other
requirements for the content of a tentative restoration plan.



      (2)   The restoration plan shall include a detailed
description that includes provisions for restoration to at least the minimum
required standards of the Oxnard coastal land use plan and permanent
protection of the restoration area.  The restoration plan shall also include
a description of how the restoration project will provide equal or greater
biological productivity in the area to be filled.



         (a)   A complete inventory and assessment of plant, fish
and wildlife habitat values which would be affected by the filling, including:



            (i)   Any changes in plant and animal natural
species diversity abundance, any composition and an assessment of how, if at
all, these affect the long-term stability of the ecosystem (i.e., natural
species, diversity, abundance and composition are generally unchanged as a
result of the project);



            (ii)   Any impacts to rare or endangered species
or their habitat;



            (iii)   Any impacts to a species or habitat
essential to the natural biological functioning of the wetland or the estuary
ecosystem; and



            (iv)   Any significant reduction to consumptive
values, such as fishing, hunting, clamming, or nonconsumptive values, such as
water quality and research opportunity values of the wetland or estuary
ecosystem.



         (b)   A clear statement of the habitat restoration and
management proposed, including how their plan will compensate for the habitat
damage described in the resource inventory section in conformance with the
required standards and to include development of specific biological criteria
for the restoration site and design.



         (c)   A recommended restoration site and project design,
including maps at a scale no greater than one inch = 200 feet.



         (d)   A preliminary proposal for the long-term
management of the restoration project.



      (3)   Restoration shall occur simultaneously with project
construction and be completed prior to commencement of operation of the
proposed project.



      (4)   The commission shall review the tentative restoration
plan in conjunction with the required coastal development permit.



      (5)   The applicant shall prepare a final restoration plan
based on the city's approved or conditionally approved tentative restoration
plan.  In addition, the final plan shall include all of the following:



         (a)   A complete statement of the restoration objectives.



         (b)   A complete description of the restoration site
including a map of the project site, at a mapping scale no smaller than one
inch = 200 feet.



         (c)   A complete restoration description including
scaled, detailed diagrams, and including:



            (i)   A grading plan depicting any alterations to
topography, natural landforms, and drainage channels and areas where existing
fill and debris will be removed;



            (ii)   A vegetation plan including a list of plant
species to be eliminated and a list of plant species to be introduced on the
restoration site, and describing the methods and proposing a schedule for
eliminating and establishing vegetation;



            (iii)   A clear statement of when restoration work
will commence and be completed;



            (iv)   Provisions of public access, where
appropriate, for public recreation, scientific, and educational use; and



            (v)   Other measures necessary to achieve
restoration objectives and to protect the restoration site from adverse
impacts of adjacent development and use.



            (vi)   Provisions for mosquito and vector control.



            (vii)   Provisions for long-term management of the
restoration site. The final plan shall describe the applicant's
responsibilities in assuring that the project will be successful, including
monitoring and evaluation, and that the restored area is maintained
consistent with the plan's restoration objectives.



            (viii)   Provisions for making repairs or
modifications to the restoration site necessary to meet the project
objectives. The final plan shall provide either that the restoration site
shall be owned in fee by an agency or nonprofit organization having among its
principal purposes the conservation and management of fish and wildlife, or
other habitat resources, or shall provide for dedication of an open space or
conservation easement over the restoration area to such an agency or
organization.



      (6)   Review and approval of final restoration plan:



         (a)   Following staff review of the final restoration
plan for conformance with the approved or conditionally approved tentative
restoration plan, the director shall determine if the final restoration plan
is in substantial conformance with the approved tentative plan.



         (b)   The director shall give notice of final
restoration plan submittal in accordance with the requirements of section
17-58.



         (c)   The director's determination that the final
restoration plan is in substantial conformance with the approved tentative
plan, may be appealed pursuant to the appeals procedures of section 17-58.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.3.3)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2095, 2124, 2716)



SEC. 17-35.  HAZARDS.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide standards
to minimize risks to life and property in areas of high geologic, seismic,
beach erosion, storm wave run-up and flood hazards in a manner consistent
with the standards contained in this section and other general and specific
coastal development and resource standards contained in this chapter, as well
as all applicable provisions and policies of the Oxnard coastal land use
plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.4.1)



   (B)   Applicability and specific standards -



      (1)   All development shall ensure stability and structural
integrity and neither create nor contribute significantly to erosion,
geologic instability or destruction of the site or surrounding area or in any
way require the construction of protective devices that would substantially
alter natural land forms along the coast.



      (2)   Specific standards are contained in Policy Nos. 39 and
40 of the Oxnard coastal land useplan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.4.2)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-36.  SERVICE INVENTORIES.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide standards
to ensure that the city's limited service capacities are conserved and
allocated on a priority basis giving the highest value to coastal dependent
land uses in a manner consistent with the standards contained in this section
and other general and specific coastal development and resource standards
contained in this chapter, as well as all applicable provisions and policies
of the Oxnard coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.5.1)



   (B)   Applicability and specific standards - All new development
shall be based upon the prioritization of service allocation in the Oxnard
Coastal Zone and be reviewed in terms of coastal dependency consistent with
the priorities of the Oxnard local coastal program.  Specific standards are
contained in Policy Nos. 41, 42 and 44 of the Oxnard coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.5.2)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-37.  CULTURAL RESOURCES.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide standards
designed to avoid or minimize the impact of new development upon a cultural
resource within the coastal zone in a manner consistent with the standards
contained in this section and other general and specific coastal development,
and resources standards contained in this chapter, as well as all applicable
provisions and policies of the Oxnard coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.6.1)



   (B)   Applicability and specific standards - All new development
shall be designed and constructed to avoid destruction of coastal resources
consistent with the standards of this chapter.  Specific standards are
contained in Policy No. 48 of the Oxnard coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.6.2)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-38.  OIL/ENERGY RECOVERY.



   (A)   Purpose - The Oxnard Coastal Zone exhibits significant
potential for exploration for and production of oil and gas resources.  The
purpose of this section is to provide minimum operational standards to assure
compatibility of oil and gas development with valuable coastal resources
which include, but are not limited to, recreation and scenic resources,
environmentally sensitive habitat areas and public access, as well as with
all applicable provisions and policies of the Oxnard coastal land use plan. 
Oil and gas development shall be permitted in accordance with Section 30260
of the Coastal Act, in addition to the standards outlined below. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.7.1)



   (B)   Applicability and specific standards -



      (1)   No well shall be drilled and no accessory equipment or
facility permanently located within:



         (a)   One hundred feet of any dedicated public street or
highway;



         (b)   One hundred feet of a building or dwelling not a
part of operation of the well;



         (c)   Three hundred feet of any building used as a place
of public assembly, recreation or school;



         (d)   Three hundred feet of a stream or mean high tide
line, river, wetland, lake, or channel appearing on the most current U.S.
Geological Service 2,000 scale topographic map as a blue line, except where
an applicant has demonstrated that the subject use can be safely located near
a watercourse without creating a risk of water pollution, damage to wildlife
and habitat and impairment of flood control interests.  In no case shall
setbacks from streams or channels be less than 50 feet; and



         (e)   The applicable setbacks for accessory structures
for the sub-zone in which the use is located.



      (2)   Drill sites and access roads shall not obstruct natural
drainage courses.



      (3)   Drill site preparation, drilling and production
operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to eliminate, as far as
practicable, dust, noise, vibration or noxious odors, and shall be in
accordance with the best accepted practices for drilling for and producing
oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances and shall comply with current
standards set forth in all applicable State laws regulating oil and gas
development.  Generally accepted and used technological improvements for
reducing factors of nuisance and annoyance shall be employed by the permittee.



      (4)   Drilling, redrilling and maintenance work on approved
wells shall be conducted with the use of portable equipment only.  No
permanent derrick shall be installed, unless otherwise allowed by the permit
or required by the State Division of Oil and Gas.  All equipment used for
such purposes shall be removed from the site within 30 days of the completion
of such work and shall not be stored on the site, unless a time extension is
approved by the commission.



      (5)   Oil, produced water, drilling fluids, cuttings, and
other contaminants associated with the drilling, production, storage and
transport of oil shall be contained on the site in steel-lined tanks, unless
properly transported off-site or injected into a well.  The director shall
be furnished with a plan for controlling oil spillage and preventing saline
and other polluting or contaminating substances from reaching surface or
subsurface waters.  The plan shall be consistent with the requirements of
the city, county, State and federal governments and shall be subject to the
approval of the director.



      (6)   No earthen sump shall be used and all wastewater, mud,
oil or any other waste produced from the drilling operation shall be
accumulated in steel tanks.  Such steel tanks may be placed in excavations
for the purpose of providing gravity flow, but shall not be permitted to
overflow at any time, and all such tanks which extend above the natural
surface of the ground less than five feet shall be considered as debris
basins and shall be entirely enclosed by a chain-link fence or equal, six
feet in height and erected in a substantial manner.  Such tanks or the waste
material therein shall be hauled away from the drilling site for disposal at
an approved waste disposal site.  The operator shall notify the hauling or
disposal contractor in writing of these requirements with a copy to the
director.



      (7)   Upon issuance of a drilling permit and prior to drilling
operations thereunder, the operator shall provide the city with a bond issued
by a company authorized to do business in the State, guaranteeing the
faithful performance of each and every development standard and condition set
forth in the permit.  The bond shall be maintained in effect until released
by the city council.  The amount of the bond shall be established by the
coastal permit for each controlled drilling site.  The surface of the roads
to be used are to be examined prior to use in connection with the permit and
an additional bond for each controlled drilling site made payable to the
governmental agency having jurisdiction shall be posted guaranteeing the
repair of all damage.  In the event other drilling permits are issued for
the same controlled drilling site, the bonds may be amended to guarantee
compliance with each of the other drilling permits.  No extension of time
that may be granted or any change in specifications or requirements that may
be approved or required by any officer or department of this city shall be
deemed to exonerate the surety on any bond posted pursuant to this
requirement.



      (8)   The drill site and all roads or hauling routes located
between the city right-of-way and the site shall be oiled, paved, chipped,
sealed or otherwise treated as required by the public works department, and
maintained as necessary to prevent dust.



      (9)   Light shall be controlled so as not to produce annoying
levels of glare or abnormal light levels directed at any neighboring uses or
rights-of-way.



      (10)   The operator shall immediately notify the director and
the fire department, department of fish and game, regional water quality
control board, and all other applicable agencies in the event of any fires,
spills or hazardous conditions.  Upon request of any city department, the
operator shall provide a written report of any incident within five working
days which shall include, but not be limited to, a description of the facts
of the incident, the corrective measures used, and the steps taken to prevent
recurrence of the accident.



      (11)   (a)   Drilling, production or maintenance operations
associated with an approved permit, shall not produce noise measured at a
point five feet away from the outside wall of an occupied residence, school,
health care facility or place of public assembly that exceeds the following
standards as defined and measured in accordance with National Standards
Institute Criteria and Methodologies:



 

Time Period
 
Peak Noise Level


Day (7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.)
 
55 dB(A)


Night (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.)
 
45 dB(A)



 



         (b)   In the event that ambient noise levels exceed
these limits, the maximum allowable day/night noise levels may be increased
to the ambient day/night noise level.  Ambient noise levels shall be
determined by measuring the noise levels in a manner prescribed by the
director.  Measurements for said ambient noise levels shall be taken at a
point five feet away from the outside wall of an occupied residence or
school.  Once the operator has been notified by the director that the
operation is in violation of the applicable noise standards, he/she shall
have until 10:00 p.m. of that day to comply with the standards or cease the
operations that are the source of the noise.  The director may waive this
requirement if upon the advice of the State Division of Oil and Gas, the
cessation of the subject operations would lead to an unsafe operation.



      (12)   If drilling, redrilling or maintenance operations such
as pulling pipes or pumps are located within 1,600 feet of an occupied
dwelling, school, health care facility or other place of public assembly, the
work platform, engine base and draw works, crown block, power source(s), pipe
rack and other probable noise sources associated with a drilling or
maintenance operation, shall be enclosed with soundproofing, sufficient to
ensure that expected noise levels do not exceed the noise limits set forth
herein, or in the conditions of the permit.  This requirement may be waived
by the director if it can clearly be demonstrated that such measures have no
adverse impact upon adjacent sensitive habitat or residential areas. 
Residents within the prescribed distance may submit a waiver exempting the
drilling operation from such requirements.  All required soundproofing shall
be installed prior to drilling.



      (13)   All permanent facilities and structures on the site
shall be painted a neutral color so as to blend in with natural
surroundings.  Said color shall be approved by the director prior to the
painting of said facilities.



      (14)   The area shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
manner so as not to create any hazardous or unsightly conditions such as
debris, pools of oil, water or other liquids, weeds, brush and trash.  No
equipment shall be stored on the site which is not essential to the regular
operation of the oil well located thereon.  Lumber, pipes, and casings shall
not be left on the site except when drilling operations are being conducted.



      (15)   Within 90 days after the revocation, expiration or
surrender of any permit, the abandonment of use, or after the wells on a site
have been shut in or the operation thereof has been suspended for 90 days,
the premises shall be restored and revegetated to as nearly the original
condition as is practicable.  Upon completion of production, the oil and gas
production facility area shall be returned as much as is possible to either
its natural state or to be in conformance with the surrounding topography and
uses by contouring, seeding, and landscaping, except as may otherwise be
permitted by conditions of an approved coastal development permit.



      (16)   The operator shall maintain for the life of the permit
liability insurance of not less than $500,000 for one person, $1,000,000 for
all persons, and $2,000,000 for property damage.  This requirement does not
preclude the option of self-insurance.



      (17)   The only processing operations permitted at the well
site are the separation of produced water and natural gas from crude oil and
those processing operations required for injection purposes and for the
transportation of production products from the site, unless otherwise
required by the State Division of Oil and Gas.



      (18)   The permit shall become null and void if a zone
clearance for site preparation and drilling of at least one well has not been
issued within one year of the granting of the original permit.  Failure of
the city to notify the permittee of the imminent expiration of the permit
shall not be grounds for continuation beyond this deadline.



      (19)   Upon the filing of a renewal application at least six
months prior to expiration, the permittee shall be eligible to continue
normal operations until the request is acted upon and all administrative
appeals are heard, even though the permit being renewed has expired.  The
permittee/operator of record is solely responsible to apply for renewal of
the permit.  Failure of the city to notify said parties of the expiration
shall not be grounds to continue operations after the permit expires.



      (20)   All facilities and uses other than those specifically
identified in the approved permit are prohibited until and unless authorized
by the commission.  All proposed changes to the permit or to the existing
proposed uses, facilities, structures or improvements (including construction
of pipelines to and from the site) shall be presented in written and map form
to the director, who shall determine what type of permits, if any, the
proposal requires.  The director may grant a minor change to allow for the
redrilling of existing wells if there would be no significant change in the
approved plot plan and if there have been no significant changes in the land
use on adjacent areas.  No permit shall be required for the maintenance and
normal operation of existing facilities.



      (21)   The director shall be provided with the current names,
addresses and telephone numbers of the permittee's agents or representatives
who shall receive all orders and notices as well as all communications
regarding matters of condition and code compliance at the site.  This
information shall be provided for both the field agent at the site and an
agent at the office headquarters. If the names, addresses or phone numbers of
the agents should change, the permittee shall provide the director with the
new information within 30 days.



      (22)   The permittee shall provide copies of the conditions
applicable to the permit, to the owner of record, and drilling contractor. 
A current set of conditions shall be posted and maintained at the drill site
for use by persons participating in the drilling of said well.



      (23)   The permittee agrees as a condition of issuance or
renewal and use of the permit to defend at his/her sole expense any action
brought against the city because of issuance or renewal of the permit, or in
the alternative to relinquish the permit.  Upon demand of the city, the
permittee shall reimburse the city for any court costs and/or attorneys' fees
which the city may be required by a court to pay as a result of any such
action.  The city may, at its sole discretion, participate in the defense of
any such action, but such participation shall not relieve the permittee of
his/her obligations under this requirement.



      (24)   The permittee's acceptance of the permit and/or
commencement of construction and/or operations shall be deemed to be
acceptance of all standards and conditions required of the permit.



      (25)   Neither the issuance of a permit hereunder, nor
compliance with the conditions thereof, shall relieve an operator from any
responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property,
nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability
upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or
property.



      (26)   The director may suspend, following a duly noticed
hearing, all or a portion of the operations until such time as the violation
in question is corrected.  If the director orders suspension of well
operation, the suspension shall only occur after consulting with the State
Division of Oil and Gas about the implications of such a suspension. 
Approval of any other city permits requested by the permittee may be withheld
until any violation in question is corrected.



      (27)   (a)   The permittee shall bear the full cost
incurred by the city or its consultants for the review of material submitted,
monitoring and enforcement of the requirements of the subject permit, and a
resolution of valid complaints attributed to the permittee.  To ensure that
funds are available for costs incurred, the permittee shall deposit $1,000
with the city prior to the issuance of a zoning clearance.  The funds shall
be used for at least three inspections of the project during the following
phases of the project site: preparation, drilling, production and/or
rehabilitation of the site if a producing well was not achieved.



         (b)   The funds shall also cover the cost for any other
necessary inspections or the resolution of valid complaints that may occur. 
Once the project is in the production phase, the required deposit fee may be
reduced by the director to an amount commensurate with the anticipated cost
of monitoring and enforcing the permit.  One deposit may be made to cover
all of the permittee's various permits.  Upon receiving notice from the city
that the required deposit fee is below the required level, the permittee
shall have 30 days to bring the deposit fee up to the required level or pay
the cost billed to him/her.  Failure to pay the required bill or maintain
the required deposit fee balance shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of the permit.  Prior to the city engaging any independent
consultants or contractors pursuant to this section and standard city
building procedures, the director shall confer with the permittee over the
work to be contracted for and the cost of such work.  However, the permittee
may hire private consultants to undertake work required by the city, provided
that the consultant and the proposed scope of work are acceptable to the city.



      (28)   Unless otherwise advised by the applicable State
agencies, rotary mud, produced water, drill cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons,
and all other oil field waste derived or resulting from the drilling or
reworking of any well shall not be discharged onto, beneath or outside of the
site in any form or manner and shall only be discharged from the drilling
activities and shall be transported to a State-approved Class I dump site.



      (29)   Each producing well site shall be completed in such a
manner that all production equipment and facilities shall be recessed,
covered or otherwise screened from view.  Trees or shrubbery shall be
planted and maintained so as to develop attractive landscaping and to screen
the site and production equipment, structures, tanks and facilities thereon
from public view, unless such equipment, structures, tanks and facilities are
screened from public view by reason of an isolated location, existing trees
or shrubbery, intervening surface contours or a wall constructed as herein
provided.  The commission may waive this provision to wells in an existing
field.



      (30)   No sign shall be constructed, erected or maintained on
the property subject to the permit except those required by law or allowed by
the city's sign ordinance.  Wells shall be marked in a conspicuous place
with the name of the operator, and other pertinent information as
necessary.  This marker shall be maintained at all times.



      (31)   Any production shipping tanks installed on the site
shall have a rated capacity of not more than 3,000 barrels per site and the
tanks and appurtenances.  Within 30 days of erection of the tanks, the tanks
shall be kept painted and maintained in good conditions at all times.  The
tanks shall be painted in accordance with the paint scheme approved by the
commission.



      (32)   All equipment necessarily incidental to production
shall be completely enclosed in a building.  The plans for the building are
to be approved by the public works department, fire department and
development services department.  The building shall be of a permanent type,
be of attractive design, and be constructed in a manner that eliminates as
far as practicable, dust, noise, noxious odors and vibrations or other
conditions offensive to the senses.  The building shall be equipped with
such devices as are necessary to eliminate the objectionable features
mentioned above.  The architectural treatment of the exterior of the
building shall also be subject to the approval of the development services
department.



      (33)   Only electrical power shall be utilized in all pumping
and production operations.  Power shall not be generated on the drilling
site.  Alternative power sources may be allowed by an approved coastal
development permit.



      (34)   If the city receives a complaint about noise
originating from the permitted operation, the director may require a noise
evaluation made by qualified noise experts at the permittee's expense. 
Until such time as a determination is made regarding the validity of the
complaint, the operator shall, unless otherwise ordered by the State Division
of Oil and Gas, take steps to minimize any ongoing noise, such as but not
limited to, the cessation of:



         (a)   Hammering on pipe;



         (b)   Racking or making up of pipe;



         (c)   Acceleration;



         (d)   Acceleration of engines or motors;



         (e)   Drilling assembly rotational speeds that cause
more noise than necessary and could be reasonably reduced by use of a slower
rotational speed;



         (f)   Picking up or laying down of drill pipe, casing,
tubing or rods into or out of the drill hole; and



         (g)   Work except for the continued circulation of
fluids within the well, unless such succession would endanger the well.



      (35)   All non-emergency maintenance of a well, such as the
pulling of pipe and replacement of pumps, shall be limited to the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. if the well site is located within 3,000 feet of an
occupied residence.



      (36)   Drilling activities shall be limited to the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. when they are located less than 800 feet from an
occupied residence.



      (37)   No one shall reside on the area subject to the permit
except individuals who are required to be on the site 24 hours a day.  Those
individuals include, but are not limited to, the foreman, drilling mud
specialist, mud logger and directional drilling technicians.



      (38)   During drilling operations, sealing of the
formation-casing, annular well space from ground surface through the base of
fresh water shall be performed to prevent degradation of ground water quality.



      (39)   If archaeological or historical artifacts are
uncovered, the operator shall immediately notify the director and preserve
the site until a qualified archaeologist can recommend the proper disposition
of the site, consistent with the policies of the Oxnard coastal land use plan.



      (40)   The permittee shall clean and restore all streets,
sidewalks and other places constituting public property which may have been
disturbed or damaged in connection with any operations associated with the
use, including operations for the abandonment of the use except for ordinary
wear and tear of public streets and highways, to substantially the same
condition that existed at the time of use inauguration.



      (41)   Any machinery used in production and/or processing
shall be designed and housed so that noise and vibration are reduced to a
minimum and the operation thereof shall be compatible with the level of the
surrounding area.



      (42)   The permittee shall prepare an oil spill control plan
for review and approval by the city, as lead agency, and the department of
fish and game, and any other applicable agency, as determined by the director.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.7.2)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-39.  COASTAL ACCESS AND RECREATION.



   (A)   Purpose - The coastal zone includes substantial opportunities
for public access to the ocean and related recreational uses.  The purpose
of this section is to guide the acquisition and development of access
facilities and vertical and lateral easements for public use within the
coastal zone as part of a comprehensive program for implementing the Oxnard
coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.8.1)



   (B)   Applicability and specific standards - All development within
the Oxnard Coastal Zone which will have an effect on public access to, and
enjoyment of, the coastline shall comply with the provisions of this section.



      (1)   Specific standards are contained in Policy Nos. 72, 73
and 74 and Appendices Policy Nos. 22 and 23 of the Oxnard coastal land use
plan.  In addition, the provisions in paragraphs B, C, D of this section and
all other applicable LUP policies shall apply;



      (2)   Public access from the nearest public roadway to the
shoreline and along the coast shall be provided in new development except
where:



         (a)   The access is inconsistent with public safety,
military security needs, or the protection of fragile coastal resources;



         (b)   Adequate access exists nearby, consistent with
applicable policies of the certified Oxnard coastal land use plan; and



         (c)   Agriculture would be adversely affected;



      (3)   Dedicated accessways shall not be required to be open to
public use until a public agency or private association agrees to accept
responsibility for maintenance of and liability associated with the
accessways;



      (4)   For the purposes of this section, new development, as
defined by Section 30212(b) of the Coastal Act, does not include the
following:



         (a)   Structures destroyed by natural disaster -
Replacement of any structure pursuant to the provisions of subsection (g) of
Section 30610 of the Coastal Act.



         (b)   Demolition and reconstruction - The demolition and
reconstruction of a single-family residence; provided that the reconstructed
residence shall not exceed either the floor area, height or bulk of the
former structure by more than 10 %, and that the reconstructed residence is
sited in the same location on the affected property as the former structure.



         (c)   Improvements - Improvements to any structure which
do not change the intensity of its use, do not increase either the floor
area, height or bulk of the structure by more than 10 %, do not block or
impede access, and do not result in a seaward encroachment by the structure.



         (d)   Repair and maintenance - Any repair or maintenance
activity for which the city has determined pursuant to Section 30610 of the
Coastal Act, that a coastal development permit will not be required, unless
the commission determines that such activity will have an adverse impact on
lateral public access along the beach.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.8.2)



   (C)   Waiver of access requirements -



      (1)   Pursuant to Cal. Pub. Res. Code, Section 30214, with
respect to regulating the time, place and manner of public access, the
requirements for vertical access may be waived for specific development
applications only when the reviewing body vested with the authority to
approve the request, finds that adequate vertical access is provided off-site
but within the immediate area.  Such waiver may be granted subject to the
specific finding that the presence of a public beach with adequate access
facilities within 500 feet, reduces the needed frequency of vertical
accessways in coastal residential areas.



      (2)   Waiving lateral access is deemed inconsistent with the
policies of the Oxnard coastal land use plan, and is therefore prohibited.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.8.3)



   (D)   General coastal access standards - The following standards
apply to all new development subject to Policies 1-34 (Appendix III, Access)
of the certified Oxnard coastal land use plan and the provisions of chapter
16, and are intended to provide for the establishment of access right-of-way
designations, dedications and easements on both public and private lands:



      (1)   Coastal access facilities shall be located where they
safely accommodate public use and should be distributed throughout an area to
prevent crowding, parking congestion and misuse of coastal resources. 
Accessways shall be sited and designed:



         (a)   To minimize alteration of natural land forms
conforming to the existing contours of the land and be subordinate to the
character of their setting;



         (b)   To prevent unwarranted hazards to the land and
public safety;



         (c)   To provide for the privacy of adjoining residences
and to minimize conflicts with adjacent or nearby established uses;



         (d)   To be consistent with military security needs;



         (e)   To prevent misuse of environmentally sensitive
habitat areas; and



         (f)   To ensure that agriculture will not be adversely
affected.



      (2)   Public access to the environmentally sensitive habitat
areas such as wetlands, sand dunes, tidelands, or riparian areas, shall be
evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Such accessways shall be designed and
constructed so as to avoid adverse effects on the resource, consistent with
Policy Nos. 1, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 21 of the certified Oxnard coastal land use
plan.



      (3)   Coastal accessways located in areas of erosion hazard
shall be constructed and managed in a manner that does not increase the
hazard potential.  Access facilities on productive agricultural land may be
temporarily closed during harvest or while pesticides are used.  Where
appropriate, coastal accessways shall be designed to correct abuses resulting
from existing use.



      (4)   Access facilities constructed on access easements should
be no wider than necessary to accommodate the numbers and types of users that
can be reasonably expected.



      (5)   The design and placement of accessways shall provide for
the privacy of adjoining residences.  Each vertical access easement in a
residential area shall be sufficiently wide to permit the placement of an
appropriate accessway facility, such as a stairway, ramp, walkway and
fencing, and/or landscape buffer as necessary to ensure privacy and
security.  Depending on local considerations in a single-family residential
neighborhood, vertical accessways may be fenced on the property line and use
restricted to daylight hours.



      (6)   Unless otherwise authorized in a specific sub-zone, use
of lateral accessways shall be limited to the right of public pass and
repass, active and passive recreational use, or as otherwise designated by
the certified Oxnard coastal land use plan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.8.4)



   (E)   Establishing access areas - The establishment of required
vertical and lateral accessways shall be accomplished in one of the following
methods:



      (1)   Deed restriction - This method may be used only if an
owner, association, or corporation agrees to assume responsibility for the
maintenance and liability of the public accessway. City approval is first
required of the person or entity assuming responsibility.



      (2)   Grant of fee interest - This method may be used when a
public agency or private organization approved by the city is willing to
assume responsibility for ownership, maintenance and liability for the public
accessway.



      (3)   Grant of easement - This method may be used in the same
instances as those identified above.



      (4)   Offer of dedication - This method is to be used when no
public agency, private organization or individual is willing to accept a fee
interest or easement and the owner is not willing to accept responsibility
for the accessway.  Any offer of dedication shall be irrevocable for a
period of 25 years.  Offers of dedication shall not be accepted until
responsibility for maintenance and liability is assumed.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.8.5)



   (F)   Specific coastal access standards - The standards for the
location and distribution of both vertical and lateral accessways involving
public and private lands contained in this section shall apply to all new
development within the city's coastal zone. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.8.6)



   (G)   Lateral access -



      (1)   Lateral accessways shall include a minimum width of 25
feet of dry sandy beach to the extent feasible, given periodic climatic
conditions, or should include the entire sandy beach area if the width of the
beach is less than 25 feet.  Said accessways should not extend further
landward than the foot of an existing shoreline protective device, or be
closer than ten feet to an existing single-family residence unless another
distance is specified by the Oxnard coastal land use plan.  Where
development imposes a greater burden on public access, a larger accessway
shall be provided.



      (2)   Lateral accessways shall be located on all waterfront
land to provide continuous and unimpeded lateral access along the entire
reach of the sandy beach area or other usable recreational shoreline. 
Exceptions to this standard may include military installations where public
access would compromise military security, industrial developments and
operations that would be hazardous to the public safety and developments
where topographic features, such as river mouths, could be hazardous to
public safety.



      (3)   The proximity of the Pacific Ocean periodically
precludes any development on narrow lateral accessways other than portable
support facilities such as trash receptacles, picnic tables and benches, or
retractable ramps or boardwalks designed for use by persons with disabilities.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.8.7)



   (H)   Vertical access -



      (1)   Vertical accessways shall be a minimum of ten feet wide.



      (2)   Accessway surface materials shall be as follows:



         (a)   Where the native soil is sand, no other surfacing
material is required, unless accessway is in a dune habitat, where wooden
planking shall be required.



         (b)   Where accessways are to be constructed in areas
where sand does not exist, or where conditions required an improved
accessway, one of the following materials shall be used:



            (i)   Asphalt or concrete;



            (ii)   Masonry paving units including flat stone,
concrete blocks, bominite, stamped concrete or other similar materials which
provide a smooth, even surface;



            (iii)   Smooth, rounded gravel, which is
approximately½-inch in diameter or less, laid to a minimum depth of five
inches within an area contained by wood or concrete headers.  Gravel shall
be underlaid with plastic which is at least four mil thick;



            (iv)   Wood platform or walkways, provided that
the wood shall be treated and waterproofed; and



            (v)   Other materials or systems approved by the
commission.



         (c)   All accessways in designated wetlands or resource
protection areas shall be subject to the granting of a coastal development
permit.



      (3)   Vertical accessways shall be established in all
beachfront areas and should be evenly distributed and carefully located
throughout such areas to the maximum extent feasible.  They should be
located where they provide access to onshore or offshore recreational areas.



      (4)   Where single-family development exists or is planned,
vertical accessways should be located where streets end at the shoreline,
once every six residential parcels or not less than once every 500 feet. 
Multiple-family residential projects of five dwelling units or more should
provide sufficient open space within the project for a vertical accessway, a
public parking area and for construction of the access facility.



      (5)   Visitor-serving commercial or recreational developments
on shoreline parcels shall enhance the shoreline experience by providing (or
preserving) views of the ocean, vertical access through the project, and
accessway facilities and maintenance as part of the project.  Industrial
development near beachfront parcels shall provide vertical access and parking
improvements appropriate to safe, public shoreline use and equal to the
potential public use of shoreline displaced by the industrial facility.



      (6)   Subdivision of beachfront parcels shall provide a
vertical accessway to the beach area either as a separate parcel or as an
easement over the parcels to be created.



      (7)   Vertical accessways may be developed with a range of
facilities including stairways, ramps, trails, right-of-way overpasses and
underpasses, or any combination thereof.  Vertical accessways shall include
design features which minimize bluff and shoreline erosion such as drainage
systems, planting of native cover, fencing, and elevation of stairways away
from bluff area.  Vertical accessways shall include appropriate support
facilities, such as signs and fencing.



      (8)   (a)   In determining the specific siting of an
accessway, the protection of the right of privacy of the adjacent residence
shall be considered.  Where a residential structure is located on the beach
with no physical barrier, such as a seawall separating the residential
structure from the accessway, the accessway shall not extend closer than 10
feet to the occupied residential structure.  In such cases, the area from 10
to 20 feet from the residential structure may be used for pass and repass
with all areas seaward of the 20-foot line available for passive recreational
use.  In determining an appropriate access buffer, the need for privacy
should be considered in light of the public's right to obtain access and use
along the shoreline.  The buffered area should not act to preclude the
public's right of access to and use of publicly-owned tidelands.



         (b)   A vertical accessway for pedestrian use on a
parcel where a residential structure exists or is anticipated for
construction in the proposed project shall not be sited closer than five feet
to the residential structure.  This five-foot buffer shall be provided to
protect the privacy rights of the residents of the site.  In some instances,
the proposed project may have to be relocated in order to provide the
accessway and still allow for a buffer between the accessway and the
residential structure.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.8.8)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-40.  HOUSING DEMOLITION, CONVERSION OR REPLACEMENT.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide standards
designed to preserve sound and safe housing for low- and moderate-income
families in a manner consistent with the standards contained in this section,
other general and specific coastal development and resource standards
contained in this chapter, and all applicable provisions and policies of the
housing element of the Oxnard general plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.9.1)



   (B)   Applicability and specific standards - Specific standards are
contained in Policy Nos. 87, 88 and 89 of the Oxnard coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.9.2)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-41.  RECORDATION OF LAND RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide for timely
compliance with permit condition requirements, recordation of land
restrictions and ensure full compliance with the Oxnard certified coastal
program. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.10.1)



   (B)   Responsibilities - Any permit requiring recordation (or any
other similar legal form) of land restrictions imposed pursuant to this
chapter shall not be issued until the recordation (or other similar legal
form) is duly accomplished and finalized. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-3.10.2)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



ARTICLE IV.  GENERAL COASTAL DEVELOPMENT AND RESOURCE STANDARDS



SEC. 17-45.  CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide standards
designed to preserve sound and safe rental housing for low- to
moderate-income families in a manner consistent with the standards contained
in the general and specific coastal development and resource standards
contained in this section and all applicable policies of the Oxnard coastal
land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.1.1)



   (B)   Applicability and specific standards - In order to provide for
appropriate protection for existing housing stock, any application for
conversion from apartments to condominium ownership shall be subject to the
community housing conversion standards contained in chapter 16 of the code. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.1.2)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-46.  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Purpose - Design review shall be required in order to assure
that new or modified uses and development will produce an environment of
stable, desirable character which will be in harmony with the existing or
potential development of the surrounding neighborhood to ensure the
compatibility of development proposed adjacent to resource protection and
recreation areas and to avoid excessive similarity or dissimilarity in the
appearance of buildings.  Design review is also intended to implement the
goals and policies contained in the Oxnard coastal land use plan.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.2.1)



   (B)   Applicability and specific standards - Any coastal permit
shall be subject to the design review standards set forth in this section. 
While encouraging the broadest possible range of individual and creative
design, the commission, or the director, where authorized, may grant design
review approval only if the application conforms to all of the following
standards:



      (1)   The proposed development will be of a quality and
character which is compatible with the surrounding area and harmonizes with
existing development;



      (2)   The design will improve the community's appearance by
avoiding excessive variety and monotonous repetition;



      (3)   Proposed signage will be an integral architectural
feature which does not overwhelm or dominate the structure or object it is
attached to;



      (4)   Lighting will be stationary and deflected away from
adjacent properties;



      (5)   Mechanical equipment, storage and trash areas and
utilities will be architecturally screened from view;



      (6)   The plans show proper consideration for the relationship
between the existing and finished grades of the site to be improved and
adjacent properties;



      (7)   The proposed development or modification will not, in
its exterior design and appearance, be so at variance with the appearance of
existing buildings and development in the neighborhood as to cause the nature
of the local environment to materially depreciate in appearance;



      (8)   The proposed design is compatible with existing
development in the area in terms of scale, height, bulk, materials,
cohesiveness, colors and the preservation of privacy;



      (9)   The proposed design promotes a harmonious transition in
terms of scale and character between areas of different land use designations;



      (10)   All building elevations have been architecturally
treated in a uniform manner, including the incorporation within the side and
rear building elevations of some or all of the design elements used for the
primary facades;



      (11)   The plans provide for adequate on-site vehicular and
pedestrian circulation; and



      (12)   The main entrance to the dwelling unit or commercial or
industrial building provides independent access for the physically impaired.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.2.2)



   (C)   Approval - When the proposed design does not comply completely
with the above standards, the approval body may impose conditions sufficient
to bring the design into conformity.  When the proposed design cannot be
conditioned or modified to comply with the standards, the proposed design
shall be disapproved and referred to the applicant for redesign and
resubmittal. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.2.3)



   (D)   Solar energy systems design standards - These provisions are
intended to incorporate, to the extent feasible, passive heating and cooling
opportunities into the design of residential developments. They are further
designed to assure that solar energy systems are protected from shading and
conform in appearance to the surrounding neighborhood.



      (1)   Solar collectors shall be roof-mounted in the least
visible location that does not interfere with the operating efficiency of the
collectors;



      (2)   Collectors shall be mounted at the same angle as the
pitch of the roof, allowing water sheet flow between the roof and the
collector;



      (3)   Appurtenant equipment, particularly plumbing and related
fixtures, shall be installed in the attic, where feasible;



      (4)   Large accessory fixtures which must be exposed shall be
screened by architectural features that harmonize with other design elements
of the structure; and



      (5)   Exterior surfaces shall have a matte finish and be
color-coordinated to harmonize with roof materials or other dominant colors
of the structure.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.2.4)



   (E)   Protection of solar access - No building, wall, fence or other
structure or part of a structure shall be constructed or modified and no
vegetation may be placed or allowed to grow so as to increase the consumption
of airspace over a lot in a manner that obstructs solar access to a solar
energy system on a neighboring lot such that more than 10% of the absorption
area would be shaded at any time.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.2.5)



   (F)   Design standards for single-family dwellings - Each
single-family dwelling shall incorporate all of the following design features:



      (1)   A minimum projection of two and a half feet on at least
two opposite sides;



      (2)   A roof constructed of fire-resistant asphalt composition
shingles, tile, or similar fire-resistant roofing material; and



      (3)   Exterior siding of brick, wood, stucco, plaster,
concrete, metal or similar material having a nonglossy and nonreflective
finish.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.2.6)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-47.  LANDSCAPING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide standards
designed to enhance the appearance of development within the city by
requiring the placement and maintenance of landscaping for aesthetic and
screening purposes, and to provide for areas of improved open space
consistent with the Oxnard coastal land use plan, with special concern for
the coastal zone. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.3.1)



   (B)   Applicability and specific standards - The landscaping
standards shall apply where landscaping is required by this chapter as part
of a project or permit condition of approval and to all areas where
landscaping is proposed by the applicant.  All landscaping shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with chapter 16 of the code. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.3.2)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-48.  SIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide standards
for the identification of businesses and development that will enhance the
appearance of the city as an attractive place to live and work, and to
provide for signs that will not create public safety hazards, but will
encourage functional flexibility, design, and compatibility, and maintain the
positive visual aspects of the coastal zone, consistent with the Oxnard
coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.4.1)



   (B)   Applicability and specific standards - The following standards
shall apply to all outdoor signs proposed for the identification of
development or businesses and informational and directional signs related
thereto.



      (1)   Standards for all signs in all coastal sub-zones are
found in chapter 16 of the code.



      (2)   Specific sign standards for the coastal sub-zones shall
be in accordance with sections of chapter 16.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.4.2)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-49.  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide standards
designed to achieve the following objectives:



      (1)   To ensure accessible, attractive, and well-maintained
parking and loading facilities;



      (2)   To reduce traffic congestion and hazards;



      (3)   To protect neighborhoods from the effects of vehicular
noise and traffic generated by adjacent nonresidential districts; and



      (4)   To provide parking in proportion to the needs generated
by varying types of land use consistent with the Oxnard coastal land use plan
and in recognition of the coastal community with established and anticipated
parking problems and uses.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.5.1)



   (B)   Applicability and specific standards - Every use legally
established, and every building or structure erected or altered, shall have
permanently maintained off-street parking areas.  The provision and
development of parking and loading areas for uses in the coastal zone shall
be in accordance with chapter 16 of the code. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.5.2)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2095, 2145, 2716)



SEC. 17-50.  NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to address
nonconforming buildings and uses in the coastal zone in order to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare, and to bring such buildings and
uses into conformity with the goals and policies of the Oxnard coastal land
use plan.  This chapter is intended to prevent the expansion of
nonconforming buildings and uses, establish the circumstances under which
they may be continued, and provide for the removal, correction or change of
such buildings and uses. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.6.1)



   (B)   Nonconforming buildings - A legal nonconforming building is a
structure which lawfully existed when constructed, but by reason of changes
to the city code fails to conform to the present requirements of the subject
zoning district. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.6.2)



   (C)   General requirements -



      (1)   A nonconforming building which is damaged to the extent
of one-half or more of its replacement cost immediately prior to such damage
may be restored only if made to conform to all provisions of this chapter. 
The replacement cost shall be determined by the city building official, whose
decision may be appealed to the city council.



      (2)   Changes to interior partitions, or other nonstructural
improvements and repairs, may be made to a nonconforming building.



      (3)   Structural elements may be modified if the building
official determines such modification is immediately necessary to protect the
health and safety of the public or occupants of the nonconforming building or
adjacent property.



      (4)   Exterior modifications or additions to nonconforming
buildings used for residential, commercial or industrial purposes may be
permitted providing the following conditions are met:



         (a)   The modification or addition does not increase the
degree of nonconformity by extending horizontally or laterally any structural
nonconformity.



         (b)   The modification or addition does not increase the
requirement for off-street parking.



      (5)   A development review permit may be granted for additions
or modifications to buildings that are used for commercial or industrial
purposes and that are nonconforming due to setbacks or parking, provided that
the addition or modification meets the parking and other standards of this
chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.6.3)



   (D)   Nonconforming uses - A legal nonconforming use is a use that
lawfully existed when instituted, but which the city code does not now permit
or conditionally permit in the zone in which the use is located. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.6.4)



   (E)   General requirements -



      (1)   Change of ownership, tenancy or management of a
nonconforming use shall not affect the nonconforming status of a use.



      (2)   A nonconforming use may be continued, provided that a
nonconforming use which ceases for a continuous period of six months shall
lose its nonconforming status, and the premises on which the nonconforming
use was located shall from then on be used for conforming uses only.



      (3)   A lot occupied by a nonconforming use may be further
developed by the addition of conforming uses and structures pursuant to the
granting of a modification permit.



      (4)   Any nonconforming use which is nonconforming only
because of the absence of a city-approved permit shall be deemed a conforming
use upon securing such permit.



      (5)   Any nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use
provided that all applicable permit requirements and standards of this
chapter are satisfied.  If a nonconforming use is converted to a conforming
use, the nonconforming use may not be resumed.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.6.5)



   (F)   Nonconforming lots - Any lot, the area, dimension or location
of which was lawful when created, but which does not conform to the present
requirements of the zoning district, shall be considered buildable for the
purposes of this chapter. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.6.6)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-51.  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide general
standards relating to fencing, building heights, zone walls, on-site
lighting, architectural features and similar provisions which generally apply
to all development within the coastal zone. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.7.1)



   (B)   Applicability and specific standards - Except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, the general standards of chapter 16 shall apply to
development in the coastal zone. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-4.7.2)



(Ord. No. 2145, 2716)



SEC. 17-52.  WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide standards
governing the installation of towers, antennae, and other wireless
communication facilities (hereinafter collectively "wireless communication
facilities") to greatly reduce or eliminate any adverse impacts on coastal
zoned properties. Specifically, the purpose of this section is to:



      (1)   Permit stealth installation of wireless communication
facilities within the coastal zones;



      (2)   Encourage the joint use of new and existing sites as a
primary option rather than the construction of additional single-use sites;



      (3)   Encourage the location of wireless communication
facilities in areas where adverse impacts to coastal zoned properties are
minimal;



      (4)   Discourage the construction of monopoles and non-stealth
facilities;



      (5)   Encourage the configuration of wireless communication
facilities to minimize adverse visual impacts through careful design (such as
the use of stealth facilities, siting, landscape screening, and other
camouflaging techniques); and



      (6)   Expand the availability of quick, effective and
efficient wireless communications services in the coastal zone.



   (B)   Applicability -



      (1)   This section applies to wireless communication
facilities that were not approved prior to the effective date of this
section, whether the application was received by the city before or after the
effective date of this section.



      (2)   This section shall not apply to wireless communication
facilities under 70 feet in height that are owned and operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio station.



   (C)   Definitions -



      (1)   ANTENNA. A device used in communications that radiates
or captures electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunication signals or
other communication signals.



      (2)   CELL SITE. A geographical area with a typical radius of
one-half mile to five miles, containing both transmitting and receiving
antennae.



      (3)   CELLULAR. Analog or digital wireless communication
technology based on systems of interconnected neighboring cell sites.



      (4)   CO-LOCATION. The locating of wireless communication
facilities from more than one provider on a single building or structure.



      (5)   ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD. The local electric and magnetic
fields that envelop the surrounding space, as by the movement and consumption
of electric power by transmission lines, household appliances and lighting.



      (6)   EQUIPMENT FACILITY. A structure containing ancillary
equipment for a wireless communication facility, including cabinets,
shelters, and similar structures.



      (7)   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.



      (8)   LATTICE TOWER. A multi-sided, open, metal frame tower.



      (9)   MANAGER. The City's Planning and Environmental Services
Manager.



      (10)   MICRO-CELL FACILITY. A small low power radio
transceiver contained in equipment cabinets with a total volume of 100 cubic
feet or less, that are either under or above ground, and up to four
directional panel antennas with dimensions no greater than two feet by two
feet or one foot by four feet or one cylindrical antenna with dimensions no
greater than six inches in diameter and five feet in height mounted on a
single pole, an existing convention utility pole or other similar support
structure.



      (11)   MONOPOLE. A single pole wireless communication facility.



      (12)   SCENIC HIGHWAY. A road, street, highway or freeway
designated as a scenic highway in the open space/conservation element of the
city's general plan.



      (13)   STEALTH FACILITY. A wireless communication facility
designed to blend into the surrounding environment, typically architecturally
integrated into a building or other concealing structure. Mounting structures
may include, but are not limited to, clock towers, bell steeples, and other
similar structures designed to camouflage or conceal the presence of antennae
or towers.



      (14)   TOWER. A structure higher than its diameter and high
relative to its surroundings, free- standing or attached to another
structure, of skeleton framework or enclosed, that is erected primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennae for wireless communication
facilities.



      (15)   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS. Personal wireless services as
defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, including cellular, personal
communication, specialized mobile radio, enhanced specialized mobile radio,
paging, and similar services.



      (16)   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. A structure, including
a tower, pole, monopole, lattice tower, water tower, building or other
structure, that supports antennae and related equipment that sends or
receives radio frequency signals.



   (D)   Approval process - Applications for all wireless communication
facilities shall be supported by information described in section 16-488(F)
of the city code. Such wireless communication facilities shall not be
constructed, installed, operated, or maintained before a development review
permit is granted or a coastal development permit is issued, as set out in
this chapter. Applicants are encouraged to submit a single application for
multiple wireless communication facilities or a single application for
multiple wireless communication facilities to be located on one site (i.e.
co-location).



      (1)   Development Review Permit - A development review permit
may be processed in accordance with section 17-57 of this chapter for the
following wireless communication facilities that do not meet the definition
of appealable development pursuant to Section 17-3 of this chapter, and that
comply with all of the development standards of this section and the zoning
district in which such facilities are to be located.



         (a)   A stealth facility located in a non-residential
coastal zone district, i.e. Coastal Neighborhood Commercial (CNC), Coastal
Dependent Industrial (CDI), Coastal Energy Facilities (EC), Coastal Oil
Development (COD), or the Harbor, Channel Islands (HCI) zones.



         (b)   A stealth facility located in the Coastal Visitor
Serving Commercial (CVC) zone district that is subordinate to a
visitor-serving commercial use on the site.



         (c)   A micro-cell facility within a public right-of-way
or utility easement.



      (2)   Coastal Development Permit - A coastal development
permit, processed in accordance with section 17-57 of this chapter, may be
issued for the following wireless communication facilities:



         (a)   A non-stealth facility in a non-residential
coastal zone district, i.e. Coastal Neighborhood Commercial (CNC), Coastal
Dependent Industrial (CDI), Coastal Energy Facilities (EC), Coastal Oil
Development (COD), or the Harbor, Channel Islands (HCI) zones.



         (b)   A non-stealth facility located in the Coastal
Visitor Serving Commercial (CVC) zone district that is subordinate to a
visitor-serving commercial use on the site.



         (c)   A stealth facility located in any coastal
residential zone district, i.e. Single-Family Beach (R-B-1), Single-Family
Water-Oriented (R-W-1), Townhouse, Water-Oriented (R-W-2), Coastal Low
Density Multiple-Family (R-2-C), Coastal Medium Density Multiple-Family
(R-3-C), Coastal Planned Unit Community (CPC), Coastal Mobile Home Park
(MHP-C), and Beachfront, Residential (R-BF) zones.



         (d)   Although strongly discouraged, a wireless
communication facility with an individual support tower (e.g. monopole or
lattice tower).



         (e)   A wireless communication facility within a
Southern California Edison (SCE) substation.



      (3)   Wireless communication facilities are prohibited within
the Coastal Resource Protection (RP) and Coastal Recreation (RC) zone
districts, unless it can be demonstrated that there is no other feasible
location that would avoid the need for wireless communication facilities to
be located in these zone districts.  Where such facilities are allowed, all
impacts must be fully mitigated.



   (E)   Co-location policy - Wireless communication facilities shall
be designed to promote site sharing and co-location, and shall comply with
the following standards:



      (1)   All new wireless communication facilities shall be
designed to accommodate co-location.



      (2)   Accessory structures, including light poles, existing
utilities and buildings, shall be utilized as co-location facilities.



   (F)   Health and safety -



      (1)    Every wireless communication facility shall be placed,
operated and maintained in a manner that fully complies with current
regulations of the FCC governing radio frequency emissions.



      (2)   All wireless communication facilities shall meet the
minimum siting distances to habitable structures required for compliance with
FCC regulations and standards governing the environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions.



      (3)   New or existing wireless communication facilities shall
not interfere with public safety telecommunications or private use
telecommunication devices.



      (4)   Wireless communication facilities shall meet current
standards and regulations of the FCC and any other agency of the State or
federal government with authority to regulate wireless communication
facilities. If such standards or regulations change, the owners of wireless
communication facilities governed by this article shall bring wireless
communication facilities into compliance with the revised standards or
regulations within six months of the effective date of the revisions, unless
a different compliance schedule is required by the controlling agency.
Failure to bring wireless communication facilities into compliance with the
revised standards or regulations shall constitute grounds for the city to
remove such facilities at the owner's expense, following a duly noticed
public hearing where it is found that such facilities are not operating in
full compliance with said revised standards and regulations.



      (5)   If applicable, mitigation measures shall be implemented
to mitigate environmental impacts associated with the facility.



   (G)   Development standards -



      (1)   Height. In all coastal zone districts, no structures,
antennae, or appurtenances associated with wireless communication facilities
shall exceed the height limitations of the subject zone district. For those
zone districts where maximum height is not specified, the maximum height for
such facilities shall not exceed the maximum height of the existing
building/structure by more than 15 feet. Height shall be measured as the
vertical distance from the grade at the base of the wireless communication
facility to the top of the wireless communication facility, or in the case of
roof mounted wireless communication facilities, from the grade directly below
the exterior base of the building to the highest point of the wireless
communication facility (inclusive of any screening device). Antennae and
other projections from the wireless communication facility shall be included
in the measurement of height.



      (2)   Setbacks. All wireless communication facilities shall
comply with the setbacks specified in the zone in which the facility is
located. For those zone districts without established setbacks, such
distances shall be set at the height of the structure for a freestanding
structure. A building-mounted facility shall be set back from habitable
structures as required by FCC regulations.



      (3)   Separation and Screening from Residential Property.
Wireless communication facilities shall be placed far enough from residential
property or be screened to mitigate visual impacts of the facilities on
residences.



      (4)   Landscaping and Screening. Wireless communication
facilities shall be landscaped and screened to comply with the requirements
of the zone and specific plan area in which they are located. The manager or
the planning commission shall have discretion to require such landscaping and
screening as may be reasonably required to mitigate visual impacts. If an
equipment screen is proposed to be located on the roof of an existing
building or structure, it shall be fully screened or incorporated into the
architectural design of the structure. Existing mature trees and natural land
forms on the site shall be preserved to the extent feasible. Vegetation that
causes interference with antennae or inhibits access to an equipment facility
may be trimmed. Existing on-site vegetation may be used in lieu of other
landscaping when approved by the manager.



      (5)   Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas.  Disturbed
areas associated with the development of a facility shall not occur within
the boundaries or buffer of any area meeting the definition of
environmentally sensitive habitat area, either identified by the certified
LCP or identified by the city through a site-specific biological survey.  An
exemption may be approved only upon showing of sufficient evidence that there
is no other feasible location(s) in the area or other alternative facility
configuration that would avoid impacts to environmentally sensitive habitat
areas.  If an exemption is approved with regard to this standard, the city
shall require the applicant to fully mitigate impacts to environmentally
sensitive habitat consistent with the provisions of the certified LCP.



      (6)   Design Standards - Wireless communication facilities
shall be designed as follows:



         (a)   In General -



            1.   Wireless communication facilities and
accessory equipment shall have subdued colors and be constructed of
non-reflective materials that blend with the materials and colors of the
surrounding areas.



            2.   Wireless communication facilities shall not
bear any signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning, or
other required seals or signs.



            3.   In scenic areas and where there are views to
or along the coast or inland waterways, wireless communication facilities
shall be sited and designed to minimize impacts to visual resources.



         (b)   Towers - All towers shall have either a galvanized
steel finish or be painted a neutral color to reduce visibility.



         (c)   Equipment Facilities -



            1.   Accessory equipment shall be located within a
building, structure, enclosure or underground vault. All rooftop equipment
shall be fully screened from view from public rights-of-ways, using
architecturally appropriate material approved by the approving authority.



            2.   In scenic areas and where there are views to
or along the coast or inland waterways, impacts to visual resources should be
minimized through the undergrounding of accessory equipment, where feasible,
unless accessory equipment is screened from view by existing, legal
structures.



      (6)   Lighting - Wireless communication facilities shall not
be artificially illuminated. Equipment facilities may have security and
safety lighting that is appropriately shielded to keep light within the
boundaries of the site.



   (H)   Removal of abandoned wireless communication facilities - A
wireless communication facility that has not operated for six continuous
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner shall remove such
facility at the owner's expense within 90 days of notice from the manager. If
the wireless communication facility is not removed within 90 days, the city
may remove such facility at the owner's expense. If there are two or more
users of a single wireless communication facility, this section shall not
apply until all users cease using such facility for six continuous months.



   (I)   Removal of wireless communication facilities within utility
right of way - A wireless communication facility that is located within any
utility right of way where undergrounding of utilities is scheduled to occur,
shall be removed at the owner's expense within six months of notice. If the
wireless communications facility is not removed within the six-month period,
the city may remove such facility at the owner's expense.



   (J)   Modifications to existing wireless communications facilities -



      (1)   Minor Modification. The manager may approve minor
modifications to existing wireless communication facilities. For purposes of
this section, a minor modification is defined as any modification to an
existing and permitted wireless communications facility that does not result
in any increase or intensification in dimensions or power output. In
addition, minor modifications shall not increase the visual impact of any
wireless communication facility.



      (2)   Major Modification. The planning commission may approve
a major modification to wireless communication facilities as an amendment to
a previously approved coastal development permit. Major modifications are any
modifications that exceed the definition of minor modifications or that the
manager does not consider to be minor modifications.



   (K)   Validation of proper operation - Within 90 days of
commencement of operation of a wireless communication facility approved after
the effective date of this section, the operator of such facility shall
provide to the manager a report prepared by a qualified engineer, verifying
that the operation of such facility is in compliance with the standards
established by the American National Standards Institute and the Institute of
Electrical and Electrical Engineers for safe human exposure to
electromagnetic fields and radio frequency radiation.



   (L)   Violations - Violation of any provision of this section is a
misdemeanor. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate offense
by a fine. In accordance with the city's bail schedule, or imprisonment for a
term not to exceed six months, or both.



(Ord. No. 2649, 2673, 2716)



ARTICLE V.  ADMINISTRATION



SEC. 17-55.  HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide for the
conduct of home occupations in residential structures in residential zones,
when the home occupations are incidental to and compatible with surrounding
residential uses.  A home occupation is gainful employment engaged in by the
occupant of a dwelling. A home occupation shall not generate frequent
customer access or have associated characteristics which would reduce other
residents' enjoyment of the neighborhood. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.1.1)



   (B)   Permit required - The conduct of a home occupation requires
the approval of a home occupation permit by the director, who may establish
additional conditions to further the intent of the Oxnard coastal land use
plan.  An application for such permit shall be in a form prescribed by and
filed with the development services department. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.1.2)



   (C)   Operating standards -



      (1)   A home occupation shall not be permitted if the home
occupation violates any section of this chapter.



      (2)   A home occupation shall not alter the appearance of the
dwelling unit.  No structural alterations shall be permitted within the
dwelling unit to separate any area used for a home occupation from the
dwelling space.  No area used for a home occupation shall be subleased or
rented to another person.



      (3)   No goods shall be sold or displayed on the premises.



      (4)   No signs are permitted for a home occupation.



      (5)   Advertising for a home occupation shall not identify the
street address of the home occupation.



      (6)   A home occupation shall be conducted indoors and
confined completely to one room within the dwelling, which room shall not
occupy an area equivalent to more than 25% of the gross area of one floor of
the dwelling.



      (7)   Use of a garage for home occupation purposes shall not
interfere with the permanent maintenance of two parking spaces.  No portion
of any other accessory structure shall be used for home occupation purposes.



      (8)   Horticulture activities may be conducted outdoors within
the rear one-third of the lot.



      (9)   A single vehicle no larger than a three-quarter ton
truck may be used in connection with a home occupation.



      (10)   A home occupation shall not encroach into any required
parking, yard or open space area.



      (11)   Parking for a vehicle used in connection with a home
occupation shall be provided in addition to parking required for the
residents.



      (12)   Activities conducted by and equipment or material used
in a home occupation shall not change the fire safety or occupancy
classifications of the premises or use utilities in amounts greater than
normally provided for residential use.



      (13)   A home occupation shall not create or cause noise,
dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare, electrical interference or other
hazards or nuisances.



      (14)   No employees other than residents of the dwelling shall
be allowed in connection with a home occupation.  Babysitters or domestic
servants shall not be considered employees of a home occupation.



      (15)   No customers or clients of a home occupation shall call
upon the premises, arriving either by vehicle or on foot.



      (16)   If a home occupation is conducted on rental property,
the property owner's authorization for the proposed use shall be obtained
prior to the issuance of a home occupation permit.



      (17)   Where the person conducting a home occupation serves as
an agent or intermediary between outside suppliers and outside customers, all
articles, except for samples, shall be received, stored and sold directly to
customers at an off-premise location.



      (18)   A home occupation shall not involve the use of material
or mechanical equipment not recognized as part of normal household or hobby
use.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.1.3)



   (D)   Revocation - A home occupation permit may be revoked if the
director finds that one or more of the following conditions exist:



      (1)   Any condition of the permit or any of the operating
standards has been violated;



      (2)   The use has become detrimental to the public health or
safety or constitutes a nuisance;



      (3)   The permit was fraudulently obtained;



      (4)   The use for which the permit was granted has ceased or
was suspended for six or more successive calendar months; and



      (5)   The condition of the premises thereof in which the home
occupation is conducted, has changed so that the use is no longer justified
under the meaning and intent of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.1.5)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-56.  TEMPORARY USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide for
short-term activities which may be appropriate when regulated so as to avoid
incompatibility between such activities and surrounding uses.  The
provisions of this article shall apply only to temporary uses within the
coastal zone. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.2.1)



   (B)   Permitted uses - A temporary use permit may be issued by the
director for the following uses, pursuant to chapter 16 of the code:



      (1)   Real estates sales offices within approved development
projects;



      (2)   Christmas tree sales lots; however, a permit shall not
be required when such sales are in conjunction with an established commercial
business holding a valid city business license and do not continue for 30
consecutive days;



      (3)   Temporary outdoor display/sales of merchandise in any
commercial zone, provided such merchandise is customarily sold on the
premises, and that such premises are utilized for a permanently established
business;



      (4)   Sale of other seasonal products, such as pumpkins,
flowers and fruit;



      (5)   Circuses and carnivals;



      (6)   Fairs, festivals, rodeos, and concerts, when not held
within premises designed to accommodate such events, such as auditoriums,
stadiums or other public assembly facilities;



      (7)   On- and off-site contractors' construction yards;



      (8)   Similar temporary uses which, in the opinion of the
director, are compatible with the zone and surrounding land uses; and



      (9)   Youth, charitable or nonprofit organization projects.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.2.2)



   (C)   Required permits - A temporary use permit approved by the
director shall be required for all uses listed in this section, issued prior
to the commencement of the use. Applications for such permits shall be
obtained from and filed with the development services department pursuant to
article V.  A permit shall not be required for events which occur in
theaters, meeting halls or other permanent public assembly facilities. 
Temporary uses may be subject to additional permits, other departmental
approvals and licenses and inspections as required by any applicable laws or
regulations. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.2.3)



   (D)   The development services director may approve a temporary use
permit application only after making all of the following findings:



      (1)   The operation of the requested use at the location
proposed and within the time period specified will not jeopardize, endanger
or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general
welfare;



      (2)   The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to
accommodate the temporary use;



      (3)   The proposed site is adequately served by streets or
highways having sufficient width and improvements to accommodate the kind and
quantity of traffic that such temporary use will or could reasonably generate;



      (4)   Adequate temporary parking to accommodate vehicular
traffic to be generated by such use will be available either on-site or at 
alternate locations acceptable to the director; and/or



      (5)   The use would not jeopardize the public peace, safety or
general welfare, or be injurious or detrimental to properties adjacent to, or
in the vicinity of, the proposed location of the activity.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.2.4)



   (E)   Conditions of approval - In approving an application for a
temporary use permit, the director may impose such conditions as are deemed
necessary to ensure that the use will conform to the findings required by
subsection (D) above.  These conditions may address any pertinent factors
affecting the operation of the temporary use, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Provision of temporary parking facilities, including
vehicular access and egress;



      (2)   Regulation of nuisance factors such as, but not limited
to, the prevention of glare or direct illumination of adjacent properties,
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, and heat;



      (3)   Regulation of temporary buildings, structures and
facilities, including placement, height and size, location of equipment and
open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards;



      (4)   Provision of sanitary and medical facilities;



      (5)   Provision of solid waste collection and disposal;



      (6)   Provision of security and safety measures;



      (7)   Regulation of signs;



      (8)   Regulation of operating hours and days, including
limitation of the duration of the temporary use to a shorter time period than
that requested;



      (9)   Submission of a performance bond or other security to
ensure that any temporary facilities or structures used for the temporary use
will be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event
and that the property will be restored to its former condition;



      (10)   Submission of a site plan indicating any information
required by this chapter;



      (11)   A requirement for compliance with applicable provisions
of other ordinances; and



      (12)   Other conditions which will ensure the operation of the
proposed temporary use in an orderly and efficient manner and in accordance
with the intent and purpose of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.2.5)



   (F)   Revocation - The director may revoke a temporary use permit on
finding that one or more of the following conditions exists:



      (1)   Circumstances have changed to such a degree that one or
more of the findings contained in subsection (D) above can no longer be made;



      (2)   The temporary use permit was fraudulently obtained;
and/or



      (3)   One or more conditions of the temporary use permit have
not been complied with.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.2.6)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-57.  COASTAL PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to describe
procedures and various land use permits that may be applied for within the
coastal zone, and further to provide for amendments to the land use and
zoning designations on properties where amendments are warranted. At the time
of application, a review of the location, design, configuration and impact of
the proposal shall be conducted by comparing the proposal to established
standards, consistent with the policies of the Oxnard coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.3.1)



   (B)   Applicability - The following eight categories of review
represent the primary range of procedures for addressing land use within
Oxnard's Coastal Zone:



      (1)   Exempt development - The following types of development
are exempt from the requirement for a development review permit or coastal
development permit, and are permitted, subject to the provisions of this
chapter and the issuance of a zone clearance where appropriate:



         (a)   Improvements to existing single-family residences
not located on a beach, wetlands, or seaward of the mean high tide line,
except for improvements which require a coastal development permit because
they involve a risk of adverse environmental effects as set out in the Code
of Regulations, Title 14, Section 13250(b)(2), (3), (4) and (6);



         (b)   Lot line adjustments not resulting in the creation
of any new lot;



         (c)   Repair and maintenance activities that do not
result in addition to or enlargement or expansion of, the object of such
repair or maintenance activity, or which do not include extraordinary methods
of repair and maintenance described in Sections 13252(1)(A), (B), (C), and
(D), 13252(2)(A), (B), and (C), and 13252(3)(A) and (B) of the California
Coastal Regulations;



         (d)   Fences and walls (not including seawalls) of six
feet or less in height except within an appealable area or when such fence or
wall will obstruct public access or view to the beach;



         (e)   Installation of irrigation lines;



         (f)   Maintenance dredging of existing navigation
channels to original contours or moving dredge material from such channels to
a disposal area outside the coastal zone, pursuant to a permit from the
United States Army Corps of Engineers;



         (g)   Installation, testing, placement in service or
replacement of any necessary utility connection between an existing service
facility and any development that has been granted a coastal development
permit;



         (h)   Replacement of any structure other than a public
works facility destroyed by natural disaster.  Such replacement structure
shall conform to applicable existing zoning requirements, shall be for the
same use as the destroyed structure, shall not exceed either the floor area,
height or bulk of the destroyed structure by more than 5% and shall be sited
in the same location on the effective property as the destroyed structure; and



         (i)   Home occupation permits.



      (2)   Categorical exclusions -



         (a)   The following list types of development within
prescribed geographical areas are exempt from the permit provisions outlined
in this section, provided that a zone clearance is obtained where appropriate:



         (b)   Construction of walls, accessory structures,
additions to, and new single-family residences on existing lots, including
additions to townhomes, patio homes and condominiums in the following areas:



            (i)   Oxnard Shores - The developed areas located
in the area bounded by the first public road easterly of the Pacific Ocean on
the west, Fifth Street on the north, Harbor Boulevard on the east, and
Channel Islands Boulevard on the south.



            (ii)   Oxnard Dunes - The developed areas located
in the area bounded by Fifth Street on the north, the Edison Canal on the
east, Wooley Road on the south, and Harbor Boulevard on the west.



            (iii)   Mandalay Bay/Inland Waterway - The
developed areas located in the area bounded by Eastborne Bay and Hemlock
Street on the north, Victoria Avenue on the east, Channel Islands Boulevard
on the south, and Harbor Boulevard on the west.



      (3)   Emergency permits - An emergency permit may be issued
when immediate action by a person or a public agency performing a public
service is required to protect life and property from imminent danger or to
restore, repair or maintain public works utilities or services destroyed,
damaged or interrupted by natural disaster, serious accident, or other cases
of emergency.  The requirement to obtain a coastal development permit under
this section may be waived by the executive director of the California
Coastal Commission, pursuant to the Pub. Res. Code, Section 30611.



      (4)   Development review permit - A development review permit
is required of all development not classified as categorically exempt,
excluded development, emergency permit, or subject to a coastal development
permit.  This type of permit is required of all permitted uses, as
identified in the individual coastal sub-zones of this chapter except for
those in excluded areas, and is considered to be a ministerial decision.



      (5)   Coastal development permit - A coastal development
permit is required for all conditionally permitted uses, lot splits and
subdivisions within the individual coastal sub-zones requiring a
discretionary decision by the city, as well as all projects meeting the
definition of appealable developments, pursuant to the Pub. Res. Code,
Section 30603(a), as referenced by section 17-3 of this chapter.



      (6)   Variances - A request for a variance may be made
whenever a property owner seeks adjustment to the development standards of
this chapter which would otherwise prevent the reasonable use of property in
the same manner that other property of like character in the same vicinity
and zone can be used.  A variance shall not be granted which confers a
special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in
the same vicinity and coastal sub-zone in which the subject property is
situated or which authorizes a use or activity which is not otherwise
expressly authorized by the zoning regulations governing the parcel of
property.  Variances shall be required for adjustments to the development
standards of this chapter for which an administrative modification may not be
granted.



      (7)   Administrative modification - An administrative
modification shall be required for routine and minor adjustments to specific
development standards which may be approved by the director in the following
situations:



         (a)   To allow a decrease not exceeding ten percent in
required setbacks or other open space requirements;



         (b)   To allow walls, fences, or hedges to exceed the
height limit regulations by a maximum of ten percent, and to permit them to
be located within setback areas where consistent with safety and neighborhood
appearance;



         (c)   To allow an increase not exceeding ten percent in
maximum lot coverage regulations; and



         (d)   To allow decreases of not more than ten percent of
any development standard related to on-site improvements, excluding public
access, imposed in a coastal development permit.



      (8)   Coastal land use plan, zoning map and text amendments -
A procedure for amending Oxnard's certified local coastal program, which
consists of a land use plan, land use and zoning maps, zoning and other
ordinances, and special programs pursuant to Cal. Pub. Res. Code, Section
30514.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.3.2)



   (C)   Application procedures - The following section outlines the
procedures required to process the aforementioned eight categories of
review.  In all instances an application for each of the categories shall be
filed pursuant to section 17-61.



      (1)   Exempt development - The director shall determine
whether a development is exempt at the time the application for development
within the coastal zone is submitted.  This determination shall be made with
reference to the certified Oxnard coastal land use plan, including any maps,
categorical exclusions, land use designations and the original permit and
appeals jurisdiction map adopted by the coastal commission.  The following
procedure shall be used to determine the appropriate designation for the
development:



         (a)   The director shall determine what type of
development is proposed and shall inform the applicant of the
determination.  The director shall provide written notice of the
determination to residents within 100 feet of the development and to persons
known to be interested.  An exemption shall not become effective until the
director has reported the determination to the commission at its next
regularly scheduled meeting.



         (b)   If the determination of the director is challenged
by any person or if the director wishes to have a commission determination as
to the appropriate designation, the director shall schedule the item before
the commission at the next available public hearing.



         (c)   If the determination of the commission is
challenged by the applicant or an interested person, or if the city wishes to
have a coastal commission determination as to the appropriate designation,
the city shall contact the coastal commission by telephone and request an
executive director's opinion.



         (d)   The executive director shall, within two working
days of the city's request, or upon completion of a site inspection where
such inspection is warranted, transmit a determination as to whether the
development is exempt.  Where, after the executive director's investigation,
the executive director's determination is not in accordance with the city
determination, the coastal commission shall hold a hearing for purposes of
determining the appropriate designation for the area.  The coastal
commission shall schedule the hearing on the determination for the next
commission meeting (in the appropriate geographic region of the State)
following the city request.



         (e)   The city shall maintain a record of all permits
issued for exemptions which shall be made available to the coastal commission
or any interested person upon request and may be in the form of any record of
permits issued currently maintained by the city, provided that such record
includes the applicant's name, an indication that the project is located in
the coastal zone, the location of the project and a brief description of the
project.



      (2)   Categorical exclusions - All of the procedures outlined
for exemption shall apply to categorical exclusions, consistent with Cal.
Pub. Res. Code, Section 30610 and Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 14,
Sections 13240 through 13244.



      (3)   Emergency permits -



         (a)   Investigation - Upon receipt of an application for
an emergency permit, the director shall verify the facts including the
existence and the nature of the emergency to assure the emergency is a
sudden, unexpected occurrence demanding immediate action to prevent or
mitigate loss or damage to life, health, property or essential public
service.  Applications for an emergency permit shall be made by letter to
the director, or in person, or by telephone if time does not allow for
written or personal application. The following information shall be provided
to the director at the time of the request:



            (i)   Nature of the emergency;



            (ii)   Cause of the emergency, insofar as this can
be established;



            (iii)   Location of the emergency;



            (iv)   The remedial, protective, or preventative
work required to deal with emergency; and



            (v)   The circumstances during the emergency that
appeared to justify the cause of action proposed to be taken, including the
probable consequences of failing to take action.



         (b)   Findings - Based upon information in the public
record, the director may approve and/or modify an emergency permit
application, in whole or in part, with or without conditions only if all the
following findings of fact are made:



            (i)   An emergency exists that requires action
more quickly than permitted by the procedures for administrative permits or
for regular permits and the work will be completed within 30 days unless
otherwise specified by the terms of the permit.



            (ii)   Public comment on the proposed emergency
action has been reviewed if time allows.



            (iii)   The work proposed will be consistent with
policies of the certified Oxnard coastal land use plan.  Each emergency
permit shall specify the time period in which a coastal permit shall be
applied for to allow continuation of the emergency related use or activity.



      (4)   Development review permits -



         (a)   Investigation - The purpose of investigating a
development review permit application is to allow the development services
department to evaluate new construction projects for uses allowed by right
within their respective sub-zones which because of the type, scale or
location of the development requires comprehensive review.  Investigation
will provide facts to assure that, with appropriate conditions, new or
modified uses will harmonize with existing or potential development in the
surrounding neighborhood; avoid excessive similarity or dissimilarity in the
appearance of buildings; and ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the
general public.



         (b)   Findings - Based upon information in the public
record, the director may approve or modify a development review permit
application in whole or in part with or without conditions after making all
of the following findings of fact:



            (i)   The proposed use is permitted within the
subject sub-zone and complies with all of the applicable provisions of this
chapter.



            (ii)   The proposed use would not impair the
integrity and character of the subject sub-zone.



            (iii)   The subject site would be physically
suitable for the land use being proposed and the proposed use will protect
and maintain coastal resources including environmentally sensitive areas,
adjacent to the project site.  The proposed use would be consistent with all
policies of the Oxnard coastal land use plan.



         (c)   If the director does not make the foregoing
findings, the director shall deny the application for a development review
permit.



      (5)   Coastal development permit -



         (a)   Investigation - Upon submittal of a complete
application, the development services department shall evaluate the proposal
and prepare a comprehensive report containing all pertinent facts, a list of
proposed findings, and a recommendation supported with conditions where
appropriate for submittal to the commission.



         (b)   Findings - Based upon information in the public
record, the commission may approve or modify a coastal development permit
application, in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only after
making all of the following findings:



            (i)   The proposed used is conditionally permitted
within the subject sub-zone and complies with all of the applicable
provisions of this chapter.



            (ii)   The proposed use would not impair the
integrity and character of the subject sub-zone.



            (iii)   The location and intensity of use of the
subject site would be physically suitable and would protect and maintain
adjacent coastal resources.



            (iv)   The proposed use would be compatible with
the land uses presently on the subject site.



            (v)   The proposed use would be compatible with
existing and future land uses within the sub-zone and the general area in
which the proposed use would be located.



            (vi)   There are adequate public services for the
proposed use, including, but not limited to, fire and police protection,
water, sanitation and public utilities and services to ensure that the
proposed use would not be detrimental to public health and safety.



            (vii)   The proposed use will provide a type and
level of public access consistent with the access policies and standards of
the certified Oxnard coastal land use plan.



            (viii)   The proposed use would be appropriate in
light of an established need, based upon the underlying goals and objectives
of specific Oxnard coastal land use plan policies, applicable to the proposed
location.



            (ix)   The proposed use would be consistent with
all of the applicable policies of the certified Oxnard coastal land use plan.



      (6)   Variances -



         (a)   Investigation - Investigation shall be conducted
in accordance with that specified for coastal development permits.



         (b)   Findings - Based upon information in the public
record, the commission may approve and/or modify a variance application in
whole or in part, with or without conditions, only after making all of the
following findings:



            (i)   Strict interpretation and enforcement of the
specified regulation deprives the subject property of privileges enjoyed by
other property in the vicinity and under the identical coastal sub-zone;



            (ii)   There are exceptional or extraordinary
circumstances or conditions applicable to the subject property involved that
do not apply to other property in the vicinity and under the identical
coastal sub-zone;



            (iii)   Strict interpretation and enforcement of
the specified regulations would deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed
by the owners of other property in the vicinity and under the identical
coastal sub-zone;



            (iv)   The granting of the variance would not be
detrimental to the protection and maintenance of adjacent resources or to
public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to property or
improvements in the vicinity;



            (v)   The variance would not adversely affect
access to or along the shoreline, including the physical and visual qualities
of access;



            (vi)   The variance would not allow a use or
activity not expressly authorized in the sub-zone applicable to the subject
property; and



            (vii)   The proposed variance would be consistent
with all applicable policies of the certified Oxnard coastal land use plan.



      (7)   Administrative modification -



         (a)   Investigation - Upon submittal of a complete
application for minor adjustments to specific development standards or
conditions of approval of coastal permits, the department shall evaluate the
proposal, consistent with the procedures for a development review permit.



         (b)   Findings - Based upon information in the public
record, the director may approve or modify an application for administrative
modification in whole or in part after making all the findings of fact
required to approve a coastal development review permit.



         (c)   Denial - If the director does not make such
findings, the director shall deny the application.



      (8)   Coastal land use plan, zoning map, and zoning ordinance
amendments -



         (a)   Initiation - Amendments to the certified coastal
land use plan may be initiated only in the following manner:



            (i)   A resolution of intention of the commission;



            (ii)   A resolution of intention of the city
council; or



            (iii)   An application from any other person or
agency pursuant to section 17-61.



         (b)   Investigation - Upon submittal of a complete
application or proper initiation, the development services department shall
evaluate the proposal and prepare a comprehensive report consistent with the
procedures outlined for coastal development permits, and those originally
followed in the preparation of the Oxnard coastal land use plan.



         (c)   Findings - Following a public hearing on the
application for amendment, the commission and city council shall record their
recommendation and decision, respectively, in writing and shall recite
therein the findings of fact upon which the recommendation or decision is
based.  The commission and city council may recommend approval or
modification or may approve or modify the application for amendment in whole
or in part only after making all of the following findings:



            (i)   The proposed amendment to a zoning map or
ordinance would be consistent with the current certified coastal land use
plan or said coastal land use plan shall be amended concurrently in order to
maintain consistency pursuant to the coastal act.



            (ii)   The application for amendment has been
processed in accordance with procedures required by section 17-58.



            (iii)   Cumulative amendments or changes shall
maintain or enhance the coastal resources as identified and protected in the
originally certified coastal land use plan.



            (iv)   The proposed land use plan, zoning map
designation or zoning ordinance amendment would be appropriate in light of an
established need for the requested amendment at the time and location
anticipated by said amendment.



            (v)   The proposed amendment would not be
detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience or welfare.



            (vi)   The proposed amendment maintains or
enhances the provisions for public access within the coastal zone.



         (d)   Number of amendments permitted - Amendments to the
coastal land use plan, including changes in land use and designations and
zoning and plan text amendments, shall be considered and permitted no more
than three times per calendar year.  The development services department
shall establish a schedule and procedures for such amendments.



         (e)   The proposed amendment shall not take effect until
certified by the coastal commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.3.3)



   (D)   Reapplication conference - A prospective applicant or agent
may request a preapplication conference with the director or staff member
prior to formal submittal of an application for a coastal permit.  At such
conference, the designated planner shall acquaint the property owner with the
Oxnard coastal land use plan and requirements applicable to the subject
property. If review of a sketch plan provided by the applicant reveals
deficiencies, the designated planner shall suggest revisions that should be
made before submitting an application.  The designated planner shall
exercise discretion in granting requests for such conferences so as not to
impinge upon other staff duties.  A fee for such conferences may be
required. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.3.4)



   (E)   Use of property before final decision - No building permit
shall be issued for any building or use involved in an application or
approval of any development permit required herein until and unless the same
has become final, pursuant to section 17-58. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.3.5)



   (F)   Notice after city fails to act -



      (1)   Notification by applicant - If the city has failed to
act on an application within the time limits set forth in Cal. Gov't Code,
Sections 65950 through 65957.1, thereby approving development by operation of
law, the person claiming a right to proceed pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code,
Sections 65950 through 65957.1 shall notify, in writing, the city and the
coastal commission of his/her claim that the development has been approved by
operation of law.  Such notice shall specify the application which is
claimed to be approved.



      (2)   Notification by the city - When the city or a court of
law determines that the time limits established pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code,
Sections 65950 through 65957.1 have expired, the city shall, within seven
working days of such determination, notify the coastal commission and any
person entitled to receive notice pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations, Title
14, Section 13571(a), that the application has been approved by operation of
law, and, where applicable, that the application may be appealed to the
coastal commission, pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section
13110.  The appeal period for a project approved by operation of law shall
begin to run only upon receipt of the notice in the coastal commission office.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.3.6)



   (G)   Expiration - A coastal permit, excluding an emergency permit,
shall expire 24 months from the date of issuance if the use, building, or
structure for which the permit has been issued has not been established or
commenced or for a length of time equal to the time limits provided for a
concurrently approved land division, pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Section
66463.5 (State Subdivision Map Act).  Each permit shall contain a statement
that any request for an extension of time to establish said use shall be
applied for prior to the expiration of the permit, and shall be limited to a
maximum of 12 additional months for any one application. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.3.7)



   (H)   Compliance with conditions of approval - To assure continued
compliance with the provisions of this section, a coastal permit may be
conditioned to establish a specific time limit for operation at the end of
which time the approved use shall be subject to review by the commission. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.3.8)



   (I)   Permit amendment - A permittee may submit an application for
an amendment to a permit.  An action on the application shall be
accomplished in the same manner as specified by this chapter for initial
approval. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.3.9)



   (J)   Reapplication - No new application for any permit or variance
shall be accepted or acted upon within one year of a denial by the commission
or the city council of a similar application covering substantially the same
real property and requesting approval of substantially the same project
unless the commission or the city council permits such reapplication after
finding that one or more of the following applies:



      (1)   New evidence material to the denial will be presented
that was unavailable or unknown to the applicant at the previous hearings and
which the applicant could not have been discovered in the exercise of
reasonable diligence;



      (2)   There has been a substantial and permanent change of
circumstances since the previous hearings, which materially affect the
applicant's real property; and/or



      (3)   A mistake in fact or law was made at the previous
hearings which was a material factor in the denial of the previous
application.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.3.10)



   (K)   Revocation - The commission on its own motion or on direction
of the city council shall hold a public hearing concerning revocation of a
permit granted under or pursuant to this chapter.  Notice of such hearing
shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city
and shall be served in writing either in person or by registered mail on the
owner and operator of the property for which such permit was granted at least
ten days prior to such public hearing.  A permit may be revoked if the
commission finds that one or more of the following conditions exist:



      (1)   Circumstances have changed to such a degree that one or
more of the original findings of fact adopted by the approving authority can
no longer be made;



      (2)   The permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner;



      (3)   The use for which the permit was granted had ceased or
was suspended for six or more successive calendar months;



      (4)   One or more of the conditions of the permit have not
been complied with; and/or



      (5)   The use for which the permit was granted has been so
exercised as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or as to
constitute a nuisance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.3.11)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-58.  HEARINGS AND APPEALS.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide minimum
procedures for public hearings and to provide recourse if an applicant or
interested party is aggrieved by any requirements, decision or determination
made by the director, commission or city council in the administration or
enforcement of this chapter, including final action taken on any application
that is appealable to the coastal commission. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.4.1)



   (B)   Applicability - The determination of whether a project is
nonappealable or appealable for purposes of notice, hearing, and appeals
procedures shall be made by the director at the time the application is
submitted.  This determination shall be made with reference to the certified
Oxnard coastal land use plan, including any maps, categorical exclusions,
land use designations, and zoning ordinances which are adopted as part of the
coastal land use plan. Challenges to this determination shall be resolved
pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section 13569. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.4.2)



   (C)   Hearing and notice requirements - Specific requirements for
hearing and notice for each permit category as follows:



      (1)   For exempt development or categorical exclusions, the
director shall provide written notice of his/her determination to residents
within 100 feet of the development and to persons known to be interested. 
The exemption or categorical exclusion shall not become effective until the
director has reported his/her determination to the commission at its next
regularly scheduled meeting.



      (2)   For emergency permits, the director shall provide public
notice of the proposed emergency action with the extent and type of notice
determined on the basis of the nature of the emergency, consistent with Cal.
Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section 30624.  Following issuance of an
emergency coastal development permit, the director shall inform the council
and the coastal commission, in writing, of the nature of the emergency and
the work involved, and shall provide copies of this report to any person
requesting a copy.  Each emergency permit shall specify the time period in
which a coastal permit shall be applied for to allow continuation of the
emergency use or activity.  This period shall not exceed three months.



      (3)   At least ten days prior to decision on the applications
for development review permits or administrative modifications, the director
shall provide notice of the pending development review by first class mail
addressed to all persons who have requested to be on the mailing list for
that development project or for coastal decisions within the city's
jurisdiction, and to all property owners within 300 feet of the perimeter of
the parcel on which the development is proposed and to the coastal
commission.  The notice shall contain the following information:



         (a)   A statement that the development is within the
coastal zone;



         (b)   The date of filing of the application and the name
of the applicant;



         (c)   The case number assigned to the application;



         (d)   A description of the development and its proposed
location;



         (e)   The date and time when, and the place at which,
the application shall be heard by the city;



         (f)   A brief description of the general procedure of
the city concerning the submission of public comments either in writing or
orally prior to the city's decision; and



         (g)   A statement that a public comment period of
sufficient time to allow for the submission of comments by mail, will be held
prior to the city's decision.



      (4)   Review of applications for coastal development permits
and variances shall be conducted by the commission with notice being given at
least ten days prior to the scheduled public hearing in the following manner:



         (a)   Notice shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation;



         (b)   Notice by first class mail to any person who has
filed a written request therefor;



         (c)   Notice by first class mail to property owners
within 300 feet and residents within 100 feet of the proposed project;



         (d)   Notice by first class mail to the coastal
commission;



         (e)   The notice shall contain the following information:



            (i)   A statement that the development is within
the coastal zone;



            (ii)   The name of the applicant;



            (iii)   The case number assigned to the
application;



            (iv)   A description of the development and its
proposed location; and



            (v)   The date and time when, and the place at
which the application shall be heard by the city.



         (f)   A brief description of the general procedure of
the city concerning the conduct of public hearings; and



         (g)   The system for city and coastal commission appeals
including any fees required.



      (5)   The Commission shall hear applications for hearings on
land use plans, zoning maps, and zoning ordinance amendments and make a
recommendation for final determination by the city council.



         (a)   Notice of each public hearing shall be given at
least ten days prior to each hearing in the same manner as prescribed for
coastal development permits, except, in the event that the number of owners
to whom notice would be sent is greater than 1,000, the city may provide
notice by placing a one-quarter page display advertisement in a newspaper of
general circulation published and circulated in the city.  The notice shall
contain the same information as prescribed for coastal development permits.



         (b)   The commission's recommendation shall be made by
resolution carried by the affirmative vote of a majority of its total voting
members. The resolution shall be accompanied by a statement outlining the
commission's reasons and required findings for such recommendation.  Within
40 days of receipt of the recommendation of the commission, the city council
shall hold a public hearing on the matter after giving notice of the time and
place of the hearing with the city council shall be given in the same manner
provided for notice of the hearing by the commission.  The city shall assure
the availability of documents related to the noticed item for public review
prior to the scheduled public hearing.  The city council may approve, modify
or disapprove the recommendation of the commission. Any modification desired
by the city council shall first be referred back to the commission for a
report and recommendation, but the commission shall not be required to hold a
public hearing thereon.  Failure of the commission to report within 40 days
of the referral or such longer period as may be designated by the city
council shall be deemed to be a recommendation for approval of the proposed
modification.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.4.3)



   (D)   Notice of continued public hearing - If a decision on a
coastal permit is continued to a time which has not been stated in the
initial notice or at the public hearing, notice of the continued hearing
shall be provided in the same manner and within the same time limits as
outlined in subsection (C) above. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.4.4)



   (E)   Notice of final action - Within ten days of a city decision on
any permit application, the city shall provide notice of its action by first
class mail to the applicant, the coastal commission and any persons who
specifically requested notice of such final action by submitting a
self-addressed stamped envelope to the city.  Such notice shall include
conditions of approval and written findings and the procedures for appeal to
the coastal commission.  Any amendment to the Oxnard coastal land use plan
shall not take effect until the amendment has been certified by the coastal
commission.  Therefore, any approval by the city of an amendment to the
coastal land use plan, zoning map, or zoning text shall be submitted to the
coastal commission within 14 working days of the final approval by the city
council in accordance with Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 14, Sections 30512
and 30513. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.4.5)



   (F)   Finality of decision - A city decision on any application
subject to this article shall be deemed final when:



      (1)   The city's decision on the application has been made and
all required findings have been adopted, including specific factual findings
supporting the legal conclusions that the proposal is or is not in conformity
with the certified Oxnard coastal land use plan and, where applicable, the
public access and recreation policies of Chapter 3 of the Coastal Act.



      (2)   All rights of appeal to city appellate bodies, as
established in subsections (G) and (H) below have been exhausted, as defined
in Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section 13573.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.4.6)



   (G)   Effective date of finality of decision - The city's final
decision on an application for an appealable development shall become
effective after the ten working day period for appeal to the coastal
commission has expired or after the twenty-first calendar day following the
final city action, unless any of the following occur:



      (1)   An appeal is filed with the coastal commission in
accordance with Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section 13111;



      (2)   The notice of final city action is not received in the
coastal commission office and/or is not consistent with the provisions of
subsection (E) above or distributed to interested parties in time to allow
for a ten working day appeal period within the 21 days after the city
decision.  Where any of the circumstances outlined above occur, the coastal
commission shall, within five working days of receiving notice of that
circumstance, notify the city and the applicant that the effective date of
the city action has been suspended.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.4.7)



   (H)   Appeals - The purpose of this section is to provide procedures
for appeals to the commission and city council and to establish criteria for
developments that may be appealed to the coastal commission. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.4.8)



   (I)   Appeal of decisions of the director to the commission -



      (1)   The decision of the director on the issuance, revocation
or modification of any coastal permit may be appealed to the commission by
the applicant or any aggrieved person.  The appeal application must be filed
with the secretary of the commission within ten working days following notice
of the decision of the director to the applicant.



      (2)   The appellant shall state specifically in the appeal in
what respects the decision of the director is not in accordance with the
purposes of this chapter, is inconsistent with the Oxnard coastal land use
plan, or is based on an error or abuse of discretion by the director.



      (3)   Prior to the hearing on the appeal, the director shall
transmit to the commission copies of the permit application, including all
maps, data and a statement setting forth the reasons for the director's
decision.



      (4)   The commission shall affirm, reverse or modify the
decision of the director at a public hearing.  Notice of the time and place
of the public hearing shall be given in the manner prescribed in this chapter
for coastal development permits.  Notice shall also be mailed to the
appellant.



      (5)   The decisions of the commission on appeals of the
director's actions shall be final.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.4.9)



   (J)   Appeal of decisions of the commission to the city council -



      (1)   The decision of the commission on permits which were
initially heard by the commission may be appealed to the city council by the
applicant, an aggrieved person or any member of the city council.  The
appeal must be filed with the city clerk within ten working days of the date
of the commission's decision.



      (2)   The appellant shall state specifically in the appeal in
what respects the decision of the commission is not in accordance with the
purposes of this chapter, is inconsistent with the Oxnard coastal land use
plan or is based on an error or an abuse of discretion by the commission.



      (3)   Prior to the hearing on the appeal, the city clerk shall
notify the commission that an appeal has been filed, after which the
commission shall transmit to the city council copies of the application,
including all maps, data, and a statement of findings setting forth the
reasons for the commission's decision.



      (4)   The city council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the
decision of the commission at a regular public hearing.  Notice of the time
and place of the public hearing shall be given in a manner prescribed in this
article for coastal development permits.  Notice shall also be mailed to the
appellant.



      (5)   The decision of the city council on appeals of the
commission's action shall be final.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.4.10)



   (K)   Appeals to the coastal commission -



      (1)   Pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section
30603(a), appeal of an action by the city council on an “appealable”
development may be filed with the coastal commission within ten working days
of the decision of the city council by the applicant, an aggrieved person or
any two members of the coastal commission.



      (2)   Only the following coastal permit applications are
appealable to the coastal commission after local appeals are exhausted:



         (a)   Developments approved by the city between the sea
and the first public road paralleling the sea within 300 feet of an inland
extent of any beach, or of the mean high tide line of the sea where there is
no beach, whichever is the greater distance as indicated on the official city
appeal zone maps on file with the development services department; and



         (b)   Developments approved by the city not included
within subsection (a) above, located on tidelands, submerged lands, public
trust lands, within 100 feet of any wetland, estuary, stream, or within 300
feet of any top of the seaward face of any coastal bluff, as indicated on the
official city appeal zone map or as determined by State Lands Commission.



         (c)   Any development which constitutes a major public
works project or a major energy facility.



      (3)   Grounds of appeal.



         (a)   The grounds of appeal for any permit application
appealable under subsection (K)(2)(a) above shall be limited to one or more
of the following:



            (i)   The development fails to provide adequate
physical access or public or private commercial use or interferes with such
uses;



            (ii)   The development fails to protect public
views from any public road or recreation area to and along the coast;



            (iii)   The development is not compatible with the
established physical scale of the area;



            (iv)   The development may significantly alter
existing natural land forms; and



            (v)   The development does not comply with
shoreline erosion and geologic setback requirements.



         (b)   The grounds of appeal for any permit application
appealable under subsections (K)(2)(b) or (c) above shall be limited to
whether the proposed development is in conformity with the Oxnard certified
coastal program.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.4.11)



   (L)   Exhaustion of city appeals - Pursuant to Cal. Code of
Regulations, Title 14, Section 13573, an appellant shall be deemed to have
exhausted local appeals for purposes of Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 14,
Section 13111 and shall be qualified as an aggrieved person where the
applicant has pursued his/her appeal to the city appellate body as required
by city appeal procedures. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.4.12)



(Ord. No. 2716)



SEC. 17-59.  INTERPRETATION OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to facilitate
interpretation of the provisions of this chapter by clarifying terms used in
this chapter. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.5.1)



   (B)   Construction.  When used in this chapter, the words "shall,"
"will," and "is to" are always mandatory and not discretionary.  The words
"should" or "may" are permissive.  Present tense includes the past and
future tenses, and the future tense includes the past.  The singular number
includes the plural and the plural the singular. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.5.2)



   (C)   Time of day.  Whenever a certain hour or time of day is
specified in this chapter or any permit, condition of approval, or notice
issued or given as set forth in this chapter, such hour shall be standard
time or daylight savings time whichever is in current use in the city. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.5.3)



   (D)   Number of days.  Whenever a number of days is specified in
this chapter or any permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given
as set forth in this chapter, such number of days shall be deemed to be
consecutive days. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.5.4)



   (E)   Rounding of quantities.  Whenever this chapter requires
consideration of distances, parking spaces or other aspects of development,
or the physical environment expressed in numerical quantities which are
fractions of whole numbers, such numbers are to be rounded to the nearest
highest whole number when the fraction is 0.5 or more and to the next lowest
whole number when the fraction is less than 0.5 except as otherwise noted in
this chapter.  In the case of the number of dwelling units, the numerical
quantities which are fractions of whole numbers shall be rounded to the next
lowest whole number in all such instances. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.5.5)



(Ord. No. 2716)



SEC. 17-60.  ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to provide for
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.  Any permits granted by the
city shall be monitored to ensure compliance with any conditions of approval,
to promote the city's planning efforts, to protect the public health, safety
and welfare of the community, and ensure full compliance with the policies
and standards of the certified Oxnard coastal land use plan. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.6.1)



   (B)   Responsibility - The development services department shall be
responsible for monitoring and enforcing conditions and standards imposed on
all land use permits granted by the city as outlined in this chapter.  Any
use which is established, operated, erected, moved, altered, enlarged or
maintained, contrary to the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to
be unlawful and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties set forth in
chapters 1 and 16 of the city code, or revocation procedures initiated
pursuant to the following sections of this chapter:



      (1)   Section 17-55, home occupations;



      (2)   Section 17-56, temporary use permits; and



      (3)   Section 17-57, coastal permit procedures.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.6.2)



(Ord. No. 2034, 2716)



SEC. 17-61.  APPLICATIONS AND FEES.



   (A)   Purpose - The purpose of this section is to prescribe the
process for filing applications for permits, amendments and approvals when
required by this chapter. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.7.1)



   (B)   Filing - Application for permits, amendments, and approvals
shall be filed with the development services department on an application
form prescribed by the development services department, together with all
required plans, maps, and such other materials as are required by the
development services department.  Applications shall be filed and processed
as described in section 17-4 and sections 17-30 through 17-41 of this
chapter.  Application shall be signed by the owners of the property for
which the permit is sought or by an authorized agent or an owner in escrow
with written authorization of the legal owner.  The lessee of a parcel of
land upon which a permit is sought may file an application that is
accompanied by written authorization of such filing by the owner of such
property.  In addition, prior to issuance of a coastal development permit or
variance, the legal applicant shall demonstrate the authority to comply with
all conditions of approval. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.7.2)



   (C)   Fees - The city council shall by resolution establish a
schedule of fees for permits, approvals and other matters arising under this
chapter.  The schedule of fees may be changed or modified only by resolution
of the city council.  Until all applicable fees have been paid in full, no
action shall be taken on any application, appeal, or other matter arising
under this chapter. 



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-5.7.3)



(Ord. No. 2716)



ARTICLE VI.  TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS



SEC. 17-65.  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   The purpose of this article is to provide a procedure to
preserve significant resource areas within the city, maximum public access
and recreation at and near the ocean, and control development in potentially
hazardous areas by the transfer of development rights from properties in such
areas to qualified properties in other parts of the city.



   (B)   The transfer of development rights is found to be a reasonable
approach to achieve such purposes for the following reasons:



      (1)   A transfer of development rights system was determined
to be feasible in a study entitled “Oxnard Shores Restoration Program
Project Feasibility Report,” dated July 18, 1983, and the city council
concurs in such determination; and



      (2)   The transfer of development rights program has been
incorporated into the Oxnard Shores, beach and development plan and is
consistent with the general plan and local coastal program; and



      (3)   The transfer of development rights program will assist
the city in implementing its responsibilities under the local coastal
program; and



      (4)   The authority to establish a transfer of development
rights program is within the scope of the police power granted by Article XI,
Section 7 of the State Constitution.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-6.1.0)  (Ord. No. 2006, 2716)



SEC. 17-66.  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS - The potential value of development on a
parcel of real property, measured in dwelling units or units of commercial or
industrial space.  This chapter does not create any such potential that does
not otherwise exist.



   (B)   SENDING AREA -



      (1)   An area designated as a sensitive resource area;



      (2)   An area containing potential development hazards in the
city's adopted coastal land use plan; or



      (3)   Other areas designated by the city council from which
development rights may be transferred. 



   (C)   SENDING PARCEL OR SITE - A parcel or site located in a sending
area.



   (D)   RECEIVING AREA - An area designated as appropriate for
development beyond its base density through the transfer of development
rights. 



   (E)   RECEIVING PARCEL OR SITE - A parcel or site located in a
receiving area.



   (F)   BASE DENSITY - The number of dwelling units or units of
commercial or industrial space permitted by the zoning classification of a
parcel in a receiving area without the use of transfer of development rights
or other density bonuses.



   (G)   TRANSFER UNITS - The additional units of dwellings, commercial
space or industrial space allowed on a receiving parcel over base density
through the use of transferable development rights.



   (H)   CONSERVATION EASEMENT - As broadly defined in the California
Conservation Easements Act of 1979 (Cal. Civil Code, Section 815-816), any
restriction on real property imposed for conservation purposes and binding on
future owners of the restricted land.



   (I)   OPEN SPACE EASEMENT - As broadly defined in Cal. Gov't Code,
Sections 51070 through 51097, a restriction on real property which will
preserve for public use or enjoyment the natural or scenic character of open
space land.



   (J)   EXCHANGE RATE - The number of transfer units that can be built
upon an acre of receiving area by extinguishing all of the transferable
development right on one sending parcel.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-6.2.0)  (Ord. No. 2006, 2716)



SEC. 17-67.  SENDING AREAS.



   (A)   (1)   In order to preserve the beachfront area of Oxnard
Shores as a sensitive resource area and an area needed for public access and
recreation, and in order to prevent development subject to geologic hazard,
all vacant lots located between the ocean and the first public street, and
between Fifth Street and Amalfi Way, are designated as sending areas.



      (2)   Interim determination of the development rights for a
particular sending parcel shall be made by the commission upon application
for a transfer of development rights.  In any case, no more than six
transferable development rights shall be assigned to any single legal
parcel.  Criteria used by the commission for assignment of transferable
development rights to each parcel shall include the buildability of the
parcel, lot size, existing zoning, exposure to wave runup and other hazards,
and the owner's investment-backed expectations.



   (B)   Final determination of the development rights on each sending
parcel shall be made by the commission upon completion of the requisite
analysis of all parcels.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-6.3.0) (Ord. No. 2006, 2716)



SEC. 17-68.  RECEIVING AREAS.



   (A)   Criteria for eligibility -



      (1)   Transfer units in receiving areas must be served within
the existing or planned capacity of major infrastructure, including roads,
sewer, water, and storm drainage systems.



      (2)   The higher density resulting from the addition of
transfer units in receiving area will not result in a significant change in
the basic character of a neighborhood or create a nuisance.



      (3)   The addition of transfer units in receiving areas will
improve development patterns through providing an incentive for development.



      (4)   The transfer of development rights to any particular
receiving area must provide a net public benefit and an overall reduction in
cumulative impacts when compared to the alternative of development in both
the sending and receiving areas.



   (B)   Designated receiving areas - All of the land in the following
zoning categories designated as receiving areas:



      (1)   Coastal zone -



         (a)   R-W-2, townhouses, water-oriented;



         (b)   R-2-C, low density, multiple-family;



         (c)   R-3-C, coastal, medium density, multiple-family;
and



         (d)   PUD-C, coastal, planned unit development.



      (2)   Noncoastal zone -



         (a)   R2, low density, multiple-family;



         (b)   R3, garden apartment zone; and



         (c)   R4, high rise residential.



   (C)   Other receiving areas - Eligibility for transfer of
development rights to potential receiving areas in other zoning categories
shall be determined on an individual case basis upon submittal of a special
use permit application to the commission.



   (D)   Exchange rates -



      (1)   Purchase of one transferable development right from a
sending area shall entitle the owner of a receiving site to build one
transfer unit.



      (2)   In all zoning categories which are designated receiving
areas, six per acre is the maximum number of transfer units.  This maximum
ensures that the criteria for receiving areas are met in any transfer of
development rights.  The number of transfer units to be added to any
receiving area in other zoning categories shall be determined by the
commission based on the same criteria.



      (3)   The exchange rate between the Oxnard Shores sending area
and residentially zoned receiving areas shall be a maximum of six transfer
units per acre in the receiving area for purchase of all the transferable
development rights on each individual lot of record in the sending area. 
The exchange rate between the Oxnard Shores sending area and other receiving
areas shall be determined by the commission upon submittal of a special use
permit application.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-6.4.0)  (Ord. No. 2006, 2716)



SEC. 17-69.  IN-LIEU FEE CONTRIBUTIONS.



   (A)   Subject to a coastal development permit, the city council may
allow fee contributions in lieu of the requirements of section 17-70 for the
following types of development:



      (1)   Vacation timeshare use and density bonus; and



      (2)   Residential density bonus.



   (B)   Where such a procedure is sought, the city council shall
consider the following:



      (1)   The appropriate in-lieu fee contribution commensurate
with the benefit and economic return to the contributor; and



      (2)   The land use impacts of the development for which the
in-lieu fee contribution is sought.



   (C)   Requirements for in-lieu fee contributions:



      (1)   For every timeshare unit constructed, one transfer of
development rights credit shall be secured.



      (2)   For every additional timeshare or residential unit over
that allowed by zoning, one transfer of development rights credit shall be
secured.



      (3)   Each transfer of development rights credit necessary to
develop a project shall be secured prior to issuance of a building permit.



      (4)   The value of contributing in-lieu fees of each transfer
of development rights credit shall be established by the commission at the
time of consideration of a coastal development permit for the receiving
project.



      (5)   Funds received from in-lieu fee contributions shall be
used by the city to purchase beachfront lots.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-6.4.1)  (Ord. No. 2123, 2716)



SEC. 17-70.  PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL OF TRANSFER OF
DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS.



   (A)   Initiation - An application for transfer of development rights
shall be initiated as follows:



      (1)   Prior to any determination of development rights for all
sending parcels, the owner of the receiving parcels shall initiate a transfer
of development rights by submitting an application for a special use permit
to the commission.



      (2)   Subsequent to final determination of development rights
on sending parcels by the commission, the owner of the receiving parcel shall
submit an application to the director for certification of the parcel.



         (a)   If the application meets all the requirements of
this chapter and the receiving parcel is in a designated receiving area, the
director shall certify that the receiving parcel is eligible to apply for a
subdivision map, building permit, special use permit, planned development
permit or other land use entitlement with the allowable base density and the
additional transfer units.



         (b)   If the application meets all the requirements of
this chapter except that the receiving parcel is not within a designated
receiving area, or the applicant requests changes in design standards or
street parking standards to accommodate the transfer units, the director
shall submit the application to the commission for approval as a special use
permit.



   (B)   Submittal requirements - All applications for the transfer of
development rights shall include the following:



      (1)   A map showing the location and boundaries of the
receiving parcel;



      (2)   The acreage of the receiving parcel;



      (3)   The zoning and current allowable base density of the
receiving parcel;



      (4)   A site plan that demonstrates that all applicable design
standards and off-street parking requirements can be met with the additional
transfer units;



      (5)   If the commission has not determined the development
rights on the sending parcel, a map shall be submitted identifying the
specific sending parcel from which the applicant intends to acquire
development rights; and



      (6)   If the commission has determined the development rights
on sending parcels, the applicant shall submit a copy of all agreements by
which sufficient development rights will be acquired to allow the transfer
units requested on the receiving parcel.



   (C)   Requirements for final approval - Approval of transfer of
development rights and issuance of a subdivision map or building permits for
the receiving parcel shall not be finalized until such time as the following
have been accomplished:



      (1)   Recordation with the Ventura county recorder of a deed
of transferable development rights and submittal of a certified copy of that
recorded deed to the director.  The deed shall be approved as to form and
content by the city attorney.  The director shall certify that the deed
contains adequate development rights to allow development of the approved
transfer units on the receiving parcel.



      (2)   Recordation of an open space or conservation easement on
all of the sending parcels from which development rights are obtained.  A
copy of the recorded easement shall be submitted to the director, who shall
certify that all of the development rights on each sending parcel are
removed, and the easement has been granted to and accepted by the city, the
county, or the Ventura County Land Conservancy.



      (3)   The open space or conservation easement shall be subject
to approval by the city attorney as to form and content.  For all sending
parcels in the Oxnard Shores area, the easement shall restrict all private
residential or commercial development and provide for public access in
perpetuity, pursuant to Section 170(h) of the Internal Revenue Code.  Any
easement granted in the manner provided for in this chapter is approved
pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, Section 51083.5 and Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code,
Section 421-4322, provided that any prior conflicting rights in the property
leave been subordinated to the easement.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-6.5.0)  (Ord. No. 2006, 2716)



SEC. 17-71.  EXEMPTION FROM FEES.



   (A)   In order to encourage the use of the transfer of development
rights program, approved transfer units shall be exempt from certain fees
normally imposed by the city.  Such exemption is appropriate because there
is a clear public benefit to be gained through the program in the
preservation of valuable environmental and recreational resources.  In
addition, exemption from certain city fees will benefit owners of receiving
parcels who are providing open space and recreation land through the purchase
of transferable development rights.



   (B)   Upon application for building permits or approval of a
tentative subdivision or parcel map including transfer units, the owner may
apply to the development services department for exemption from:



      (1)   Assembly fees for local park acquisition;



      (2)   Growth development fees;



      (3)   Park taxes; and



      (4)   Plan check fees.



   (C)   The fee exemption shall not apply to units allowed under the
base density of the receiving parcel.



   (D)   The fee exemption shall be approved by the director after all
requirements have been met and final project approvals have been obtained.



(`64 Code, Sec. 37-6.6.0)  (Ord. No. 2006, 2716)



CHAPTER 18:  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   18-1.   Purpose



   18-2.   Definitions



   18-3.   Flood loss reduction methods



   18-4.   Breakaway walls



   18-5.   Mobile homes; start of construction



   18-6.   Description of substantial improvements



   18-7.   Presumption of violation



   18-8.   Applicable lands



   18-9.   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard



   18-10.   Compliance; violation a misdemeanor



   18-11.   Abrogation; effect of other ordinances



   18-12.   Interpretation



   18-13.   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   18-14.   Severability



ARTICLE II.  ADMINISTRATION



   18-20.   Designation of the floodplain administrator



   18-21.   Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator



ARTICLE III.  PERMIT, APPEAL AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES



   18-25.   Issuance of development permit



   18-26.   Appeal board



   18-27.   Conditions for variances



ARTICLE IV.  PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



   18-35.   Standards of construction



   18-36.   Standards for utilities



   18-37.   Standards for subdivisions



   18-37.1.   Standards for manufactured homes



   18-37.2.   Standards for recreational vehicles



   18-38.   Floodways



   18-39.   Coastal high hazard areas



   18-40.   Flood-related erosion-prone area



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 18-1.  PURPOSE.



   (A)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by
Cal. Gov't Code sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 to adopt regulations designed
to promote the public health, safety and general welfare.



   (B)   The City Council finds as follows:



      (1)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.



      (2)   These flood losses are caused by uses that are
inadequately elevated, flood proofed or protected from flood damage. The
cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards that
increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss.



   (C)   The purpose of this chapter is to promote public health,
safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to
flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



      (1)   Protect human life and health;



      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;



      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts
associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public;



      (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such
as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and
bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;



      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the
sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future blighted areas caused by flood damage;



      (7)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property
is in an area of special flood hazard; and



      (8)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood
hazard assume responsibility for their actions.



   (D)   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes
methods and provisions to:



      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;



      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including
facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the
time of initial construction;



      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
flood waters;



      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development
which may increase flood damage; and



      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers
which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards
in other areas.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-1)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-2.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   ACCESSORY BUILDING - A building that is incidental and subordinate to
the principal building on the parcel of land on which it is located.



   APPEAL - A request for a review of the flood engineer's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD - The land in the floodplain within the
city subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD - The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year; also called the "100 year flood."



   BASEMENT - Any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BREAKAWAY WALLS - Any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and
whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other
suitable building material that is not part of the structural support of the
building and that is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or
wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the
building on which they are used or any buildings to that they might be
carried by flood waters.



   BUILDING - See STRUCTURE.



   COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA - The area subject to high velocity waters,
including coastal and tidal inundation or tsunamis and designated on a flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) as zone V1-V30, VE or V.



   DEVELOPMENT - Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located
within the area of special flood hazard.



   DUNE - A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with
relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and
adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides
and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of a primary frontal
dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a pronounced
mound of sand to a relatively mild slope.



   ENCROACHMENT - The advance or infringement of uses, plan growth, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain,
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION - A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by
the city.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION - The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities to serve
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FLOOD, FLOODING or FLOOD WATER -



      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal
waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and



      (2)   The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY and FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) - The official maps upon which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration
have delineated both the area of flood hazard and the floodway.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) - The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY - The official report provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance
rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.



   FLOOD RELATED EROSION - The collapse or subsidence of land along the
shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical level or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.



   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA - Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source. (See FLOOD, FLOODING, or FLOOD WATER.)



   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR - The individual appointed to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT - The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, and preserving
and enhancing, when possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including,
but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS - This chapter, zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other applications of
police power, which control development in flood-prone areas. This term
describes federal, State or local regulations or any combination thereof that
provides standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.



   FLOODPROOFING - Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.  (Refer to FEMA Technical
Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93 for guidelines on dry and wet flood
proofing.)



   FLOODWAY - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot; also
called "regulatory floodway."



   FRAUD and VICTIMIZATION - As related to section 18-27 (Conditions for
variances) of this chapter, the variance granted must not cause fraud on or
victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the
decision-making body will consider the fact that every newly constructed
building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the
community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed
below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to
increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and
the community as a whole  are subject to all the costs, inconvenience,
danger and suffering those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future
owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential
flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE - A use that cannot perform its intended
purpose unless located or carried out in close proximity to water including
only docking facilities or port facilities that are necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but not including long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.



   HARDSHIP - As related to section 18-27 (Conditions for variances) of
this chapter, the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to
grant the requested variance. The city requires that the variance be
exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic
considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval
of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional
hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without
granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive or requires
the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use
than originally intended.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE - The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE - Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states
without approved programs.



   LEVEE - A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.



   LOWEST FLOOR - The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement (see basement definition).



      (1)   An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the
lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access
or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a
building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation
design requirements, including, but not limited to:



         (a)   The wet flood-proofing standard in article 4,
section 18-35(C)(3);



         (b)   The anchoring standards in article 4, section
18-35(A);



         (c)   The construction materials and methods standards
in section 18-35(B); and



         (d)   The standards for utilities in section 18-36.



      (2)   For residential structures, all subgrade-enclosed areas
are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "basement"
definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.



   MANUFACTURED HOME - A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   MARKET VALUE - Determined by estimating the cost to replace the
structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of
depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost
of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor
determined by reference to a building cost estimate guide recognized by the
building and construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be
determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the
structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain
administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external
obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors
different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides
may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by
an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation
of the differences.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL - For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program,
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which
base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION - For floodplain management purposes, structures for
which the "start of construction," commenced on or after March 15, 1988, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after April
14, 1988.



   OBSTRUCTION - Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock,
gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along,
across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or
change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, due to its
location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of
water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.



   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD or "100-YEAR FLOOD" - (See "Base flood.")



   PUBLIC SAFETY and NUISANCE - As related to section 18-27 (Conditions
for variance) of this chapter, the granting of a variance must not result in
anything that is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or
neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs
the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or
river, bay, stream, canal or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light-duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY - The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot.



   REMEDY A VIOLATION - To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations or, if this
is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of
this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing
State or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other
development.



   RIVERINE - Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries) stream, brook, etc.



   SAND DUNES - Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or
mounds landward of the beach.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) - An area having special flood or
flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on a FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO,
A1-30, AE, A99, AH, Vl-V30, VE, or V.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION - Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
from the date of the permit.  The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation.  Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; not does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure.  For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE - A walled and roofed building or mobile home that is
principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures that have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.



   VIOLATION - The failure of a structure or other development to fully
comply with city's floodplain management regulations.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION - The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified) of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.



   WATERCOURSE - A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or
other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-2)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640, 2783)



SEC. 18-3.  FLOOD LOSS REDUCTION METHODS.



   To accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:



   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses that are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or that result in
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, that help accommodate or channel
flood waters;



   (D)   Controlling, filling, grading, dredging, and other development
that may increase flood damage; and



   (E)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers
that will unnaturally divert flood waters or that may increase flood hazards
in other areas.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-3)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-4.  BREAKAWAY WALLS.



   (A)   A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance
of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot.



   (B)   Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered
engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:



      (1)   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load
less than that which would occur during the base flood; and



      (2)   The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any
structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously in the event of the base flood.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-4)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-5.  MOBILE HOMES; START OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   For mobile homes not within a mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision, "start of construction" means the affixing of the mobile home to
its permanent site.



   (B)   For mobile homes within mobile home parks or mobile home
subdivisions, "start of construction" is the date on which the construction
of facilities to serve the site on which the mobile home is to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the construction of streets, either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and installation of utilities) is
completed.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-5)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-6.  DESCRIPTION OF SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS.



   "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:



   (A)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



   (B)   Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-6)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-7.  PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION.



   A structure or other development without an elevation certificate,
other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this
chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation
is provided to the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-7)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-8.  APPLICABLE LANDS.



   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within
the jurisdiction of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-8)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-9.  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   (A)   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency of the Federal Insurance Administration in a
scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the
City of Oxnard," dated October 15, 1985, and accompanying flood insurance
rate maps and all subsequent revisions are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter.



   (B)   The flood insurance study is the minimum area of applicability
of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas that allow
implementation of this chapter and that are recommended to the city council
by the floodplain administrator.



   (C)   The flood insurance study is on file at City Hall, 305 West
Third Street, Oxnard, California.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-9)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-10.  COMPLIANCE; VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations.  Violations of the provisions of this
chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the
city from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-10)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-11.  ABROGATION; EFFECT OF OTHER ORDINANCES.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this
chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-11)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-12.  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the city; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under State statutes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-12)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-13.  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations.  Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions.  Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. 
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.



   (B)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-13)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-14.  SEVERABILITY.



   The chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be
severable.  Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to
be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



(Ord. No. 2783)



ARTICLE II.  ADMINISTRATION



SEC. 18-20.  DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The city engineer is hereby appointed as floodplain administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permit applications in accordance with its provisions.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-15)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-21.  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   Duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be
limited to the following:



   (A)   Permit review -



      (1)   Review all development permits to determine that the
permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;



      (2)   Determine that all other required State and federal
permits have been obtained;



      (3)   Determine that the site is reasonably safe from
flooding; and



      (4)   Determine that the proposed development does not
adversely affect the carrying capacity of the areas where base flood
elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated.  For
purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood more than one foot at any point.



   (B)   Use of other base flood data - When base flood elevation data
has not been provided in accordance with section 18-9, the floodplain
administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal or State agency, or
other source, in order to administer section 18-3.



   (C)   If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or
State agency or other source, the floodplain administrator shall obtain a
base flood elevation using one of the following methods from the FEMA
publication "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximately Zone A Areas -
A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations," dated
July 1995:



      (1)   Simplified method:



         (a)   Obtain a 100-year or base flood discharge using
the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. Geological Survey
publication, or the discharge-drainage area method; and



         (b)   Obtain a base flood elevation using the Quick-2
computer program developed by FEMA; or



      (2)   Detailed method:



         (a)   Obtain a 100-year or base flood discharge using
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-HMS computer program; and



         (b)   Obtain a base flood elevation using the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers' HEC.RAS computer program.



   (D)   Notification of other agencies. 



      (1)   In alteration or relocation of a watercourse, the
floodplain administrator shall:



         (a)   Notify adjacent communities and the California
Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;



         (b)   Submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency; and



         (c)   Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.



      (2)   When base flood elevations change due to physical
alterations, the floodplain administrator shall:



         (a)   Within six months of information becoming
available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain
administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits
technical or scientific data to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).



         (b)   All LOMR’s for flood control projects are
approved prior to the issuance of building permits.  Building permits must
not be issued based on Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMR’s). 
Approved CLOMR’s allow construction of the proposed flood control project
and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction”
definition.



         (c)   Such submissions are necessary so that upon
confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk
premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current
data.



      (3)   The floodplain administrator shall notify FEMA in
writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or
other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating
the new corporate limits.



   (E)   The floodplain administrator shall obtain and maintain for
public inspection and make available, as needed, the following:



      (1)   Certification required by section 18-35(C)(1) (lowest
flood elevations);



      (2)   Certification required by section 18-35(C)(3) (elevation
or flood proofing of nonresidential structures);



      (3)   Certification required by sections 18-35(C)(4) (wet
flood proofing standard);



      (4)   Certification of elevation required by section 18-37
(subdivision standards);



      (5)   Certification of elevation required by section 18-37
(subdivision standards);



      (6)   Certification required by section 18-38 (floodway
encroachments);



      (7)   Information required by section 18-39(F) (coastal
construction standards).



   (F)   The floodplain administrator shall make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazard. Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions, the floodplain administrator shall use grade and
base flood elevations to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard
area. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in section
18-26.



   (G)   The floodplain administrator shall take action to remedy
violations of this chapter as specified in section 18-10.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-16)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640, 2783)



ARTICLE III.  PERMIT, APPEAL AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES



SEC. 18-25.  ISSUANCE OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard (as defined in
sections 18-2 and 18-9).  Application for a development permit shall be made
on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not
be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures; fill; storage of materials; drainage facilities; and the
location of the foregoing.



   (B)   The application shall specifically require the following
information:



      (1)   Site plan, including, but not limited to:



         (a)   For all proposed structures, spot ground
elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the
foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building
site;



         (b)   Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary
sewer, and utilities;



         (c)   If available, the base flood elevation from the
Flood Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map; and



         (d)   If applicable, the location of the regulatory
floodway.



      (2)   Foundation design detail, including but not limited to:



         (a)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level,
of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;



         (b)   For a crawl-space foundation, location and total
net area of foundation openings as required in section 18-35 and FEMA
Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93; and



         (c)   For foundations placed on fill, the location and
height of fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to 95% using the
Standard Proctor Test method).



      (3)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to
which any nonresidential structure will be flood proofed, as required in
subsection 18-35(C)(2) and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93.



      (4)   All appropriate certifications listed in subsection
18-21(E); and



      (5)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-17)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-26.  APPEAL BOARD.



   (A)   The city council is designated as the appeal board and shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of
this chapter.



   (B)   The city council shall hear and decide appeals when the
applicant alleges that the floodplain administrator made an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination in the enforcement or administration
of this chapter.



   (C)   In deciding such appeals, the city council shall consider all
technical evaluations and relevant factors, and standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, including the following factors:



      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future
owners of the property;



      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the city;



      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location,
where applicable;



      (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the
proposed use that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (9)   The safety of access to the property in time of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise,
and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and



      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets
and bridges.



   (D)   Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (C) above and
the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to
appeals and variances granted.



   (E)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice signed by the floodplain administrator that:



      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and



      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property.



   (F)   The floodplain administrator shall record a copy of the notice
in the Office of Ventura County Recorder in such manner that the notice
appears in the chain of the title of the affected parcel of land.



   (G)   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance decisions, including the justification for their issuance, and
report variances granted in the biennial report submitted to the Federal
Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-19)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-27.  CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.



   (A)   The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on
the general principle of zoning laws that variances pertain to a piece of
property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a
parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying
with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to
the property owner or surrounding property owners. The characteristics must
be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristics must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants or the property owners.



   (B)   It is the duty of the city to help protect its citizens from
flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances
from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance
are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and
damage can be met only if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the
variance guidelines provided in this chapter are detailed and contain
multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly
granted. The guidelines are designed to identify situations in which
alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.



   (C)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction,
substantial improvement, and other proposed new developments to be erected on
a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots
with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing
that the procedures of Articles 2 and 4 of this chapter have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.



   (D)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
"historic structures" upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.



   (E)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.



   (F)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of
deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of
variances from an elevation requirement, the city council need not grant
permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation
the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city council
finds will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of this chapter.



   (G)   Variances shall be issued only upon a:



      (1)   Showing of good and sufficient cause;



      (2)   Determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship (as defined in section 18-2 of this chapter)
to the applicant; and



      (3)   Determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in section 18-2
of this chapter), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in section 18-2 of
this chapter) of the public, or conflict with other city ordinances.



   (H)   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections
18-27(C) through 18-27(H) are satisfied, that the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the
base flood, and that the variance does not result in additional threats to
public safety or create a public nuisance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-20)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



ARTICLE IV.  PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



SEC. 18-35.  STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards apply:



   (A)   Anchoring -



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of
the structure resulting from hydrodynamic or hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy.



      (2)   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring
standards of this chapter.



   (B)   Construction materials and methods -



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed with flood resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical
Bulletin TB 2-93 and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.



      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



      (3)   With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding; and



      (4)   Within Zone AH or AO, so that there are adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and
away from proposed structures.



   (C)   Elevation and flood proofing. (See section 18-2 definitions
for "basement," "lowest floor," "new construction," "substantial damage," and
"substantial improvement.")



      (1)   The lowest floor, including basement, of a residential
construction, new or substantial improvement, shall:



         (a)   In a Zone AO, be elevated above the highest
adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified
in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent
grade if no depth number is specified. In Zone AO without velocity, the
lowest floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height
exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM by at least two
feet, or elevated at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade if no
depth number is specified.



         (b)   In a Zone A, be elevated at least two feet above
the base flood elevation. Said base flood elevation shall be determined by
one of the methods in section 18-21(B).



         (c)   In all other zones, be elevated at least two feet
above the base flood elevation. Upon the completion of the structure, the
elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a
registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by a city building
inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall
be filed with the floodplain administrator.



      (2)   Nonresidential construction, new or substantial
improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with subsection 18-35(C)(1)
or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:



         (a)   Be flood proofed below the elevation recommended
under section 18-35(C)(1) so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;



         (b)   Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and



         (c)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the standards of this subsection 18-35(C)(2) are satisfied.
Such certification shall be filed with the floodplain administrator.



      (3)   All new construction and substantial improvement with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which
are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement shall follow the
guidelines in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93, and must exceed
the following minimum criteria:



         (a)   Have a minimum of two openings having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwater; or



         (b)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect.



      (4)   Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in this
section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-21)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-36.  STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES.



   (A)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system and discharge from systems into flood waters.



   (B)   All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of
proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood,
the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.



   (C)   On-site waste disposal systems shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (D)   All subdivisions shall locate and construct public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to minimize
flood damage.



   (E)   All subdivision proposals shall provide adequate drainage to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-22)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-37.  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood
hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.



   (B)   All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of
proposed structure(s) and pads.  If the site is filled above the base flood,
the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.



   (C)   All subdivisions shall be designed to minimize flood damage.



   (D)   All subdivisions shall locate and construct public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems to minimize
flood damage.



   (E)   All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-23)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-37.1.  STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.



   (A)   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved, on sites located:



      (1)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;



      (2)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;



      (3)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or



      (4)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a
result of a flood shall:



         (a)   Within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood
elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.



         (b)   Within Zones V1-30, V and VE on the community’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map, meet the requirements of Section 18-39.



   (B)   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones
A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30, V and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map
that are not subject to the provisions of section 18-37.1(A) will be securely
fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:



      (1)   Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the
base flood elevation; or



      (2)   Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
pies or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
not less than 36 inches in height above ground.



   (C)   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the
lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil
engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building
inspector to be properly elevated.  Such certification and verification
shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.



(Ord. No. 2783)



SEC. 18-37.2.  STANDARDS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30
and VE will either:



      (1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or



      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use.  A
recreational vehicle is ready for highway uses if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or



         (3)   Meet the permit requirements of section 18-25 of
this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured
homes in section 18-37.1.



   (B)   Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones V1-30, V
and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the
requirements of section 18-37.2(A) and section 18-39.



(Ord. No. 2783)



SEC. 18-38.  FLOODWAYS.



   (A)   Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas
designated as floodways.



   (B)   Because the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of flood waters that carry debris, potential projectiles, and
erosion potential, the floodplain administrator shall:



      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.



      (2)   If the requirements of subsection (1) above are
satisfied, ensure that all new construction and substantial improvements
shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-25)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-39.  COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREAS.



   Within coastal high hazard areas designated in "The Flood Insurance
Study for the City of Oxnard," the following standards shall apply:



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
elevated on five adequately anchored pilings or columns and securely anchored
to such pilings or columns so that the lowest horizontal portion of the
structural members of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is
elevated to or above the base flood level.  The pile or column foundation
and structure attached thereto shall be anchored to resist floating,
collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads
acting simultaneously on all building components.  Water loading values used
shall be those associated with the base flood.  Wind loading values used
shall be those required by applicable State or local building standards.



   (B)   All new construction shall be located on the landward side of
the reach of mean high tide.



   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have
the space below the lowest floor free of obstructions or constructed with
breakaway walls.  Such temporarily enclosed space shall not be used for
human habitation.



   (D)   Fill shall not be used for structural support of buildings.



   (E)   Manmade alteration of sand dunes that would increase potential
flood damage is prohibited.



   (F)   The floodplain administrator shall obtain and maintain the
following records:



      (1)   Certification by a registered engineer or architect that
a proposed structure complies with this section; and



      (2)   The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings
or columns) of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether
such structures contain a basement.



(`64 Code, Sec. 35-26)  (Ord. No. 2426, 2640)



SEC. 18-40.  FLOOD-RELATED EROSION-PRONE AREA.



   (A)   The floodplain administrator shall require permits for
proposed construction and other development within all flood-related
erosion-prone areas.



   (B)   The floodplain administrator shall review permit applications
to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be
reasonably safe from flood-related erosion and will not cause flood-related
erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard.



   (C)   If a proposed improvement is found to be in the path of
flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, the floodplain
administrator shall require that such improvement be relocated or adequate
protective measures be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard.



   (D)   Within Zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, a setback is
required for all new development from the ocean, lake, bay, riverfront or
other body of water to create a safety buffer consisting of a natural
vegetative or contour strip. This buffer shall be designated according to the
flood-related erosion hazard and erosion rate, in relation to the anticipated
"useful life" of structures, and depending upon the geologic, hydrologic,
topographic and climatic characteristics of the land. The buffer may be used
for suitable open space purposes, such as for agricultural, forestry, outdoor
recreation and wildlife habitat areas, and for other activities using
temporary and portable structures only.



(Ord. No. 2640)



CHAPTER 19:  PUBLIC WORKS



ARTICLE I.  SEWERAGE SYSTEM; WASTEWATER DISPOSAL



DIVISION 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   19-1.   Purpose and policy



   19-2.   Administration



   19-3.   Abbreviations



   19-4.   Definitions



DIVISION 2.  WASTEWATER COLLECTION/CONVEYANCE SYSTEM



   19-10.   Service connections



   19-11.   Connection to mains to be maintained by owner



   19-12.   Demolition and abandonment of services premises



   19-13.   Availability of capacity; restriction of discharge rate



   19-14.   Excessive sewer maintenance expense



   19-15.   Damage to city's municipal wastewater system; creation of
other liability



   19-16.   Provisions for extension of system



   19-17.   Special provision for extension of system




DIVISION 3.  WASTEWATER INTRODUCTION INTO THE CITY'S MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER
SYSTEM




   19-25.   Prohibited; discharge standards



   19-26.   Local limits



   19-27.   Federal categorical pretreatment standards



   19-28.   Medical and infectious wastes



   19-29.   City's right of revision



   19-30.   Special agreements



   19-31.   Variances



   19-32.   Dilution



DIVISION 4.  PRETREATMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER



   19-35.   Pretreatment facilities



   19-36.   Additional pretreatment measures



   19-37.   Separation of domestic and industrial wastewater



   19-38.   Spill prevention plans



   19-39.   Accidental discharge/slug control plans



   19-40.   Tenant and owner responsibilities



   19-41.   Discharges of wastes or wastewater into the system from
vehicles



   19-42.   Vandalism




   19-43.   Discharges from food establishments, vehicle maintenance
facilities, and commercial and industrial laundries




   19-44.   Maintenance of grease interceptors and gravity separation
devices



   19-45.   Limitations on the use of garbage grinders



DIVISION 5.  INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT SYSTEM



   19-50.   Industrial wastewater analysis



   19-51.   Industrial wastewater discharge permit requirements



   19-52.   Connections



   19-53.   Extra-jurisdictional industrial users



   19-54.   Industrial wastewater discharge permit application contents



   19-55.   Application signatories and certification



   19-56.   Decisions



   19-57.   Duration



   19-58.   Contents



   19-59.   Appeals



   19-60.   Modification



   19-61.   Transfer



   19-62.   Revocation



   19-63.   Reissuance



   19-64.   Continuation of expired industrial wastewater discharge
permits



   19-65.   Municipal user permits



DIVISION 6.  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS



   19-70.   Monitoring facilities



   19-71.   Baseline monitoring reports



   19-72.   Compliance schedules



   19-73.   Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline



   19-74.   Periodic compliance reports



   19-75.   Report of changed conditions



   19-76.   Reports of potential problems



   19-77.   Reports from unpermitted users



   19-78.   Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting



   19-79.   Analytical requirements



   19-80.   Sample collection



   19-81.   Monitoring charges



   19-82.   Timing



   19-83.   Record keeping



DIVISION 7.  COMPLIANCE MONITORING



   19-90.   Right of entry; inspection and sampling



   19-91.   Inspection; search warrants



   19-92.   Confidential information



   19-93.   Publication of significant violators



DIVISION 8.  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES



   19-100.   Notification of violation



   19-101.   Consent orders



   19-102.   Order to show cause



   19-103.   Administrative compliance orders



   19-104.   Cease and desist orders



   19-105.   Administrative fines



   19-106.   Emergency suspensions



   19-107.   Termination of discharge



DIVISION 9.  JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES



   19-115.   Injunctive relief



   19-116.   Civil penalties



   19-117.   Criminal prosecution



   19-118.   Remedies nonexclusive



DIVISION 10.  SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION



   19-125.   Performance bonds



   19-126.   Liability insurance



   19-127.   Water supply severance



   19-128.   Informant rewards



DIVISION 11.  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



   19-133.   Wastewater rates



   19-134.   Fees and charges



   19-135.   Collection of fees



   19-136.   Billing and collection - delinquent wastewater bill



   19-137.   Out-of-city service fees



   19-138.   Connection fees



   19-139.   Private water supply fees



   19-140.   Appeal fee



   19-141.   IWD permit fee



   19-142.   Service fees



   19-143.   Pretreatment charges and fees



ARTICLE II.  SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING



DIVISION 1.  IN GENERAL



   19-150.   Purpose



   19-151.   Definitions



   19-152.   Establishment of regulations by city manager



   19-153.   Hours of operation and charges set by city council



   19-154.   Compliance with article



DIVISION 2.  REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE



   19-160.   Solid waste on private property



   19-161.   Solid waste on streets, alleys and city property



   19-162.   Notice to remove solid waste; appeal of notice



   19-163.   Removal of solid waste by city



   19-164.   Charges for removal and disposal of solid waste by city



   19-165.   Street sweeping



   19-166.   Trucks transporting solid waste or recyclable materials



   19-167.   Burning solid waste



   19-168.   Hazardous waste in solid waste containers



   19-169.   Residential subdividers to pay for solid waste containers



DIVISION 3.  COLLECTION AND CHARGES



   19-175.   Exclusive right to collect solid waste



   19-176.   Extra nonresidential service



   19-177.   Unauthorized collection



   19-178.   Interference with collection



   19-179.   Interference with solid waste containers



   19-180.   Collection in annexed areas



   19-181.   Occupants liable for charges; charges to be billed to
water meter user



   19-182.   Charges added to utility bill; payment; adjustment for
higher rates



   19-183.   Delinquent bill; authority to discontinue utility service



   19-184.   Billing and collection - delinquent refuse bill



DIVISION 4.  RECYCLABLE MATERIALS



   19-190.   Collecting, transporting, processing and marketing
recyclables



   19-191.   Recycling containers; removal or interference



   19-192.   Placement of recycling containers



   19-193.   Title to recyclable materials



   19-194.   Recycling collection services



DIVISION 5.  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS



   19-200.   Underground storage



ARTICLE III.  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



DIVISION 1.  ENCROACHMENTS AND EXCAVATIONS



   19-205.   Definitions



   19-206.   Permit required



   19-207.   Application; indemnification of city



   19-208.   Work without a permit; review fees



   19-209.   Duration of permit



   19-210.   Utility encroachment permit



   19-211.   Specifications for work



   19-212.   Inspection of concrete work



   19-213.   Testing and certification of work



   19-214.   Protection of public



   19-215.   Removal of items



   19-216.   Acceptance of work; security



   19-217.   Certificate of occupancy; elimination of driveways



   19-218.   Use of city forces; charge



   19-219.   Charge for extra work



   19-220.   Permit fees



   19-221.   Street cut fee; waiver



   19-222.   Periodic inspection and repair by franchised utilities



   19-223.   Periodic inspection and repair by city utilities



DIVISION 2.  STREET NUMBERING



   19-230.   Street numbering system



   19-231.   Duty to affix number; type and size



DIVISION 3.  USE OF CITY STREETS AND HIGHWAYS BY OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES



   19-240.   Definitions



   19-241.   Special permit required



   19-242.   Designated streets



   19-243.   Authority to issue special permit



   19-244.   Application required



   19-245.   Special permit conditions



   19-246.   Vehicle trip logs



   19-247.   Furnishing proof of compliance with this division



   19-248.   Revocation of permit



   19-249.   Rules and regulations



   19-250.   Other permits



ARTICLE I.  SEWERAGE SYSTEM; WASTEWATER DISPOSAL



DIVISION 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 19-1.  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
municipal wastewater system of the city (system) and enables the city to
comply with all applicable State and federal laws including the Clean Water
Act (33 USC Sections 1251 et seq.), general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR
Part 403), and the requirements of the city's national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) permit.  The objectives of this article are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
system that will pass through the system inadequately treated, enter
receiving waters, or otherwise interfere with or be incompatible with the
system;



      (2)   To protect city employees who may be affected by
wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general
public;



      (3)   To promote reuse and recycling of wastewater and
biosolids from the system;



      (4)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of
the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the system; and



      (5)   To enable city to comply with its NPDES permit
conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or
State laws and regulations to which the system is subject.



   (B)   This article authorizes the issuance of industrial wastewater
discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance, and enforcement
activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user
reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.



   (C)   This article shall apply to all persons within the city who
use the system and to persons outside the city who, by contract with the
city, are included as users of the system.  By discharging wastewater into
the system, users located beyond the city limits agree to comply with the
terms and conditions established in this article, as well as any permits,
contracts or orders issued hereunder.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-1)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-2.  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the city manager shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article.



   (B)   The city manager is authorized to promulgate regulations and
standards reasonably necessary to protect the system, to comply with all
applicable federal and State laws required by the Act and the general
pretreatment regulations, to control and regulate the proper use of the
system, to regulate the rate of flow and the quality and quantity of
wastewater discharges to the system, to prevent overflow, and to provide for
the issuance, suspension or revocation of industrial wastewater discharge
(IWD) permits; provided, however, the regulations shall be consistent with
the provisions of this article and formulated to result in the uniform
control of the system.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-2)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-3.  ABBREVIATIONS.



   For purposes of this article, the following abbreviations, shall have
the designated meanings:



   (A)   BOD – biochemical oxygen demand;



   (B)   BMP – Best Management Practice;



   (C)   BMR - Baseline Monitoring Report;



   (D)   CFR – Code of Federal Regulations;



   (E)   CIU - Categorical Industrial User;



   (F)   COD – chemical oxygen demand;



   (G)   EPA – U.S. Environmental Protection Agency;



   (H)   gpd - gallons per day;



   (I)   IU - Industrial User;



   (J)   IWD - industrial wastewater discharge;



   (K)   LC50 - lethal concentration for 50 percent of the test
organisms;



   (L)   L - liter;



   (M)   mg - milligrams, mg,/l - milligrams per liter;



   (N)   NPDES - national pollutant discharge elimination system;



   (O)   NSCIU - Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User;



   (P)   O&M - operation and maintenance;



   (Q)   RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act;



   (R)   SIC - Standard Industrial Classification;



   (S)   SIU - Significant Industrial User;



   (T)   SNC - Significant Noncompliance;



   (U)   SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC Sections 6901 et seq.);



   (V)   TDS - total dissolved solids;



   (W)   TSS — total suspended solids;



   (X)   TTO - total toxic organics; and



   (Y)   USC - United States Code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-3)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2761)



SEC. 19-4.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   ACT - The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC Sections 1251 et seq.



   (B)   APPROVAL AUTHORITY - California State Water Resources Control
Board or Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region.



   (C)   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER -



      (1)   If the user is a corporation, a responsible corporate
officer.  For the purpose of this paragraph, a responsible corporate officer
means:



         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or



         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to
make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated
facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major
capital investment recommendations, and to initiate and direct other
comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with
environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are
established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for
control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has
been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.



      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a
general partner or proprietor, respectively.



      (3)   If the user is a federal, State, or local government
entity, the principal executive officer or director having responsibility for
the overall operation of the discharging facility.



      (4)   A duly authorized representative of the individual
designated in subsections (1), (2), or (3) of this subsection (C) if:



         (a)   The authorization is made in writing by the
individual described in paragraph (1), (2), or (3);



         (b)   The authorization specifies either an individual
or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility
from which the discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager,
operator of a well, or a well field superintendent, or a position of
equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company; and



         (c)   The written authorization is submitted to the city.



   (D)   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND - Quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic material under standard laboratory
procedures for 5 days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a
concentration such as mg/l.



   (E)   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) - The schedules of
activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section 19-25(A)
and (B) [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)] including treatment requirements,
operating procedures, practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or
leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage and
also including alternative means (i.e., management plans) of complying with,
or in place of certain established categorical Pretreatment Standards and
effluent limits.



   (F)   BUILDING SEWER - A sewer conveying wastewater from the
premises of a person to the public sewer, private sewer, individual
wastewater disposal system or other approved point of disposal.



   (G)   BYPASS - The intentional diversion of waste and/or wastewater
from any portion of a user's pretreatment facility.



   (H)   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD -
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA
in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC Section 1317)
that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter
I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, incorporated herein by reference.



   (I)   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER - An industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.



   (J)   [CITY] - The City of Oxnard or the City Council of Oxnard.



   (K)   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) - A measure of the oxygen
required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.



   (L)   COLOR - The optical density at visual wave length of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water in which 100% transmittance is
equivalent to zero optical density.



   (M)   COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE - A schedule containing increments of
progress, in the form of dates, for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of pretreatment equipment
and/or systems required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards.



   (N)   COMPOSITE SAMPLE - The sample resulting from the combination
of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals, based on an
increment of either flow or time.



   (O)   CONNECTION - The part of any sewer extending from a sewer main
in a public easement or right-of-way to private property for exclusive use of
the property.



   (P)   CONTROL AUTHORITY - The city.



   (Q)   COOLING WATER - The water discharged from any use, including
but not limited to, air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration units to which
the only pollutant added is heat.



   (R)   DAILY MAXIMUM - The arithmetic average of all effluent samples
for a pollutant collected during a calendar day.



   (S)   DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT - The maximum allowable discharge limit of
a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed
in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the
course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of
the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.



   (T)   DISCHARGE - The discharge or the introduction of pollutants
into the system by a person.



   (U)   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER - Human excrement and gray water from such
uses as household showers and dish washing.



   (V)   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) - The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management
division director, or other duly authorized official.



   (W)   EXISTING SOURCE - Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source
if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of
the Act.



   (X)   FEE - Any charge assessed to a person associated with the use,
or continued use, of any portion of the system and includes, but is not
limited to, a charge for connection or tap for new customers; monthly sewer
service; IWD permit; excess capacity connection; wastewater treatment;
excessive wastewater strength; laboratory testing; waste hauler's permit;
oversize sewer; and noncompliance.



   (Y)   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT - Any facility engaged in the preparation
of food products for sale. A facility engaged in the sale of food products
that are wholly prepared off-site is not included within this definition.



   (Z)   FORMULA USERS - Those users who are regulated under the IWD
permit system and billed according to a formula based on the measured or set
strength and volume of their wastewater discharged.



   (AA)   GARBAGE - The putrescible animal and vegetable wastes
resulting from the handling, preparation and consumption of foods.



   (BB)   GRAB SAMPLE - A sample which is taken from a waste stream
without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not
to exceed 15 minutes.



   (CC)   GRAVITY SEPARATION DEVICE - A device designed, constructed,
and operated for the purpose of retaining sand, silt, grit, mineral material,
and oil by gravity-differential separation from wastewater.



   (DD)   GREASE - A varied group of compounds having the common
properties of immiscibility with water and a specific gravity lower than
water as determined by appropriate procedures set forth in 40 CFR Part 136.



   (EE)   GREASE INTERCEPTOR or INTERCEPTOR - A device of at least 750
gallon capacity designed, constructed, and operated to separate and retain
grease while permitting the wastewater to be discharged into the system.



   (FF)   GROUND GARBAGE - The residue from the preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in a public sewer, with no particle greater than 1/2-inch
in any dimension.



   (GG)   HOLDING TANK WASTEWATER - Any wastewater from holding tanks
including, but not limited to, vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers,
septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.



   (HH)   INDIRECT DISCHARGE - The introduction of pollutants into the
system from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307 (b), (c), or
(d) of the Act.



   (II)   INDUSTRIAL USER - Any producing, manufacturing, processing,
institutional, commercial, agricultural or similar person that discharges,
directly or indirectly, wastewater into the system that is solid, liquid or
gaseous waste and contains pollutants different from, or stronger than, or
with constituents other than those defined for domestic wastewater.



   (JJ)   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER - The liquid and water-carried
industrial waste, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or
permitted to enter the system.



   (KK)   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT or PERMIT - A
conditionally written authorization to allow a user to utilize the system for
the discharge of industrial wastewater.



   (LL)   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM DISCHARGE LIMIT - The maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent
of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.



   (MM)   INTERFERENCE - A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the
system, its treatment processes or operations or its biosolids processes, use
or disposal, and that is therefore a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES
permit or of the prevention of biosolids use or disposal in compliance with
all applicable federal, State, or local regulations, including but not
limited to: Section 405 of the Act, the SWDA, including Title II, commonly
referred to as RCRA, any and all federal and State clean air acts, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries
Act.



   (NN)   LOCAL LIMIT - Specific discharge limits developed and
enforced by [the City] upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement
the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1)
and (b).



   (OO)   MASS EMISSION RATE - The weight of material discharged to the
system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass
emission rate shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or
combination of constituents.



   (PP)   MEDICAL WASTE - Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human
blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory
wastes, and dialysis wastes.



   (QQ)   MONITORING FACILITIES - An approved opening to a building
sewer for the purpose of inspection, sampling and/or flow measurement.



   (RR)   MONTHLY AVERAGE - The sum of all "daily discharges" measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured
during that month.



   (SS)   MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT - The highest allowable average of
"daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily
discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily
discharges" measured during that month.



   (TT)   MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM or SYSTEM - A "treatment works,"
as defined by Section 212 of the Act, owned by the city and includes any
devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of wastewater (domestic or industrial) and any conveyances which
convey wastewater to the treatment plant.



   (UU)   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT - A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act.



   (VV)   NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD - Any regulation developed under the authority of Section
307(b) of the Act.



   (WW)   NEW SOURCE -



      (1)   Any building structure, facility, or installation from
which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of
which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if
such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:



         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or



         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge or pollutants at an existing source; or



         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether
these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the
new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which
the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source, should be considered.



      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is
located and results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of subdivisions (1)(b) or (1)(c) above, but
otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



      (3)   Construction of a new source, as defined under this
subsection, has commenced if the owner or operator has:



         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous
on-site construction program:



            1.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of
facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Significant site preparation work including
clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of
new source facilities or equipment; or



         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for
the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which
can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this subsection.



   (XX)   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER - Water used for cooling which does
not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product,
waste product, or finished product.



   (YY)   PASS THROUGH - A discharge that exits the system into waters
of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of
a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.



   (ZZ)   PERSON - Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns; and including all federal, State and
local governmental entities.




   (AAA)   pH - A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance,
expressed in standard units.





   (BBB)   POLLUTANT - Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, domestic wastewater, garbage, sludge, munitions, medical
wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat,
wrecked or discharge equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal,
agricultural and industrial wastes and certain characteristics of the
wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity,
or odor).





   (CCC)   PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT - The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such
pollutants into the system. Such pretreatment or treatment can be
accomplished by physical, chemical, biological processes, or by other means,
with the exception of diluting the concentration of the pollutant unless
allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.





   (DDD)   PRETREATMENT FACILITY - Any works or device for the
treatment or flow limitation of domestic wastewater, liquid waste, industrial
waste or industrial wastewater prior to discharge into the system.





   (EEE)   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS - Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.





   (FFF)   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS - Prohibited discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and/or local limits.





   (GGG)   PRIVATE SEWER - A sewer, other than a connection, laid by a
person to serve one or more buildings, so as to connect a building to a
public sewer and irrespective of whether the sewer is constructed on public
or private property.





   (HHH)   PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM - A septic tank with the
effluent discharging into a subsurface disposal field, into one or more
seepage pits or into a combination of subsurface disposal field and seepage
pit or other wastewater holding facilities.





   (III)   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGE -
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in section 19-13 of this article.





   (JJJ)   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) - A treatment works,
as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1292), which is owned
by a State or municipality (as defined by section 502(4) of the Act).  This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the storage, treatment,
recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid
nature.  It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they
convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant.  The term also means the
municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction
over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment
works.





   (KKK)   RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL - Material containing chemical elements
that spontaneously change their atomic structure by emitting any particles,
rays or energy forms in excess of normal background radiation.





   (LLL)   SEEPAGE PIT - A lined excavation in the ground which
receives the discharge of a septic tank and is designed to permit the
effluent from the septic tank to seep through its bottom and side.





   (MMM)   SEPTAGE - Any domestic wastewater from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.





   (NNN)   SEPTIC TANK - A watertight receptacle which receives the
domestic wastewater discharge of a building and is designed and constructed
to separate solids from the liquid, digest organic matter through a period of
detention and allow the liquid to discharge into the soil outside of the tank
through a system of open joint or perforated piping or a seepage pit.





   (OOO)   SETTLEABLE SOLIDS - Any solid that will settle out of a
liquid in a specified interval of time as determined by appropriate
procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136.





   (PPP)   SEWAGE - Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).





   (QQQ)   SEWER - A pipe or conduit together with appurtenances for
carrying wastewater.





   (RRR)   SIGNIFICANT CHANGE - Plus or minus 25% in an industrial
user's typical discharge pattern, flow rate, peak flow rate, constituents,
concentration of constituents or characteristics.





   (SSS)   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER -





      (1)   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or





      (2)   A user that:





         (a)   Discharges an average of 10,000 gpd or more of
industrial wastewater to the system;





         (b)   Contributes a waste stream which makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the system;
or





         (c)   Is designated as such by the city on the basis
that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the system's
operation or for violating a pretreatment standard or requirement.





      (3)   The [City] may determine that an industrial user subject
to categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical
industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that
the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of
total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and
boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment
standard) and the following conditions are met:





         (a)   The industrial user, prior to [City's] finding,
has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements;




         (b)   The industrial user annually submits the
certification statement required in 40 CFR 403.12(q), together with any
additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and




         (c)   The industrial user never discharges any untreated
concentrated wastewater.





      (4)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in
subdivision (2) above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
system operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement,
the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR Part
403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant
industrial user.





   (TTT)   SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE - Any discharge at a flow rate
or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in this chapter. A slug discharge is any discharge of a
non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental
spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to
cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTWs
regulations, local limits or permit conditions.





   (UUU)   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) - A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, latest edition,
issued by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget.





   (VVV)   STANDARD METHODS - Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, latest edition, published by American Water Works
Association, Water Environment Association, and the American Public Health
Association, 1015 18th Street, NW, Washington, D.C. 20036.





   (WWW)   STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS - The current edition of standards
and requirements relating to size, quantity, quality and performance,
including standard drawing, as detailed and made available by the city.





   (XXX)   STATE - State of California.





   (YYY)   STORM WATER - Any flow occurring during or following any
form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation,
including snowmelts.





   (ZZZ)   SUSPENDED SOLIDS - The total suspended matter in wastewater,
as determined by the appropriate procedures set forth in 40 CFR Part 136.





   (AAAA)   TOTAL DISSOLVED SOLIDS - The solid matter in solution in
wastewater, as determined by the appropriate procedures set forth in 40 CFR
Part 136.





   (BBBB)   TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS - The summation of all quantifiable
values greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter, subject to the local limits
established pursuant to section 19-26 of this article, for the following
toxic organics: Acenaphthene, Acrolein, Acrylonitrile, Benzene, Benzidine,
Carbon tetrachloride (tetrachloromethane), Chlorobenzene,
1,2,4-trichlorobenzene, Hexachlorobenzene, 1,2-dichloroethane,
1,1,1-trichloroethane, Hexachloroethane, 1,1-dichloroethane,
1,1,2-trichloroethane, 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane, Chloroethane, Bis
(2-chloroethyl) ether, 2-chloroethyl vinyl ether (mixed),
2-chloronaphthalene, 2,4,6-trichlorophenol, Parachlorometa cresol, Chloroform
(trichloromethane), 2-chlorophenol, 1,2-dichlorobenzene, 1,3-dichlorobenzene,
1,4-dichlorobenzene, 3,3-dichlorobenzidine, 1,1-dichloroethylene,
1,2-trans-dichloroethylene, 2,4-dichlorophenol, 1,2-dichloropropane,
1,3-dichloropropylene (1,3-dichloropropene), 2,4-dimethylphenol,
2,4-dinitrotoluene, 2,6-dinitrotoluene, 1,2-diphenylhydrazine, Ethylbenzene,
Fluoranthene, 4-chlorophenyl phenyl ether, 4-bromophenyl phenyl ether, Bis
(2-chloroisopropyl) ether, Bis (2-chloroethoxy) methane, Methylene chloride
(dichloromethane), Methyl chloride (chloromethane), Methyl bromide
(bromomethane), Bromoform (tribromomethane), Dichlorobromomethane,
Chlorodibromomethane, Hexachlorobutadiene, Hexachlorocyclopentadiene,
Isophorone, Naphthalene, Nitrobenzene, 2-nitrophenol, 4-nitrophenol,
2,4-dinitrophenol, 4,6-dinitro-o-cresol, N-nitrosodimethylamine,
N-nitrosodiphenylamine, N-nitrosodi-n-propylamine, Pentachlorophenol, Phenol,
Bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate, Butyl benzyl phthalate, Di-n-butyl phthalate,
Di-n-octyl phthalate, Diethyl phthalate, Dimethyl phthalate,
1,2-benzanthracene (benzo(a)anthracene), Benzo(a)pyrene (3,4-benzopyrene),
3,4-Benzofluoranthene (benzo(b)fluoranthene), 11,12-benzofluoranthene
(benzo(k)fluoranthene), Chrysene, Acenaphthylene, Anthracene,
1,12-benzoperylene (benzo(ghi)perylene), Fluorene, Phenanthrene,
1,2,5,6-dibenzanthracene (dibenzo(a,h)anthracene), Indeno (1,2,3-cd) pyrene)
(2,3 o-phenylene pyrene), Pyrene, Tetrachloroethylene, Toluene,
Trichloroethylene, Vinyl chloride (chloroethylene), Aldrin, Dieldrin,
Chlordane (technical mixture and metabolites), 4,4-DDT, 4,4-DDE (p,p-DDX),
4,4-DDD (p,p-TDE), Alpha-endosulfan, Beta-endosulfan, Endosulfan sulfate,
Endrin, Endrin aldehyde, Heptachlor, Heptachlor epoxide,
(BHC-hexachlorocyclohexane): Alpha-BHC, Beta-BHC, Gamma-BHC, Delta-BHC,
(PCB-polychlorinated biphenyls): PCB-1242 (Arochlor 1242), PCB-1254 (Arochlor
1254), PCB-1221 (Arochlor 1221), PCB-1232 (Arochlor 1232), PCB-1248 (Arochlor
1248), PCB-1260 (Arochlor 1260), PCB-1016 (Arochlor 1016), Toxaphene,
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo- p-dioxin (TCDD).





   (CCCC)   TOXIC POLLUTANT - The pollutants, or combination of
pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA (40 CFR
Part 401.15) under authority of Section 307(a)(1) of the Act.





   (DDDD)   UNCONTAMINATED WATER - Any water not contaminated or
polluted with sewage or other waste and which is suitable for discharge into
the storm water drainage system, excluding unlined natural water courses.





   (EEEE)   UPSET - An exceptional incident in which there is
unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical and/or local
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of
the industrial user; this does not include noncompliance to the extent caused
by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.





   (FFFF)   USER - A source of direct or indirect discharge.





   (GGGG)   WASTEWATER - Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and
domestic wastewater from residential dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed directly or indirectly to the system.





   (HHHH)   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT - That
portion of the system designed to provide treatment of domestic and
industrial wastewater.




(`64 Code, Sec. 25-4)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2761, 2875)



DIVISION 2.  WASTEWATER COLLECTION/CONVEYANCE SYSTEM



SEC. 19-10.  SERVICE CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   Sewer service connections may be made to either publicly or
privately owned and maintained authorized collection systems.  No person
shall connect any private property in the city to the system without first
obtaining a connection permit issued by the city manager and paying to the
city the connection fee required therefore.



   (B)   The number of connection permits required for any development
shall be based upon the number of sewer service connections.  A separate
sewer connection is normally required for each detached building.



   (C)   Food establishments and commercial laundries shall have a
separate water connection from other users in the same building.



   (D)   The city manager may impose other requirements if the city
manager determines that public health and safety, system protection,
maintenance costs, or liability concerns so dictate.



   (E)   In order for the city to have sufficient information to make a
determination of appropriate fees, building permit applicants shall submit
sewer service plumbing plans prepared by a registered engineer or project
architect in conjunction with the building permit application for all new and
replacement structures.  The plumbing and irrigation plans shall show all
the proposed line sizes and locations.



   (F)   Every connection, disconnection and permanent blocking or
plugging made between private property and the system shall be made in the
manner and with the material required by the specifications for public sewers
approved by the city and in accordance with the city's specifications for
construction.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-5)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-11.  CONNECTION TO MAINS TO BE MAINTAINED BY OWNER.



   All connections, including the lateral, wye or saddle at the city's
sewer, shall be maintained at the expense of the property owner of which the
connection originates.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-6)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-12.  DEMOLITION AND ABANDONMENT OF SERVICES PREMISES.



   The owner of property connected to the system shall disconnect or
permanently block or plug connections when further use of the property, for
any purpose requiring the connection, is abandoned or when the structure or
facility on the property requiring the connection is demolished without
replacement.  A public works permit for abandonment of sewer lateral shall
be required prior to commencement of abandonment.  If a property owner or
his/her agent has failed to so effect the disconnection or blockage, the city
manager may disconnect or block the connection, and the cost thereof shall be
deemed a debt to the city and shall be charged to the owner.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-7)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-13.  AVAILABILITY OF CAPACITY: RESTRICTION OF DISCHARGE RATE.



   (A)   If the system capacity is not available, the city manager may
restrict discharge until sufficient capacity is made available.  The city
manager may refuse immediate service to any new facility located in an area
where there is insufficient capacity in the system to accommodate the
proposed quantity of the wastewater.



   (B)   The city manager may restrict the rate of discharge into the
system during the peak flow hours (8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.) or at any other
time when required to prevent the overloading of the system. A discharger so
restricted shall be required either to curtail the rate of discharge or to
provide approved storage or retention facilities for the wastewater. 
Wastewater so retained may be discharged into the system between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or during other periods and at a rate of flow
prescribed by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-8)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-14.  EXCESSIVE SEWER MAINTENANCE EXPENSE.



   Any person who introduces or causes to be introduced into the system,
either directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which creates a
stoppage, plugging, breakage, reduction in the capacity of any portion of the
system or any other damage to the system shall be liable for the damage and
for maintenance, operation, and replacement expenses, including overhead
costs, occasioned thereby. Expense of the damage, any excessive maintenance
expense, or any other expenses attributable thereto shall be deemed a debt to
the city and shall be charged to the offending person by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-9)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-15.  DAMAGE TO CITY'S MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM; CREATION OF OTHER
LIABILITY.



   Any person who introduces or causes to be introduced into the system,
either directly or indirectly, any prohibited pollutant or wastewater which
causes detrimental effects to the city's system or treatment plant processes
or causes a violation of the city's NPDES permit or other regulation imposed
by a regulatory agency shall be liable for all damages and costs occasioned
thereby, including any penalty assessed by a regulatory agency.  The
damages, costs or penalty assessed shall be deemed a debt to the city and
shall be charged to the offending person by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-10)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-16.  PROVISIONS FOR EXTENSION OF SYSTEM.



   (A)   In addition to the payment of a connection fee, any person
requesting service to a lot that is not adjacent to the system shall be
responsible for installation of a sewer extension in dedicated streets,
alleys or easements accepted by the city.  Sewers shall be installed in
sewer easements only when it is not in the public interest for the city to
accept dedication of a street or alley in the particular location. The
required sewer extension shall include all facilities necessary to serve the
property as well as all abutting sewers indicated by the sewer master plan. 
All construction shall conform to city standards and detailed plans approved
by the city manager.  The city manager shall determine the size sewer
required for the area for which application for service is made.  A sewer
shall not have an inside diameter of less than eight inches.  In the case of
sewer trunk mains in the sewer master plan, an appropriate credit against
collection fees and cash reimbursement may be allowed in an amount to be
determined by the city manager.



   (B)   If sewer facilities that the person would otherwise be
required to provide have previously been installed, the person shall be
required to pay to the city a sewer charge consisting of a pro rata share of
such facilities as determined by the city manager.  If such previous
installation was made by the applicant or his/her predecessor in interest in
the property to which service is desired, the applicant may be entitled to
credit in an amount to be determined by the city manager for such
installation.  Previous installations eligible for these credits must have
been made less than 20 years before the application.  Credit for previous
installations will be applied against sewer charges, but in no event shall
such credits be greater than the amount paid for actual construction of the
extension.



   (C)   When installed, connected and finally inspected, all sewer
extensions shall be deemed automatically offered for dedication to the city
and upon acceptance shall become the property of the city.  All necessary
easements shall be granted to the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-11)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-17.  SPECIAL PROVISION FOR EXTENSION OF SYSTEM.



   (A)   When an application requires a sewer extension and it is
necessary or desirable to design the extension to serve an area or users,
actual or potential, in excess for that which the application is made, the
applicant may be eligible for a credit for a portion of the design and
construction costs for the extension.  Any such credit shall be granted in
an amount to be determined by the city manager.



   (B)   If the sewer to be constructed is included in the current
sewer master plan implementation schedule, and said sewer is constructed, in
part, by the applicant, the city manager may authorize an appropriate credit
against the applicant's sewer connection fee.  No applicant may receive a
credit for more than the total amount of sewer connection fees that would be
normally required of the applicant. Any credit granted by the city manager
shall only be for the actual engineering and construction costs of the sewer.



   (C)   Upon completion of a sewer which is not in the current sewer
master plan implementation schedule and to which future connections could be
made, the city manager shall determine the actual cost thereof and the
existing sewer charge against each front foot of abutting property, taking
into consideration intersections and other property that would not receive
water service.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-12)  (Ord. No. 2494)



DIVISION 3.  WASTEWATER INTRODUCTION INTO THE CITY'S MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER
SYSTEM



SEC. 19-25.  PROHIBITED; DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced to the
system, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater that causes pass
through or interference.  These general prohibitions apply to all persons,
whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other federal, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements.



   (B)   No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the
system the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:



      (1)   Pollutants that create a fire or explosive hazard in the
system, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the
test methods specified in 40 CFR Part 261.21;



      (2)   Any pollutant or wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or
more than 10.0, or that may otherwise cause corrosive structural damage to
the city system or equipment;



      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts that will cause
obstruction of the flow in the system resulting in interference but in no
case solids greater than ½-inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension;



      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants,
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause
interference with the system;



      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 140 degrees
Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius), or that will inhibit biological activity in
the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater that
causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed
104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius);



      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products
of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass
through;



      (7)   Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the system in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems;



      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the city manager in accordance with section 19-41 of this
article;



      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;



      (10)   Wastewater that imparts color that cannot be removed by
the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit;



      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except in compliance with applicable State or federal regulations;



      (12)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, single pass noncontact cooling water and unpolluted
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the city manager;



      (13)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
city manager;



      (14)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by
the city manager in an IWD permit;



      (15)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;



      (16)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances
that may cause excessive foaming in the system;



      (17)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 250 mg/l;



      (18)   Wastes defined as hazardous waste by RCRA or the
California Hazardous Waste Control Law; and/or



      (19)   Wastewater, when measured with a combustible gas
indicator, at the point of discharge into the system or at any point in the
system, that results in two readings over five percent or any single reading
over ten percent of the lower explosive limit of the combustible gas
indicator.



   (C)   No person shall process or store pollutants, substances, or
wastewater prohibited by this section in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the system.



   (D)   No person shall discharge any domestic or industrial
wastewater to the ground, into any surface drainage conduit, storm drain or
channel, or stream or other water course.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-13)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-26.  LOCAL LIMITS.



   (A)   Limits for the pollutants listed below are established to
protect against pass through and interference.  No person shall introduce,
or cause to be introduced, wastewater containing excessive quantities or
concentrations, as set out in a resolution adopted by the city council and in
accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.5(c), of the following pollutants:



      (1)   Arsenic;



      (2)   BOD5;



      (3)   Cadmium;



      (4)   Chromium;



      (5)   Copper;



      (6)   Cyanide;



      (7)   Lead;



      (8)   Mercury;



      (9)   Nickel;



      (10)   Oil and grease (petroleum or mineral oil products);



      (11)   Silver;



      (12)   Total suspended solids;



      (13)   Total toxic organics; and



      (14)   Zinc.



   (B)   (1)   Concentration limits apply at the point designated by
the city manager. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total"
metal. At the discretion of the city manager, mass limitations may be imposed
on users in addition to or in place of the concentration based limitations on
the above listed pollutants.



      (2)   Compliance with all parameters may be determined from a
single grab sample.



   (C)   The city manager may develop BMPs, by ordinance or in
individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits, to implement
local limits and the requirements of this section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-14)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2761)



SEC. 19-27.  FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   The federal categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated by
reference.  A violation of such standards shall constitute a violation of
this section.



   (B)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the city manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.6(c).



   (C)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the city manager
shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40
CFR Part 403.6(e).



   (D)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR Part 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.



   (E)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.15.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-15)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-28.  MEDICAL AND INFECTIOUS WASTES.



   (A)   The city manager may prohibit the introduction of medical
wastes and may require that any such wastes be rendered noninfectious prior
to discharge if deemed to pose a threat to public health and safety.



   (B)   No person shall discharge solid wastes from hospitals,
clinics, offices of medical doctors, convalescent homes, medical laboratories
or other medical facilities to the system including, but not limited to,
hypodermic needles, syringes, instruments, utensils or other paper and
plastic items of a disposable nature, or recognizable portions of the human
anatomy or laboratory animals, except where prior written approval for such
discharges is given by the city manager.  Approved discharges shall be
considered industrial wastewater discharge under this article.  The city
manager may revoke such approval at any time.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-16)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-29.  CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in IWD
permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the system.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-17)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-30.  SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.



   The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with
users, setting out special terms under which they may discharge into the
system.  In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement.  However, the user may request a net
gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR Part
403.15.  The user may also request a variance from the categorical
pretreatment standard from the approval authority.  Such a request will be
approved only if the user can prove that factors relating to its discharge
are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when
establishing that categorical pretreatment standard.  A user requesting a
fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR Part 403.13.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-18)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-31.  VARIANCES.



   (A)   The city manager may grant a variance from one or more of the
provisions of this article. Prior to issuing such a variance, the city
manager shall verify that in no case will the granting of a variance allow
the user to exceed applicable categorical pretreatment standards or
requirements or federally mandated prohibitions.



   (B)   The city manager may require the user to monitor the volumes
and/or concentrations of the discharge in excess of previous levels, if the
city manager deems it necessary to properly enforce any variance granted
under this section.



   (C)   The city manager reserves the right to impose requirements
that are stricter than, or in addition to, those specified under the
authority of sections 19-25 and 19-26 should the quantity or quality of the
user's discharge merit unique consideration by virtue of the impact of the
user's discharge on the system or public health and welfare.



   (D)   The city manager reserves the right to revoke the variance at
any time.



   (E)   The city manager reserves the right to charge additional fees
related to the granting of a variance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-19)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-32.  DILUTION.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water for the purpose of
diluting a discharge, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge. 
The city manager may impose mass limitations on users suspected of using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in
other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-20)  (Ord. No. 2494)



DIVISION 4.  PRETREATMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER



SEC. 19-35.  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.



   Users shall provide wastewater pretreatment as necessary to comply with
this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in section 19-25 of this
article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State, or the city
manager, whichever is more stringent.  Any facilities necessary for
compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at user's expense. 
Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the city manager for review, and shall be acceptable to the city
manager before such facilities are constructed.  The review of such plans
and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce a discharge
acceptable to the city manager under the provisions of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-21)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-36.  ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.



   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the city manager may require users
to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate domestic waste streams from
industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to
protect the system and determine the user's compliance with the requirements
of this article.



   (B)   The city manager may require any person discharging into the
system to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure active management of
flow.  An IWD permit may be issued solely for flow regulation.



   (C)   Users shall provide gravity separation devices when, in the
opinion of the city manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of oil and grease or sand.  All
gravity separation devices shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
city manager and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.  Such devices shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the user at user's expense.



   (D)   The city manager may require users with the potential to
discharge flammable substances to install and maintain an approved
combustible gas detection meter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-22)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-37.  SEPARATION OF DOMESTIC AND INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER.



   All domestic wastewater including, but not limited to, those from
restrooms, showers and drinking fountains shall be kept separate from all
industrial wastewater until the industrial wastewater has passed through any
required pretreatment system and/or monitoring facility.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-23)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-38.  SPILL PREVENTION PLANS.



   (A)   Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials, other regulated pollutants or wastewater called out
in this article or any other materials in concentration or quantities of
which could be detrimental to the system, its operation or personnel.  Each
floor drain or floor sink located in an area where regulated chemicals are
stored or used shall be protected in a manner approved by the city manager to
prevent uncontrolled or accidental discharges of these regulated constituents
from directly entering the system.  Facilities to prevent accidental
discharge shall be provided and maintained at the owner's and/or operator's
expense.  Detailed plans in the form of a spill prevention, control, and
countermeasures plan (showing facilities and operating procedures to provide
this protection) shall be submitted to the city manager for review and
approval prior to construction of said facilities.  Such review and approval
of plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the
responsibility of said facilities as necessary to meet the other requirements
of this article.



   (B)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event
of a dangerous discharge.  Employers shall ensure that all employees who may
cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.



   (C)   Any user who causes or discovers a slug discharge of regulated
pollutants or wastewater into the system shall immediately telephone the city
manager in order that corrective action may be taken to protect the system,
its operation and personnel.  In addition, the person responsible for the
discharge of the wastes or wastewater shall file a written report to the city
manager, detailing the date, time and cause of the accidental discharge, the
quantity and characteristics of the discharge and corrective action taken to
prevent future discharges.  The report shall be filed within five days of
the occurrence of the discharge.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-24)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-39.  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.



   (A)   The city manager shall evaluate whether each significant
industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The city
manager may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement
such a plan. Alternatively, the city manager may develop such a plan for any
user.



   (B)   An accidental discharge/control slug plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the city manager of
any accidental or slug discharge; and



      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-25)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2761)



SEC. 19-40.  TENANT AND OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES.



   Any tenant under any rental, lease, or other agreement shall be jointly
and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this article
in the same manner as the owner, and both owner and tenant shall be jointly
and severally liable to the city for any costs, damages, fines or penalties
incurred and/or imposed by the city due to noncompliance by the tenant or
owner with provisions of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-26)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-41.  DISCHARGES OF WASTES OR WASTEWATER INTO THE SYSTEM FROM
VEHICLES.



   (A)   Septage may be introduced into the system only at locations
designated by the city manager, and at such times as are established by the
city manager.  Such wastes shall not violate the provisions of division 3 of
this article or any other federal, State or local regulation.  The city
manager may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain IWD permits.



   (B)   Industrial waste or wastewater haulers shall obtain IWD
permits from the city manager.  The city manager may require generators of
hauled industrial waste or wastewater to obtain IWD permits. The city manager
also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste or wastewater. 
The discharge of hauled industrial waste or wastewater is subject to all
other requirements of this article.



   (C)   Industrial waste or wastewater haulers may only discharge
loads at locations designated by the city manager.  No load may be
discharged without prior consent of the city manager.  The city manager may
collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable
standards.  The city manager may require the hauler to provide a waste
analysis of any load prior to discharge.



   (D)   Industrial waste or wastewater haulers must provide a
waste-tracking form for every load.  This form shall include, at a minimum,
the name and address of the industrial waste or wastewater hauler, permit
number, truck identification, source of waste or wastewater, and volume and
characteristics of waste or wastewater.  The form shall identify the type of
industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are
hazardous wastes designated in RCRA.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-27)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-42.  VANDALISM.



   No person shall willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance
or equipment, or other part of the system.  Any person found in violation of
this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in divisions 8
through 10 of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-28)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-43.  DISCHARGES FROM FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, VEHICLE MAINTENANCE
FACILITIES, AND COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL LAUNDRIES.



   (A)   All food establishments or similar establishments that
introduce industrial wastewater into the system shall install an approved
grease interceptor that is of sufficient size so as to prevent excessive
discharges of oil and/or grease into the system.  The grease interceptor
shall be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.  The city manager
may grant variances from the requirements of this paragraph on a case-by-case
basis.  The city manager may take into account the following items when
determining whether to grant a variance:



      (1)   Size of the restaurant;



      (2)   Type and number of meals served per day;



      (3)   Seating capacity;



      (4)   Dishwashing facilities on-site; and



      (5)   Any other criteria the city manager deems applicable.



   (B)   All vehicle maintenance facilities that introduce industrial
wastewater into the system shall be required to install a gravity separation
device designed to prevent the excessive discharge of sand, silt, oil and
grease into the system.  The city manager may grant variances from the
requirements of this paragraph on a case-by-case basis.



   (C)   All commercial and industrial laundries that introduce
industrial wastewater into the system shall install a gravity separation
device of a size and design approved by the city manager.  These facilities
shall also install other pretreatment facilities as required by the city
manager to ensure their compliant with all requirements and provisions of
this article.  The city manager may grant variances from the requirements of
this section on a case-by-case basis.



   (D)   If the city manager finds that a grease interceptor or gravity
separation device installed prior to the effective date of this article is
incapable of adequately retaining the grease, sand or oil in the wastewater
flow from a food establishment, a vehicle maintenance facility, or a laundry,
the city manager shall require that an adequately sized grease interceptor,
gravity separation device or other pretreatment facility be installed within
a reasonable time period.



   (E)   The city manager may maintain an information file available
for public use of acceptable designs of grease interceptors and gravity
separation devices.  The installation of a design shown in such file or of
any design meeting the size requirement set forth in this article or any
recommendation of requirements made by the city manager shall not impute any
liability to the city for the adequacy of the interceptor or gravity
separation device under the actual conditions of use.  Such installation
shall not relieve the owner or proprietor of responsibility for keeping
prohibited substances or substances above the limitations of this article out
of the system.  If the user's grease interceptor, gravity separation device
or other pretreatment facility is not adequate under the conditions of use,
the user shall construct a pretreatment facility that is effective in
accomplishing the intended purpose and meeting the provisions of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-29)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-44.  MAINTENANCE OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND GRAVITY SEPARATION
DEVICES.



   (A)   Any grease interceptor or gravity separation device required
by this article shall be readily accessible for inspection and properly
maintained to assure that the accumulations of grease, sand or oil do not
impair its efficiency or pass out with the effluent.



   (B)   All persons required to use and maintain a grease interceptor
or gravity separation device shall keep records of the pretreatment device
cleaning, maintenance and grease removal and provide such reports on request
to the city manager.  These records shall include the date, the name of the
person who cleaned the device and the disposal site of the waste.  The
report may be reviewed by the city manager at each routine inspection.



   (C)   Persons hauling wastes and wastewater removed from these
interceptors or gravity separation devices shall be registered to do so by
the appropriate permitting agency.



   (D)   An interceptor or gravity separation device shall not be
considered properly maintained if material accumulations total more than 25
percent of the operating fluid capacity.



   (E)   Improper maintenance of any grease interceptors and gravity
separation devices or failure to maintain adequate records shall be
considered a violation of this section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-30)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-45.  LIMITATIONS ON THE USE OF GARBAGE GRINDERS.



   Pollutants from garbage grinders shall not be discharged into the
system except as follows:



   (A)   Wastes generated in preparation of food in a residence;



   (B)   Where the user has an existing garbage grinder and has an
approval for that specific use from the city, and agrees to undertake
whatever self-monitoring is required to enable the city to equitably
determine the charges and fees based on the waste constituents and
characteristics.  Such grinders must be repaired or replaced as necessary in
order to at all times ensure that the waste is shredded to a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under normal flow conditions prevailing in
the city system.  Garbage grinders shall not be used for grinding plastic,
paper products, inert materials, garden refuse, or waste products resulting
from the handling, storage and sale of fruits and vegetables in wholesale and
retail produce establishments, or wastes from plants engaged in the
preparation, processing or preserving of foods not intended primarily for
immediate consumption; and



   (C)   At any time the property or business changes ownership,
excluding residential property, any existing garbage grinders installed on
the property must be removed and no new garbage grinders may be installed as
a condition of continued city sewer service to the property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-31)  (Ord. No. 2494)



DIVISION 5.  INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT SYSTEM



SEC. 19-50.  INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.



   When requested by the city manager, an industrial user shall submit
information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30
days of the request.  The city manager is authorized to prepare a form for
this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update this
information.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-32)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-51.  INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No industrial user shall discharge wastewater, either directly
or indirectly, into the system without first obtaining an IWD permit from the
city manager.



   (B)   The city manager may require other users to obtain an IWD
permit as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.



   (C)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an IWD permit
shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the user to the
sanctions set out in divisions 8 through 10 of this article.  Obtaining an
IWD permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all
federal and State pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other
requirements of federal, State and local law.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-33)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-52.  CONNECTIONS.



   Any user required to obtain an IWD permit that proposes to begin or
recommence discharging into the system shall obtain such permit prior to
beginning or recommencing such discharge.  An application for an IWD permit,
in accordance with sections 19-53 and 19-55 of this article, shall be filed
at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or
recommence.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-34)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-53.  EXTRA-JURISDICTIONAL INDUSTRIAL USERS.



   New users located beyond the city limits that are required to obtain an
IWD permit shall submit a permit application to the city manager 90 days
prior to any proposed discharge into the system. Upon review of such
application, the city manager may enter into an agreement with the user that
requires the user to subject itself to and abide by this article, including
all permitting, compliance monitoring, reporting, and enforcement provisions
herein.  Alternately, the city manager may enter into an agreement with the
neighboring jurisdiction in which the user is located to provide for the
implementation and enforcement of pretreatment program requirements against
the user.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-35)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-54.  INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.



   (A)   All users required to obtain an IWD permit shall submit a
permit application to the city manager at least 90 days before any proposed
discharge.  The city manager may require any user to submit as part of an
application the following information:



      (1)   All information required by section 19-71(C) of this
article;



      (2)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant
processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility that are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the system;



      (3)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation;



      (4)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and rate of production;



      (5)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);



      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans,
and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size,
location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;



      (7)   Time and duration of the discharge; and



      (8)   Any other relevant information deemed necessary by the
city manager to evaluate the application.



   (B)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed
and will be returned to the user for revision.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-36)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-55.  APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION.



   All IWD permit applications shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:



“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted.  Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.”



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-37)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-56.  DECISIONS.



   The city manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information.  Within 60 days of receipt of a complete
permit application, the city manager will determine whether or not to issue
an IWD permit.  The city manager may deny any application for an IWD permit,
for good cause.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-38)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-57.  DURATION.



   IWD permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed
five years.  An IWD permit may be issued for a period less than five years,
at the discretion of the city manager.  Each IWD permit shall indicate a
specific date of expiration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-39)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-58.  CONTENTS.



   (A)   An IWD permit shall include such conditions as are reasonably
deemed necessary by the city manager to prevent pass through or interference,
protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's
effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate biosolids management
and reuse, and protect against damage to the system.



   (B)   IWD permits shall contain:



      (1)   A statement of the duration of the permit, which in no
event shall exceed five years;



      (2)   A statement that the permit is nontransferable without
prior notification to and approval of the city manager in accordance with
section 19-61, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a
copy of the existing permit;



      (3)   Effluent limits, including BMPs based on applicable
pretreatment standards;



      (4)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
frequency, and sample type based on federal, State and local law;



      (5)   A statement of applicable civil, criminal and
administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and
requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not
extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal,
State or local law; and



      (6)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by
the city manager to be necessary.



   (C)   IWD permits may contain additions as the city manager deems
necessary, including, but not limited to, the following conditions:



      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge,
time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the system;



      (3)   Requirements for the development and implementation of
spill control plans or other special conditions including management
practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or
non-routine discharges;



      (4)   Development and implementation of waste minimization
plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the system;



      (5)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling, facilities and equipment;



      (6)   A statement that compliance with the permit does not
relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable
federal and State pretreatment standards, including those that become
effective during the term of the permit; and



      (7)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city
manager to ensure compliance with this article, and State and federal laws,
rules and regulations.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-40)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2761)



SEC. 19-59.  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person, including the user, may petition the city to
reconsider the terms of an IWD permit by filing a petition for
reconsideration with the city clerk within ten days of its issuance.



   (B)   Failure to submit a timely petition for reconsideration shall
be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative remedy.



   (C)   The petition for reconsideration shall set out the permit
provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the proposed
alternative condition, if any, the petitioner seeks to be included in the
permit.



   (D)   The conditions and provisions of the permit objected to by the
user shall not be stayed pending a hearing on the petition.



   (E)   If the city manager fails to act within 45 days, the petition
shall be deemed approved.  Decisions not to reconsider a permit, not to
issue a permit, or not to modify a permit shall be considered final
administrative actions.



   (F)   Parties seeking judicial review of such final administrative
petitions shall comply with the requirements set out in Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure, Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-41)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-60.  MODIFICATION.



   (A)   The city manager may modify a permit for good cause.



   (B)   Good cause includes, but is not limited to, the following
reasons:



      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, State or
local pretreatment standards or requirements;



      (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the
user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or characteristic since the
time of permit issuance;



      (3)   A change in the system that requires either a temporary
or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;



      (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge
poses a threat to the system, city employees, or the receiving waters;



      (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit;



      (6)   Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all
relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting;



      (7)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standard pursuant to 40 CFR Part 403.13;



      (8)   To correct typographical or other errors in the permit;
or



      (9)   To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or
operation to a new owner/operator.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-42)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-61.  TRANSFER.



   (A)   IWD permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only
if the permittee gives at least 30 days advance notice to the city manager
and the city manager approves the transfer.  The notice shall include a
written certification by the new owner or operator that:



      (1)   The new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility's operations and processes;



      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to
occur; and



      (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing permit.



   (B)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
permit void as of the date of facility transfer.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-43)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-62.  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The city manager may revoke an IWD permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:



      (1)   Failure to notify the city manager of significant
changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;



      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the city
manager of changed conditions pursuant to section 19-75 of this article;



      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the permit application;



      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;



      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;



      (6)   Refusing to allow the city manager timely access to the
facility premises and records;



      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;



      (8)   Failure to pay fines;



      (9)   Failure to pay sewer use charges;



      (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;



      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the permit
application;



      (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of
business ownership of a permitted facility; or



      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement,
or any terms of the permit or this article.



   (B)   IWD permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or
transfer of business ownership. All IWD permits issued to a particular user
are void upon the issuance of a new IWD permit to that user.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-44)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-63.  REISSUANCE.



   A user holding an expiring IWD permit shall apply for reissuance of the
permit by submitting a complete IWD permit application in accordance with
sections 19-54 and 19-55 of this article, at least 90 days prior to the
expiration of the user's existing permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-45)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-64.  CONTINUATION OF EXPIRED INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.



   An expired IWD permit will continue to be effective and enforceable
until the permit is reissued if:



   (A)   The user has submitted a complete IWD permit application at
least 90 days prior to the expiration date of the user's existing permit; and



   (B)   The failure to reissue the IWD permit before the expiration of
the existing permit is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of
the user.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-46)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-65.  MUNICIPAL USER PERMITS.



   (A)   If another legal jurisdiction outside the city, or user
located within another legal jurisdiction outside the system, contributes
wastewater to the system, the city manager shall enter into an agreement for
wastewater services with the municipality or users pursuant to section 19-53
of this article.



   (B)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (A)
of this section, the city manager shall request the following information
from the contributing municipality:



      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater
discharged to the system by the contributing municipality;



      (2)   An inventory of all users within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the system; and



      (3)   Any other information as the city manager may deem
necessary.



   (C)   An agreement, as required by subsection (A) of this section,
shall contain the following conditions:



      (1)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt
a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this article and
local limits that are at least as stringent as those established under
authority of section 19-26.  The requirement shall specify that such
ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to
this article or local limits;



      (2)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to
submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;



      (3)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including IWD permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and
enforcement will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of
these will be conducted by the city manager; and which of these activities
will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the city
manager;



      (4)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to
provide the city manager with access to all information that the contributing
municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;



      (5)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the
contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to
the system;



      (6)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing
municipality's discharge;



      (7)   A provision ensuring the city manager access to the
facilities of users located in the contributing municipality's jurisdictional
boundaries for the purpose of inspecting, sampling, and any other duties
deemed necessary by the city manager; and



      (8)   A provision specifying remedies for breach of the terms
of the agreement.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-47)  (Ord. No. 2494)



DIVISION 6.  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS



SEC. 19-70.  MONITORING FACILITIES.



   (A)   All users required to obtain an IWD permit shall furnish,
install and properly maintain a monitoring facility for wastewater
sampling.  This monitoring facility shall be of a design or configuration
approved by the city manager, who may require flow measurement equipment,
automatic flow proportional sampling equipment and automatic wastewater
analysis and data recording equipment.



   (B)   Each user, as a part of its application for obtaining an IWD
permit, shall propose a suitable location and design for the wastewater
monitoring facility.  Upon approval of the monitoring facility by the city
manager, the user shall perform wastewater monitoring at this facility.  The
monitoring facility shall be located so as to be safe and accessible to city
employees, and shall be constructed in accordance with the city's
requirements, and all applicable local building codes and other local
construction requirements.  The user's proposal for a wastewater monitoring
facility shall comply with the city's design requirements and shall be
reviewed and approved by the city manager.  Plans for all wastewater
monitoring facilities, including flow measurement and sampling systems,
determined by the city manager to require engineering design, shall be
prepared and signed by a civil, chemical or mechanical engineer registered in
the State or a registered engineer of other suitable discipline as determined
by the city manager.



   (C)   The user's wastewater sampling analysis and flow measurement
procedures, equipment, and results shall be subject to inspection by the city
manager at any time.  Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order
at all times by the user.



   (D)   Failure of a user to keep approved wastewater monitoring
facilities clean and in good working order shall not be grounds for the user
to claim that any sample results are unrepresentative of the user's
wastewater.  Flow measurement systems shall be regularly maintained and
calibrated in accordance with guidelines established by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-48)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-71.  BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.



   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard by an agency with the appropriate
jurisdiction and authority to adopt categorical pretreatment standards, or
within 180 days after the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 CFR Part 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
system shall submit to the city manager a report which contains the
information listed in subsection (C) below.



   (B)   At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new
sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the
promulgation of applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the city
manager a report which contains the information listed in subsection (C)
below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use
to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also give
estimates of anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.



   (C)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below, and all such submittals must be signed and certified in accordance
with section 19-55 of this chapter:



      (1)   The name and address of the facility, including the name
of the operator and owner;



      (2)   A list of any environmental control permits held by or
for the facility;



      (3)   A brief description of the nature, average rate of
production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation carried
out by the user including a schematic process diagram that indicates points
of discharge to the system from the regulated processes;



      (4)   Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the system from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula set out in 40 CFR Part 403.6(e);



      (5)   (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process;



         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying
the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or
the city manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process including instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term
average concentrations, or mass, where required;



         (c)   The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
section 19-79 of this article. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in section 19-80 of this article.



      (6)   A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;



      (7)   If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required
to meet the pretreatment standards, the user shall provide the city manager
with the shortest schedule by which the user shall complete such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set
out in section 19-72 of this article;



      (8)   Any other relevant information requested by the city
manager; and



      (9)   Signed and certified baseline monitoring reports in
accordance with section 19-71 of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-49)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2761, 2875)



SEC. 19-72.  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES.



   The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by
section 19-71(C)(7) of this article:



   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards such events include, but are
not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation;



   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;



   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the city manager no
later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, at a minimum, whether user complied with the increment
of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being
taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and



   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-50)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-73.  REPORT ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE.



   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the system, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
city manager a report containing the information described in section
19-71(C)(4) through (6).  For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
Part 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's
long-term production rate.  For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge
per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall
include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling
period.  All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with section 19-55 of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-51)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-74.  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the city manager, but in no case less than twice per year (in
June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration
of pollutants in the discharge that are limited by pretreatment standards and
the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting
period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation
required by the city manager of the pretreatment standard necessary to
determine the compliance status of the user. All periodic compliance reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with section 19-55 of this article.



   (B)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.



   (C)   If a user, subject to the reporting requirement in this
section, monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city
manager, using the procedures prescribed in section 19-79 of this article,
the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report sent to the
city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-52)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2761)



SEC. 19-75.  REPORT OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Each user shall notify the city manager of any planned
significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the
nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the
change.



   (B)   The city manager may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of an IWD permit application under sections or 19-54
or 19-55 of this article, if necessary.



   (C)   The city manager may issue an IWD permit under section 19-56
of this article, or modify an existing IWD permit under section 19-60 of this
article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.



   (D)   For purposes of this section, significant changes include, but
are not limited to, flow increases of 25% or greater, and the discharge of
any previously unreported pollutants.



   (E)   (1)   An IU shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities in
writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261.  Such
notification must inlcude the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40
CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge
(continuous, batch, or other).  If the IU discharges more than 100 kilograms
of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also
contain the following information to the extent such information is known and
readily available to the IU: an identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such
constituents in wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an
estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be
discharged during the following 12 months.  All notifications must take
place within 180 days after the effective date of this rule.  Industrial
users who commence discharging after the effective date of this rule shall
provide the notification no later than 180 days after the discharge of the
listed or characteristic hazardous waste.  Any notification under this
subsection need by submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. 
However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under 40 CFR
403.12(j).  The notification requirement in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR
403.12(b), (d), and (e).



      (2)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of
subsection (E)(1) of this section during a calendar month in which they
discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes
are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). 
Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a
calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. 
Subsequent months during which the IU discharges more than such quantities of
any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.



      (3)   In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of
RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the IU must notify the POTW, the
EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State hazardous
waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the
effective date of such regulations.



      (4)   In the case of any notification made under subsection
(E) of this section, the IU shall certify that it has a program in place to
reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it
has determined to be economically practical.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-53)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2875)



SEC. 19-76.  REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.



   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, which may cause potential
problems for the system, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the
city manager of the incident. This notification shall include the location of
the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the user.



   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall,
unless this requirement is waived by the city manager, submit a detailed
written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be
taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability
that may be incurred as a result of damage to the system, natural resources,
or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such notification
relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability that may be
imposed by this article or any other applicable provision of federal, State
or local law.



   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of
a discharge described in subsection (A) above. Employers shall ensure that
all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.



   (D)   Significant industrial users are required to notify the city
manager immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential
for a slug discharge.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-54)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2761)



SEC. 19-77.  REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.



   All users not required to obtain an IWD permit shall provide
appropriate reports as the city manager may require.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-55)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-78.  NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.



   If a user's sampling indicates a violation, the user shall notify the
city manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user
shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the city manager within 30 days after becoming aware of
the violation. The user is not required to resample if the city manager
conducts monitoring at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the
city manager samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user
receives the results of this sampling. If the city performed the sampling and
analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the city will perform the repeat
sampling and analysis unless the city notifies the industrial user of the
violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling and analysis.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-56)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2761)



SEC. 19-79.  ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of an IWD permit application or report shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard.  If
40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance
with procedures approved by the EPA.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-57)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-80.  SAMPLE COLLECTION.



   (A)   Except as indicated in subsection (B) below, the user shall
collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques.  In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the city
manager may authorize the use of time proportional sampling. Where
time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the
city manager, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using
protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136
and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a
24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for
cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the
laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the
samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other
parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved
EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city manager, as appropriate. In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous
discharge limits.



   (B)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds shall be obtained using grab
collection techniques.



   (C)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and
90-day compliance reports required in section 19-71 and 19-73 (40 CFR
403.12(b) and (d)), a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH,
cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic
compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for
facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the city manager
may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by section 19-74 (40
CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the industrial user is required to collect the
number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.



   (D)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the
regulated process if no pretreatment exists.  If other wastewaters are mixed
with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure
the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with
the pretreatment standards.  Where an alternate concentration or mass limit
has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit
along with supporting data shall be submitted to the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-58)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2761, 2875)



SEC. 19-81.  MONITORING CHARGES.



   The city manager may recover the city's expenses incurred in collecting
and analyzing samples of the user's discharge and may collect such charges in
the manner specified in division 11 of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-59)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-82.  TIMING.



   Written reports, applications, notices, and all mailings shall be
deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked.  For reports that are
not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United
States mail, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-60)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-83.  RECORD KEEPING.



   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements, and documentation associated with BMPs established under
section 19-26(C).  Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and
time of sampling and the name of the person taking the samples, the dates
analyses were performed, who performed the analyses, the analytical
techniques or methods used, and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning
the user or the city or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-61)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2761)



DIVISION 7.  COMPLIANCE MONITORING



SEC. 19-90.  RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   (A)   The city manager shall have the right to enter the premises of
any user to determine whether the user is complying with the requirements of
this article and any IWD permit or order issued hereunder.  Users shall
allow the city manager ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspecting, sampling, examining and copying records, and
performing of any additional duties.



   (B)   Where a user has security measures in force that require
proper identification and clearance before entry into user's premises, the
user shall make necessary arrangements with user's security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the city manager will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.



   (C)   The city manager shall have the right to set up on the user's
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operation.



   (D)   The city manager may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary.  The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment
shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by
the user at user's sole expense.  All devices used to measure wastewater
flow shall be electronically calibrated at least every six months and
hydraulically calibrated at least every five years to ensure their accuracy.



   (E)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the city manager and shall not
be replaced.  The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.



   (F)   Refusal of access or unreasonable delays in allowing the city
manager access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
The city manager may give notice of inspections at the city managers
discretion, but unannounced inspections are an important part of the city's
enforcement program, and users shall have no right to advance notice of any
city inspections.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-62)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-91.  INSPECTION; SEARCH WARRANTS.



   If the city manager has been refused access to a building, structure or
property, or any part thereof, in violation of this article and/or any IWD
permit, the city manager may seek issuance of an inspection or search warrant
from a court in addition to pursuing any other remedies available to the city
provided by federal, State or local law.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-63)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-92.  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data provided to the city manager pursuant to
this part which is effluent data shall be available to the public without
restriction.



   (B)   Unless eligible for confidential treatment as provided in 40
CFR Part 2, all other information which is submitted to the city manager
pursuant to this article shall be available to the public in accordance with
the California Public Records Act and at least to the extent provided by 40
CFR 2.302.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-64)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2875)



SEC. 19-93.  PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT VIOLATORS.



   (A)   In accordance with the public participation requirements of 40
CFR Part 25, the city manager shall at least annually publish a list of the
users that, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
Publication  pursuant to this section shall be in a newspaper(s) of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s)
served by the POTW of IUs which were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment requirements.  The cost of such publication, if any,
may be charged to such users by the city manager in accordance with division
11 of this article.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, a SIU (or any IU which
violates paragraphs (3), (4), or (8) of this subsection) is in significant
noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:



      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined as those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l);



      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as
those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceeds the product of
the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous
limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l), multiplied by the applicable TRC (1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH);



      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public;



      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted
in the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR
403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge;



      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;



      (6)   Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date,
any required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;



      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or



      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations,  which may
include a violation of BMPs, that the POTW determines will adversely affect
the operation or implementation of the city's pretreatment program.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-65)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2761, 2875)



DIVISION 8.  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES



SEC. 19-100.  NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, an IWD permit or order
issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
manager may serve upon that user a written notice of violation.



   (B)   (1)   Within ten days of the service of such notice, the
user shall submit to the city manager an explanation of the violation and a
plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, including
specific required actions.



      (2)   Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city
manager to take any action, including emergency action or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-66)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-101.  CONSENT ORDERS.



   The city manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any
user responsible for the noncompliance.  Such documents shall include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period specified by the document.  Such documents shall have the same
force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to section
19-103 and 19-104 of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-67)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-102.  ORDER TO SHOW CAUSE.



   (A)   The city manager may order a user that has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, an IWD permit or an
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to
appear before the city manager and show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken.  Notice shall be served on the user, specifying
the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the
reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken.



   (B)   The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days
before the meeting.  Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user.  An order to show cause shall not be a bar
against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-68)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-103.  ADMINISTRATIVE COMPLIANCE ORDERS.



   (A)   When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, an IWD permit or an
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the city manager may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge, directing that the user come into compliance within a specified
time.  If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided,
sewer service may be discontinued until such time as the conditions of the
administrative order have been satisfied.



   (B)   Issuance of an administrative compliance order shall not be a
bar against, or a prerequisite for, the taking of any other action against
the user.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-69)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-104.  CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.



   (A)   When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, an IWD permit or order
issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirements, or that the
user's past violations are likely to recur, the city manager may issue an
order to the user directing the user to cease and desist all such violations
and directing the user to:



      (1)   Immediately comply with all applicable requirements; and



      (2)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as
may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.



   (B)   Issuance of a cease-and-desist order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, the taking of any other against the user.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-70)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-105.  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   (A)   When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, an IWD permit or an
order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
manager may issue an administrative complaint alleging the act or failure to
act that constitutes the violation, the provisions of law authorizing
imposition of the administrative fine, and the proposed administrative fine.



   (B)   The administrative complaint shall be served by personal
delivery or certified mail on the user and shall inform the user that a
hearing shall be conducted within 60 days after the user has been served. 
The hearing officer shall be the public works director or designee.  The
user may waive the right to a hearing, in which case the hearing officer
shall not conduct the hearing and decide the matter based upon the
administrative complaint.  Any user dissatisfied by the decision of the
hearing officer may appeal the hearing officer's decision to the city council
within 30 days of notice of the hearing officer's decision.



   (C)   The city manager may recommend, and the hearing officer and
city council may impose, administrative fines as follows:



      (1)   In an amount not to exceed $2,000 per day for failing or
refusing to furnish a self-monitoring report or any other technical report
required by this article;



      (2)   In an amount not to exceed $3,000 per day for failing or
refusing to timely comply with any compliance schedule order by the city
manager;



      (3)   In an amount to exceed $5,000 per violation per day for
discharges in violation of discharge standards or limits, permit conditions,
or prohibitions issued, reissued, or adopted by the city manager; and



      (4)   In an amount not to exceed $10 per gallon for discharges
in violation of any suspension, cease-and-desist order or other orders, or
prohibitions issued, reissued, or adopted by the city manager.



   (D)   The amount of any administrative fine imposed under this
section, which remains delinquent for a period of 60 days or more, shall
accrue interest at a standard rate of ten percent.  Further, the amount of
any administrative fine and interest accrued that remains delinquent after 60
days shall constitute a lien against the real property of the user from which
the discharge originated.



   (E)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action, whether criminal or civil,
against the user.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-71)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-106.  EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.



   (A)   The city manager may immediately suspend a user's permission
to discharge into the system, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop
an actual or threatened discharge that could or does cause an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the operation of the system, to the environment
or the public health, safety or welfare.  The city manager may also
immediately suspend a user's discharge, after the user is given notice and
opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the
system, or that presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment
or the public health, safety or welfare.



   (B)   Any user notified of the suspension of the user's permission
to discharge into the system shall immediately halt discharge into the
system.  In the event any user fails to immediately comply voluntarily with
the suspension order, the city manager may take such steps as deemed
necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent
or minimize damage to the system, the receiving waters, to the environment or
the public health, safety or welfare.  The city manager may allow the user
to recommence discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the city manager that the threat of endangerment has passed, unless the
termination proceedings set forth in section 19-107 of this article are
initiated against the user.



   (C)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful or potentially harmful
discharge and the measures taken to prevent any such future occurrence, to
the city manager before the date of any order to show cause or termination
hearing under sections 19-102 and 19-107 of this article.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring any
hearing before issuance of any suspension order and the taking of any action
permitted under this section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-72)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-107.  TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.



   (A)   In addition to all other remedies available under this
article, federal, State and local law, the city manager may terminate any
user's permission to discharge into the system if the user does any of the
following acts:



      (1)   Violates IWD permit conditions;



      (2)   Fails to accurately report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of the user's discharge;



      (3)   Fails to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;



      (4)   Refuses reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or



      (5)   Violates the pretreatment standards in division 3 of
this article.



   (B)   Any user violating the provisions in subsection (A) will be
notified of the proposed termination of the user's permission to discharge
into the system and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section
19-102 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. 
Exercise of this option by the city manager shall not be a bar to, or a
prerequisite for, taking any action, whether criminal or civil, against the
user.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-73)  (Ord. No. 2494)



DIVISION 9.  JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES



SEC. 19-115.  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   (A)   When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, an IWD permit, or an
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the city manager, through the city attorney, may petition the Ventura County
Superior Court for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, that restrains or compels the specific performance of the
conditions/ requirements of an IWD permit, order, or other requirement
imposed by this article on activities of the user.



   (B)   The city manager may also seek other appropriate legal and/or
equitable relief; including an order for the user to conduct environmental
remediation.  A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against,
or prerequisite for, the taking of any action against, whether criminal or
civil, against a user.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-74)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-116.  CIVIL PENALTIES.



   (A)   A user that has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, an IWD permit, or an order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement may be liable to the city for
a maximum civil penalty of $10,000 per violation per day.



   (B)   The city filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking other enforcement action, whether
criminal or civil, against a user.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-75)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-117.  CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.



   (A)   A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of
this article, an IWD permit or an order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



   (B)   A user who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan
or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
article, an IWD permit, or an order issued hereunder, or that falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-76)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-118.  REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The provisions in this article are not exclusive remedies.  The city
manager may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user.  Enforcement of pretreatment violations is authorized by
this article and by state and federal law, and will generally be in
accordance with the city’s enforcement response plan, which contains
detailed procedures indicating how the city will investigate and respond to
instances of industrial user noncompliance, including: (1) how the city will
investigate instances of noncompliance; (2) the types of escalating
enforcement responses the city will take in response to all anticipated types
of industrial user violations and the time periods within which responses
will take place; (3) identification by title of the officials responsible for
each type of response; and (4) consistency with the city’s primary
responsibility to enforce all applicable pretreatment requirements and
standards, as detailed in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1) and (f)(2).  However, the city
manager may take other action against any user when the circumstances
warrant.  Further, the city manager is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-77)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2875)



DIVISION 10.  SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION



SEC. 19-125.  PERFORMANCE BONDS.



   The city manager may decline to issue or reissue an IWD permit to a
user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous
IWD permit, or an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, unless the user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to
the city, in a sum to be determined by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-78)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-126.  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   The city manager may decline to issue or reissue an IWD permit to a
user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous
IWD permit, or an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that the user has
obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the
system caused by the user's discharge.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-79)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-127.  WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE.



   Whenever a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this article, an IWD permit, or an order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be
severed.  Service will recommence, at the user's expense, only after the
user has satisfactorily demonstrated the user's ability to comply.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-80)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-128.  INFORMANT REWARDS.



   The city manager is authorized to pay up to $500 for information
leading to the discovery of noncompliance by a user. In the event that the
information provided results in an administrative fine or civil penalty
levied against the user, the city manager is authorized to disperse up to ten
percent of the collected fine or penalty to the informant.  However, a
single reward payment may not exceed $10,000.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-81)  (Ord. No. 2494)



DIVISION 11.  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



SEC. 19-133.  WASTEWATER RATES.



   (A)   The rates charged for all wastewater collected by the city
shall be established by ordinance of the City Council. Each customer
receiving wastewater service is liable for payment for such service at the
rates so established.



   (B)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code section 53756, and after notice
is provided as required by law, the adopted rates shall automatically adjust
over a five-year period for inflation in the cost of operating the city’s
wastewater system. If the actual inflation in natural gas and electricity
rates paid by the city since the effective date of the rates exceeds the rate
study’s cumulative forecast for inflation in utility costs for that same
period, the rates will be automatically adjusted to recover the difference
between the two. For example, if in year three of these rates the actual
inflation in natural gas and electricity rates paid by the city since the
effective date of the rates is 8.75% and the rate model estimates a
cumulative increase of 7.5% over that same time period, then the inflation
adjustment for that year would be 1.25%. On the other hand, if the actual
inflation in natural gas and utility rates for this example time period is
7.5%, then no inflation adjustment would be made for that year as the actual
inflation would equal the estimated inflation in the rate model. The city
shall issue the adjustments no more than once per calendar year, and these
adjustments will be effective at least 60 calendar days thereafter.



   (C)   When the City Council declares the existence of a water
shortage condition pursuant to City Code Section 22-154, the wastewater
treatment rates and charges provided herein that are based on water use shall
be adjusted to reflect the level of severity and corresponding mandatory
water conservation percentage reflected in the water shortage condition
declaration. For example, if the Council declares a Stage 2 water shortage
condition with a mandatory water use reduction goal of 20%, then the rates
provided herein that are based on water use, shall be concurrently adjusted
upward by the same percentage - 20%. This adjustment shall be initiated as of
the effective date of the water shortage declaration and terminate as of the
date of the termination of that water shortage declaration.



(Ord. No. 2917)



SEC. 19-134  FEES AND CHARGES.



   The fees, charges and rates set forth below shall be charged and
collected for the use of and for other privileges and services relating to
the Regional Wastewater Treatment System of the City of Oxnard:



   (A)   [reserved]



   (B)   City of Oxnard user charge for wastewater system. The rate for
City user classes or individual users of the wastewater system shall be
calculated by the “City of Oxnard User Charge Formula” (the Oxnard
Formula) as follows:



      OMUC = p (Vm) + q (Bm) + r (Sm)



      Where:



      OMUC   =   Oxnard monthly user charge in dollars



      Vm      =   monthly wastewater discharge in millions of
gallons



      Bm      =   monthly BOD discharge in thousands of pounds



      Sm      =   monthly SS discharge in thousands of pounds



      p, q and r are unit cost coefficients established as follows:



 


Service

 

Effective July 1, 2017

 

Effective January 1, 2018

 

Effective January 1, 2019

 

Effective January 1, 2020

 

Effective January 1, 2021



Monthly wastewater discharge/millions of gallons
 
p =
 

$3,061.50

 

$3,222.23

 

$3,391.40

 

$3,569.45

 

$3,756.85



Monthly BOD discharge/ thousands of pounds
 
q =
 

$697.59

 

$734.22

 

$772.77

 

$813.35

 

$856.06



Monthly SS discharge/ thousands of pounds
 
r =
 

$551.70

 

$580.67

 

$611.16

 

$643.25

 

$677.03




 



      (1)   Formula users (industrial and commercial). The monthly
user charge for formula users shall be calculated using the Oxnard Formula.
Industrial and commercial users billed by Oxnard Formula shall be those so
designated by the Public Works Director. For those formula users that do not
provide metered wastewater flow data, the wastewater flow shall be assumed to
be 90% of water consumed. For those users that provide engineering data
acceptable to the Public Works Director showing a different percentage, the
wastewater flows will be based on that data.



      (2)   Non-formula users (industrial, commercial and
governmental). The monthly user charge for non-residential users of the
system that are not classified as formula users by the Public Works Director
shall be as follows. The rate per hundred cubic feet (HCF) of water used is
based on the assumption that a percent of the water consumed is returned to
the wastewater system. The applicable percentage differs based on customer
class. The percentage return is included for each customer class in the
tables below. The Public Works Director shall have the authority to review
the water consumption of any metered user of the wastewater system and to
adjust the rate based on the average water consumption over a reasonable
period of time:



         (a)   Commercial/school wastewater use (percentage
wastewater return = 85%):



 


Tier

 

Usage

 

Effective July 1, 2017

 

Effective January 1, 2018

 

Effective January 1, 2019

 

Effective January 1, 2020

 

Effective January 1, 2021




1

 
0 to 50 HCF/month
 

$3.49

 

$3.68

 

$3.88

 

$4.09

 

$4.31




2

 
> 50 to 930 HCF/month
 

$4.36

 

$4.59

 

$4.84

 

$5.10

 

$5.37




3

 
> 930 HCF/month
 

$8.72

 

$9.18

 

$9.67

 

$10.18

 

$10.72




 



         (b)   Restaurant wastewater use (percentage wastewater
return = 80%):



 





Tier

 

Usage

 

Effective July 1, 2017

 

Effective January 1, 2018

 

Effective January 1, 2019

 

Effective January 1, 2020

 

Effective January 1, 2021




1

 
0 to 20 HCF/month
 

$3.49

 

$3.68

 

$3.88

 

$4.09

 

$4.31




2

 
>20 to 160 HCF/month
 

$4.36

 

$4.59

 

$4.84

 

$5.10

 

$5.37




3

 
> 160 HCF/month
 

$8.72

 

$9.18

 

$9.67

 

$10.18

 

$10.72




 



         (c)   Laundry/laundromat wastewater use (percentage
wastewater return = 90%):



 





Tier

 




Usage

 

Effective July 1, 2017

 

Effective July 1, 2018

 

Effective July 1, 2019

 

Effective July 1, 2020

 

Effective July 1, 2021




1

 
0 to 105 HCF/month
 

$3.49

 

$3.68

 

$3.88

 

$4.09

 

$4.31




2

 
>105 to 525 HCF/month
 

$3.86

 

$4.07

 

$4.29

 

$4.52

 

$4.76




3

 
> 525 HCF/month
 

$4.81

 

$5.07

 

$5.34

 

$5.63

 

$5.93




 



      (3)   Non-formula users - residential. Residential wastewater
service is deemed to begin when water service begins. Monthly residential
user charges by type of dwelling units are as follows. The rate per hundred
cubic feet (HCF) of water used is based on the assumption that a percentage
of the water consumed is returned to the wastewater system. The applicable
percentage differs based on customer class. The percentage return is included
for each customer class in the tables below. The Public Works Director shall
have the authority to review the water consumption of any metered user of the
wastewater system and to adjust the rate based on the average water
consumption over a reasonable period of time:



         (a)   Single family residential wastewater use
(percentage wastewater return = 80%):



 


Tier

 

Usage

 

Effective July 1, 2017

 

Effective July 1, 2018

 

Effective July 1, 2019

 

Effective July 1, 2020

 

Effective July 1, 2021




1

 
0 to 9 HCF/month
 

$1.95

 

$2.06

 

$2.17

 

$2.29

 

$2.42




2

 
>9 to 18 HCF/month
 

$2.17

 

$2.29

 

$2.42

 

$2.55

 

$2.69




3

 
> 18 HCF/month
 

$3.03

 

$3.19

 

$3.36

 

$3.54

 

$3.73




 



         (b)   Single family residential wastewater use; large
lots (lot size of over 7,000 square feet) (percentage wastewater return =
60%):



 


Tier

 

Usage

 

Effective July 1, 2017

 

Effective July 1, 2018

 

Effective July 1, 2019

 

Effective July 1, 2020

 

Effective July 1, 2021




1

 
0 to 16 HCF/month
 

$1.95

 

$2.06

 

$2.17

 

$2.29

 

$2.42




2

 
> 16 to 25 HCF/month
 

$2.17

 

$2.29

 

$2.42

 

$2.55

 

$2.69




3

 
> 25 HCF/month
 

$3.03

 

$3.19

 

$3.36

 

$3.54

 

$3.73




 



         (c)   Multi-family, multi-unit residential wastewater
use (percentage wastewater return = 90%). Tiers for multi-family and
multi-unit residential are variable and are determined by multiplying each
tier allotment by the number of dwelling units:



 


Tier

 

Usage

 

Effective July 1, 2017

 

Effective July 1, 2018

 

Effective July 1, 2019

 

Effective July 1, 2020

 

Effective July 1, 2021




1

 
0 to 6 HCF/month
 

$1.58

 

$1.67

 

$1.76

 

$1.86

 

$1.96




2

 
> 6 to 12 HCF/month
 

$1.77

 

$1.87

 

$1.97

 

$2.08

 

$2.19




3

 
> 12 HCF/month
 

$2.47

 

$2.60

 

$2.74

 

$2.89

 

$3.05




 



      (4)   Monthly base rates. In addition to monthly rates based
on water use (per HCF) as set forth above, the following customer classes
shall pay monthly meter rates:



 





Service

 

Effective July 1, 2017

 

Effective July 1, 2018

 

Effective July 1, 2019

 

Effective July 1, 2020

 

Effective July 1, 2021



Single family
 

$29.95

 

$31.53

 

$33.19

 

$34.94

 

$36.78



Multi-family/
unit:
 
1 to 6 units
 

$21.91

 

$23.07

 

$24.29

 

$25.57

 

$26.92



 
 
7+ units
 

$10.92

 

$11.50

 

$12.11

 

$12.75

 

$13.42




 



      (5)   Minimum monthly fees. The following customer classes
shall pay the greater of the applicable monthly rates set forth in the table
below, or the monthly rates based on the actual water use (per HCF) as set
forth above:



 


Service
 
Effective July 1, 2017
 
Effective July 1, 2018
 
Effective July 1, 2019
 
Effective July 1, 2020
 
Effective July 1, 2021


Commercial
 
$19.90
 
$20.95
 
$22.05
 
$23.21
 
$24.43


Restaurant
 
$18.46
 
$19.43
 
$20.46
 
$21.54
 
$22.68


Laundry/
laundromat
 
$91.57
 
$96.38
 
$101.44
 
$106.77
 
$112.38


School
 
$69.85
 
$73.52
 
$77.38
 
$81.45
 
$85.73



 



      (6)   Non-metered water users. Except as provided in
subsection (B)(3) of this section for residential water users, other
non-metered water users, including commercial and industrial users, shall pay
a monthly rate as determined by the Public Works Director based upon the
monthly rate charged a metered water user of comparable size and character of
use, provided, however, that the minimum monthly charge shall be the same as
that charged for a multi-family dwelling unit. In lieu of specifically
calculated rates, non-metered customers will be charged the following:



 





Service

 

Effective July 1, 2017

 

Effective July 1, 2018

 

Effective July 1, 2019

 

Effective July 1, 2020

 

Effective January 1, 2021



Non-metered customers
 

$51.42

 

$54.12

 

$56.97

 

$59.97

 

$63.12




 



      (7)   Where wastewater is collected by the city and is
accepted by another agency for transmission, treatment and disposal, the
monthly wastewater rates shall be equal to the rate charged by such agency
for transmission, treatment and disposal of such wastewater, anything to the
contrary herein notwithstanding.



      (8)   Additional charges for outside the city users of city
wastewater system. Those outside the city users of the Las Posas sewer line
shall be charged a monthly rate for wastewater service as follows. Wastewater
service is deemed to begin when water service begins. The rate per hundred
cubic feet (HCF) of water used is based on the assumption that 85% of
commercial and 60% of residential water consumed is returned to the
wastewater system. The Public Works Director shall have the right to review
the water consumption of any metered user of the wastewater system and to
adjust the rate based on the average water consumption over a reasonable
period of time:



         (a)   Monthly rates for user charge formula - outside
city.



 


Service

 

Effective July 1, 2017

 

Effective January 1, 2018

 

Effective January 1, 2019

 

Effective January 1, 2020

 

Effective January 1, 2021



Single family residential per
 

$79.72

 

$83.32

 

$87.04

 

$90.96

 

$95.11



Multi-family residential per
 

$55.66

 

$58.18

 

$60.79

 

$63.55

 

$66.38




 



         (b)   Monthly rates for Las Posas
commercial/institutional wastewater use.



 


Tier

 

Service

 

Effective July 1, 2017

 

Effective January 1, 2018

 

Effective January 1, 2019

 

Effective January 1, 2020

 

Effective January 1, 2021




1

 
0 to 50 HCF/month
 

$6.57

 

$6.87

 

$7.17

 

$7.48

 

$7.81




2

 
> 50 to 930 HCF/month
 

$8.21

 

$8.56

 

$8.94

 

$9.33

 

$9.73




3

 
> 930 HCF/month
 

$16.42

 

$17.12

 

$17.86

 

$18.62

 

$19.43




 



   (C)   Industrial and liquid waste sampling. Analysis and flow
measurement. Dischargers whose wastewater charges are individually calculated
using the Oxnard Formula shall be responsible for costs of required sampling,
analysis and flow measurement associated therewith as provided in Chapter 19
of the Oxnard City Code. If sampling, analysis and flow data are not provided
to the City as required, the Public Works Director shall cause monitoring to
be performed or an estimate made to enable charges to be rendered. The
discharger shall be billed for these extra costs.



   (D)   Charges for unusual or non-compatible wastewater. A charge for
unusual or non-compatible waste constituents of such quality or character as
to impose upon the city unusual operation and/or maintenance or capital costs
whether or not related to total flow volume, biochemical oxygen demand, or
suspended solids, shall be set by the Public Works Director and paid by the
discharger. These charges shall be reasonably calculated to defray costs
attributable to such wastes.



   (E)   Fee for appeal. For each appeal to the City Council of a
ruling by the Public Works Director a fee of $100 will be charged.



   (F)   Industrial wastewater discharge permits. The industrial
wastewater discharge permits (permit) specified in Chapter 19 of the Oxnard
City Code shall be granted for a specific time period, not to exceed five
years. Application for permit and permit renewal shall be made in accordance
with Chapter 19. All users classified as significant industrial wastewater
users according to Chapter 19 shall be assessed a fee of $2,500 per year per
permit. All other industrial users shall be assessed a fee of $100 per year
per permit. In addition to the permit fee, new applicants for a permit shall
be assessed a one time new application processing fee of $100.



   (G)   Billing procedure for monthly service charge for use of city
wastewater system. Bills shall be computed according to the rates then in
effect and the number of days in the service period at each rate.



(Ord. No. 2917)



SEC. 19-135.  COLLECTION OF FEES.



   The amount of any fee or charge imposed by the provisions of this
article, including interest and penalty assessments, shall be deemed a debt
owed to the city.  An action in the name of the city may be commenced in any
court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent fees or
charges, and if legal action is brought by the city or its assignee to
enforce collection of any amount charged and due under this article, any
judgment rendered in favor of the city shall include costs of suit incurred
by the city or its assignee, including actual attorneys' fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-82)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-136.  BILLING AND COLLECTION - DELINQUENT WASTEWATER BILL.



   Should a customer fail to pay a fee or charge for wastewater service,
within one month after the billing date provided on the face of the bill, the
city shall assess a penalty in an amount of 10% of the overdue balance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-83)  (Ord. No. 2494, 2918)



SEC. 19-137.  OUT-OF-CITY SERVICE FEES.



   Property situated outside the boundaries of the city may be connected
to the system if the city manager determines there is sufficient capacity in
the system to serve the property.  Out-of-city sewerage service shall be
temporary and subject to cancellation following reasonable notice.  Fees
shall be as specified by ordinance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-84)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-138.  CONNECTION FEES.



   (A)   Sewer connection fees shall be specified by ordinance and
shall be adjusted effective July first of each year to reflect changes in the
construction cost index for Los Angeles from January of the previous year to
January of the current year as reflected in the periodical, “Engineering
News Record,” or other appropriate source as determined by the city manager.



   (B)   If a demolished structure is subsequently replaced, no
additional sewer permit or sewer service connection fee is required if the
building permit for the replacement structure is issued within five years of
the date of destruction of the previous structure.



   (C)   If the building permit is issued more than five years but less
than ten years from the date of demolition, the service connection fee shall
be reduced by 50%.  If the building permit is requested for any replacement
after ten years from the date of demolition, the full permit or service
connection fee shall be required.



   (D)   The property owner shall pay for any difference between the
sewer connection fee based on the original water meter size and the
connection fee based on the water meter size to serve the replacement
structure.  The property owner shall bear the burden of proving the date of
the original demolition and that structure's water meter size at the time of
destruction.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-85)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-139.  PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY FEES.



   (A)   If a user has a supply of water not obtained from the city,
the city manager shall charge and collect from the user the metered water
user service fee.  To facilitate calculation of this fee, the user shall
install and maintain at the user's expense, a water meter of a type approved
by the city manager, capable of measuring accurately the amount of water used
on the premises.



   (B)   The meter shall provide water use measurement in the same
manner as meters recording city water use, and the user shall permit the
meter to be read monthly by authorized city employees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-86)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-140.  APPEAL FEE.



   The fees for filing an administrative hearing or other hearing pursuant
to this chapter shall be established in a resolution of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-87)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-141.  IWD PERMIT FEE.



    All persons requiring an IWD permit shall pay to the city a yearly
permit fee established by resolution of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-88)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-142.  SERVICE FEES.



   Should the city or its agents perform required industrial wastewater
sampling, analysis, review, flow measurements or other activities for a user,
the user shall be held responsible for all accrued costs.  The city manager
may, at his/her discretion, bill the user directly for services performed by
the city.  The fees for such services shall be established by resolution of
the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-89)  (Ord. No. 2494)



SEC. 19-143.  PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.



   (A)   The city council by resolution may adopt reasonable charges
and fees for reimbursement of the costs of setting up and operating the
city's pretreatment program.



   (B)   These charges and fees include:



      (1)   Fees for IWD permit applications, including the cost of
processing the applications;



      (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance
procedures, including the cost of collecting and analyzing a user's discharge
and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;



      (3)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction and responding to accidental discharges;



      (4)   Fees for wastewater of such quality or character as to
impose unusual operation and maintenance or capital costs on the system;
whether related to flow volume, BOD, SS, or peak flow rates; and



      (5)   Other fees as the city council may deem necessary to
carry out the provisions of this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 25-90)  (Ord. No. 2494)



ARTICLE II.  SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING



DIVISION 1.  IN GENERAL



SEC. 19-150.  PURPOSE.



   The collection, transportation, processing, marketing, transfer and
disposal of solid waste and recyclables by qualified persons is necessary to
protect the public health, safety and general welfare and to implement State
law.  For these reasons, collecting, transporting, processing, marketing,
transferring and disposing of solid waste and recyclable materials requires
regulation and control by the city in the manner set forth in the code,
including, but not limited to, this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-1)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-151.  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purposes of this article, the following words shall
have the following meanings.  Any words or phrases relating to solid waste
that are not defined in this article shall have the meaning applied to them
in Cal. Pub. Res. Code, Sections 40000 et seq.



   (B)   Whenever reference is made herein to any portion of this
article, any other ordinance, resolution or regulation of the city, or any
law of this State, the reference shall be deemed to apply to all amendments
and additions heretofore or hereafter made to such ordinances, resolutions,
regulations or laws.



      (1)   ARTICLE - Article II of chapter 19 of the code and
regulations issued pursuant hereto.



      (2)   CHARGES - Money paid for solid waste, recycling and
related services.



      (3)   CURBSIDE - A curb located adjacent to a street or alley
located within the city.



      (4)   HAZARDOUS WASTE - Material designated as a hazardous
waste, a hazardous substance or a hazardous material, pursuant to any
applicable federal, State or city law.



      (5)   NONRESIDENTIAL USE - A use on a lot that does not
contain one or more residential dwellings or uses.



      (6)   OCCUPANT - The person who is entitled to use and occupy
any lot located in the city, including buildings and structures located
thereon.



      (7)   OWNER - The legal owner of any lot located within the
city.



      (8)   PROCESSED MATERIALS - Recyclable materials that have
been processed by a processing facility.



      (9)   RECYCLING CONTAINER - A container that complies with the
requirements of the city for the use or temporary storage of recyclable
materials.



      (10)   RECYCLING OR PROCESSING FACILITY - Means a facility,
licensed and authorized by the city or another public agency having
jurisdiction, where recyclable materials are cleaned, sorted, or otherwise
prepared for marketing to an end user of the processed materials.



      (11)   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS - Materials that are discarded
with the intent that they be collected for return to the economic mainstream
in the form of processed materials, rather than becoming solid waste, and may
include paper, cardboard, glass, metal, plastic, wood, meat, vegetable or
plant matter, compostables, construction and demolition materials, and other
materials specified by the city manager for inclusion in the city's recycling
program, but shall not include hazardous waste.



      (12)   SOLID WASTE DIVISION - That division of the city
responsible for the collection of solid waste and the management of services
related to recyclable materials within the city.



      (13)   REGULATIONS - Written regulations and amendments
thereof issued by the city manager pursuant to this article.



      (14)   RESIDUAL MATERIALS - That portion of recyclable
materials delivered to a processing facility that is left over and must be
disposed of after the recyclable materials have been processed.



      (15)   TRUCK - Any motor vehicle that transports recyclable
materials within the city and that is defined as a truck in the Cal. Vehicle
Code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-2)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-152.  ESTABLISHMENT OF REGULATIONS BY CITY MANAGER.



   The city manager shall from time to time, as deemed necessary or
desirable, issue and amend regulations relating to the collection of
residential and nonresidential solid waste and recyclable materials and the
conditions of service, including but not limited to minimum service levels;
standards for extra nonresidential business service; standards for keeping,
collecting, removing and disposing of solid waste and recyclable materials;
the sufficiency and sanitation of solid waste and recyclable materials
containers and carriers; green waste; and the sale of salvageable materials,
and of products, commodities and services incidental thereto, and the charges
to be made therefor.  Copies of such regulations shall be maintained at the
solid waste division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-3)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-153.  HOURS OF OPERATION AND CHARGES SET BY CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   The city council shall by resolution set hours of operation of
solid waste and recyclable materials collection and hours of operation of
city owned or operated public recycling or processing facilities. 



   (B)   The city council shall by ordinance set charges for collection
of solid waste, recyclable materials and related services.  Such charges may
include all costs incurred by the city in providing such services, including
but not limited to the costs of employee and administrative overhead, the
costs of contracts for services, and the costs of the purchase and rental of
supplies and equipment.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-4)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-154.  COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE.



   Whenever compliance with the provisions of this article is required of
any person, such requirement shall include compliance with all regulations
issued by the city manager pursuant to this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-5)  (Ord. No. 2372)



DIVISION 2.  REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE



SEC. 19-160.  SOLID WASTE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No owner, occupant or person in control of private property
shall deposit, store or cause or permit to be deposited or stored any solid
waste on such property so that such solid waste could or does attract rodents
or pests and create a health hazard.  “Rodent,” as used in this
subsection, means rats, mice, gophers and squirrels.  “Pest,” as used in
this subsection, includes any animal or insect not under human control, which
is offensive to the senses or interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of
life, including but not limited to roaches, mosquitoes and flies.



   (B)   Every owner, occupant or person in control of private property
shall properly store and maintain accumulations of solid waste so that they
are not carried or deposited by the elements on any public right of way or
public place, or on the private property of another.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-6)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-161.  SOLID WASTE ON STREETS, ALLEYS AND CITY PROPERTY.



   No person shall deposit or cause or permit to be deposited, any solid
waste on any public right-of-way, or on any property owned or leased by the
city, except in receptacles or areas specifically designated or provided for
that purpose.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-7)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-162.  NOTICE TO REMOVE SOLID WASTE; APPEAL OF NOTICE.



   (A)   The city manager shall give written notice to persons
determined to be in violation of section 19-160 or section 19-161 of this
article to remove and properly dispose of the solid waste.  Such notice
shall be prominently posted on the private property on which the accumulation
exists, or shall be personally served on or sent by certified mail to the
owner, occupant or person in control of the private property on which the
accumulation exists, or shall be personally served on or sent by certified
mail to the person who deposited or caused or permitted to be deposited solid
waste on public property.



   (B)   The notice shall require that the solid waste be removed
within three days of receipt of the notice or that the person addressed make
alternate arrangements with the city manager, and shall state that if the
solid waste is not removed, the city will remove and properly disposed of the
solid waste and the person addressed will be billed for the cost thereof.



   (C)   Before the time set for the removal of the solid waste by the
city, the person addressed in the notice may file with the city clerk a
written request for review by the city council of the contemplated city
action, which request shall operate to delay the city in removing the solid
waste from private property and assessing the costs of removal, but shall not
prevent removal of solid waste from public property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-8)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-163.  REMOVAL OF SOLID WASTE BY CITY.



   The city manager may cause solid waste deposited in violation of
sections 19-160 or 19-161 to be removed and properly disposed of upon
failure, neglect or refusal of the person so notified to properly dispose of
such solid waste within three days after receipt of written notice as
provided in section 19-162, or within five days after the date a notice is
returned to the solid waste division because of inability to make delivery
thereof; provided, that the same was properly addressed to the last known
address of the owner, occupant or person in control of the private property
on which the accumulation exists, or of the person who deposited solid waste
on public property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-9)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-164.  CHARGES FOR REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE BY CITY.



   When the city has so effected the removal of solid waste, the person
notified pursuant to section 19-162 shall be personally liable to the city
for a charge for removal and disposal.  The city may add the charge to the
solid waste bill of such person or take other action to collect the charge. 
Any action described in this article taken by the city to remove and dispose
of solid waste shall not bar criminal prosecution for violation of this
article or preclude civil suit to collect amounts due.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-10)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-165.  STREET SWEEPING.



   In addition to other methods of removing solid waste from public rights
of way provided in this article, the city may provide street sweeping
services to prevent solid waste from accumulating in rights-of-way.  The
city council may prescribe charges for such services.  Such charges shall be
included in the charges for collection of solid waste and shall be payable by
the persons liable for such charges.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-11)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-166.  TRUCKS TRANSPORTING SOLID WASTE OR RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.



   (A)   The bodies of trucks transporting solid waste or recyclable
materials shall be enclosed or have a covering securely placed over the
entire load to prevent spilling of any part of the load.  Trucks
transporting solid waste shall comply with Cal. Vehicle Code, Section 23115.



   (B)   Each person operating a truck used to transport solid waste or
recyclable materials shall have on the truck a broom, shovel and other
equipment necessary to clean and pick up any recyclable materials spilled,
dropped or deposited from the truck on any public or private property, and
shall clean up, pick up, transport and haul away any such solid waste or
recyclable materials.



   (C)   All trucks and other equipment used to transport solid waste
or recyclable materials shall at all times be maintained in a good and safe
mechanical condition, with a neat and presentable appearance. All such trucks
and other equipment shall be available at all reasonable times for inspection
by an authorized representative of the city.



   (D)   Each truck used to transport solid waste or recyclable
materials, except for trucks owned and operated by the city or trucks used
pursuant to subsection (C) of section 19-175 or subsections (C) or (E) of
section 19-190, shall display the name, address and telephone number of the
person transporting solid waste or recyclable materials on both sides of the
exterior of the truck in such a manner and size as to be legible.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-12)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-167.  BURNING SOLID WASTE.



   No person shall burn solid waste.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-13)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-168.  HAZARDOUS WASTE IN SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS.



   No person shall place hazardous waste in a solid waste container.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-14)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-169.  RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVIDERS TO PAY FOR SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS.



   Any subdivider who subdivides property into residential lots shall pay
to the city the amount of money estimated by the city manager to be required
to purchase the appropriate solid waste containers for each such residential
lot, in order that at occupancy the city may provide one or more solid waste
containers for each residence.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-15)  (Ord. No. 2372)



DIVISION 3.  COLLECTION AND CHARGES



SEC. 19-175.  EXCLUSIVE RIGHT TO COLLECT SOLID WASTE.



   (A)   The collection, removal and disposal of all solid waste,
including solid waste generated by residential, commercial, agricultural,
construction or demolition uses within the city, may be performed by the city
or its authorized representatives.  No other person may engage in the
collection, removal and disposal of solid waste, except as provided in
subsections (B) and (C) of this section.



   (B)   A person holding a city business license for the collection,
removal and disposal of solid waste may collect construction and demolition
debris from roll-off boxes and remove and dispose of such debris.



   (C)   An owner or occupant may collect, remove and dispose of solid
waste created by activities on the lot owned or occupied by such person,
provided that such person uses his/her own resources to effect the
collection, removal and disposal, or contracts for such services only with
the person who engaged in the activities that created the solid waste.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-16)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-176.  EXTRA NONRESIDENTIAL SERVICE.



   Any person desiring more than the minimum solid waste collection
service may apply to the solid waste division for extra service.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-17)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-177.  UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTION.



   No person except authorized city officers and employees shall collect,
remove, convey, or cause or permit to be removed, collected or conveyed, any
solid waste on or along any public right-of-way in the city.  This section
shall not apply to any person with whom the city has entered into a contract
for the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste, or to any person who
holds a city business license for the collection, removal and disposal of
solid waste, or to any employee of such persons, while such contract or
license is in force.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-18)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-178.  INTERFERENCE WITH COLLECTION.



   No person shall interfere with or obstruct the collection,
transportation, disposal or processing of solid waste.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-19)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-179.  INTERFERENCE WITH SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS.



   No person other than the owner or occupant, or a person to whom the
owner or occupant has given consent, or an officer or employee of the city,
or a person or an employee thereof holding a contract with the city or a
business license issued by the city for the collection, removal and disposal
of solid waste, shall interfere in any manner with any solid waste container
or the contents thereof, or place materials within or remove the contents
from any solid waste container.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-20)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-180.  COLLECTION IN ANNEXED AREAS.



   When the city annexes an area in which, for at least the immediately
preceding three years, private solid waste collection service of at least the
quality and frequency of service provided by the city has been provided by an
operator holding a county franchise, license or permit, the operator may
continue to provide such service to the existing service area for the period
provided by Cal. Pub. Res. Code, Section 49520 after the city mails notice to
the operator that after such period the city will provide exclusive service
to the area.  The city and the operator may provide on mutually satisfactory
terms for the operator's termination of service before such period expires.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-21)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-181.  OCCUPANTS LIABLE FOR CHARGES; CHARGES TO BE BILLED TO WATER
METER USER.



   All occupants are liable for charges for solid waste collection
services.  In the case of premises containing more than one dwelling unit or
place of business or both that are served by a single water meter, such
charges may be billed to the landlord or water meter user, who shall collect
such charges from the occupants thereof and transmit the amount so collected
to the city.  In the event the landlord or water meter user fails to collect
such charges from any such occupant and remit the charges to the city, the
landlord or water meter user shall be liable to the city for the payment of
such charges.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-22)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-182.  CHARGES ADDED TO UTILITY BILL; PAYMENT; ADJUSTMENT FOR HIGHER
RATES.



   Whenever possible, charges for the collection of solid waste and
recyclable materials and related services shall be added to city utility
bills.  Such charges shall be for the period covered by the utility bills,
and shall be payable at the same time and in the same manner as utility
bills.  Bills for a fractional part of a billing period may be prorated in a
manner approved by the city manager.  Whenever it is not possible to
determine the total amount of such charges to be added to the utility bill,
or if such charges must be billed separately, bills for such services may be
rendered and payment of such charges may be made quarterly or monthly, in
advance, as directed by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-23)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-183.  DELINQUENT BILL; AUTHORITY TO DISCONTINUE UTILITY SERVICE.



   When a customer's bill for the collection of solid waste, recyclable
materials and related services at a service location becomes delinquent, and
water is furnished to the customer through one or more services at the same
or different locations, all such water services may be shut off.  In
addition, the city shall have the authority to discontinue water service or
solid waste and recyclable materials service, or both, without notice for
failure to comply with this article or the rules and regulations promulgated
by the city manager pursuant to this article.  The charges and procedures
for resumption of water service shut off pursuant to this article shall be
those found in chapter 22.  As an additional remedy, an action in the name
of the city may be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction for the
amount of any delinquent charges; and if legal action is brought by the city
or its assignee to enforce collection of any amount charged and due under
this article, any judgment rendered in favor of the city shall include costs
of suit incurred by the city or its assignee, including reasonable attorneys'
fees.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-24)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-184  BILLING AND COLLECTION - DELINQUENT REFUSE BILL.



   Should a customer fail to pay a fee or charge for refuse service,
within one month after the billing date provided on the face of the bill, the
city shall assess a penalty in an amount of 10% of the overdue balance.



(Ord. No. 2918)



DIVISION 4.  RECYCLABLE MATERIALS



SEC. 19-190.  COLLECTING, TRANSPORTING, PROCESSING AND MARKETING RECYCLABLES.



   No person shall collect, transport, process or market recyclable
materials within the city unless such person is:



   (A)   An officer or employee of the city acting in the course of
that individual's official duty;



   (B)   A person holding a city business license for the collection,
transportation, processing or marketing of recyclable materials or an
employee of such person;



   (C)   An owner or occupant, provided that such person transports
only those recyclable materials that are generated on the lot owned or
occupied by such person to a buy back center, drop off center or other
facility certified pursuant to Cal. Pub. Res. Code, Sections 14500 et seq.;



   (D)   The holder of a city business license for a recycling facility
or processing facility, or an officer or employee of the licensee; or



   (E)   An agent or employee of, or a volunteer authorized by, a
nonprofit organization that collects recyclable materials or processed
materials as a part of a fund-raising activity for the benefit of such
nonprofit organization.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-25)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-191.  RECYCLING CONTAINERS; REMOVAL OR INTERFERENCE.



   (A)   Recycling containers for the temporary storage of recyclable
materials generated on any lot shall comply with all applicable provisions of
this article and the code.



   (B)   No person other than the persons specified in section 19-190
shall remove or interfere in any way with a recycling container or the
contents thereof, after the same is placed for collection at an authorized
collection location by the occupant or owner of the lot on which the
recyclable materials were generated.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the code, violation of
this section is hereby declared to be an infraction punishable in accordance
with the provisions of chapter 1 of the code, relating to punishment for
infractions.



   (D)   As an alternative to subsection (C) of this section, the city
attorney is authorized to bring a civil suit at law or equity against any
person who violates this section.  In any such civil suit, the court shall
either allow treble damages, as measured by the value of the material removed
or interfered with, or award a civil penalty of not more than $1,000,
whichever is greater, against the person who violated this section, for each
unauthorized removal or interference, together with the city's reasonable
attorneys' fees, expert and other witness fees, and all costs.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-26)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-192.  PLACEMENT OF RECYCLING CONTAINERS.



   The following provisions apply to curbside or alley recyclable
materials collection:



   (A)   No person shall place or cause to be placed for collection
recyclable materials or any recycling container containing recyclable
materials, at any place, at any time or in any manner other than as provided
in this article or regulations established thereto.  Recyclable materials
that need not be placed in a recycling container for collection pursuant to
this article shall be placed for collection at the same locations and at the
same times as recyclable materials required to be placed for collection
within a recycling container.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall place or cause to be placed a
recycling container or recyclable materials for collection at any time other
than on the days established pursuant to this article or regulations
established thereto.



      (2)   Recycling containers shall be placed for collection by
the time designated by resolution of the city council, or at any time within
12 hours prior to the designated collection time.  No person shall permit
recycling containers or recyclable materials to remain at such locations
after the designated collection day.



      (3)   Each recycling container shall be returned to a location
where the same is permitted to be stored pursuant to the provisions of the
code or regulations issued pursuant thereto.



   (C)   (1)   Any recycling container or recyclable materials to be
placed for collection on the lot where generated adjacent to a street, shall
be placed as close as practicable to the curb line or right-of-way line of
the street.



      (2)   No recycling container or recyclable materials shall be
placed within the limits of any street or alley within the city, unless by
direction of the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-27)  (Ord. No. 2372)



SEC. 19-193.  TITLE TO RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.



   Title to recyclable materials shall be deemed for all purposes to be
vested in the city as of the time the materials are placed in the collection
location with the intent that they be collected for recycling by the persons
identified in section 19-190.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-28)



SEC. 19-194.  RECYCLING COLLECTION SERVICES.



   Each person operating pursuant to section 19-190(B) shall, on request
of the owner or occupant of a nonresidential use, provide recyclable
materials collection equipment or services, including, but not limited to,
segregated and nonsegregated recycling container services.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-29)  (Ord. No. 2372)



DIVISION 5.  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS



SEC. 19-200.  UNDERGROUND STORAGE.



   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 6.7, Division
20, Section 25283 and Cal. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 6.11, Division 20,
Section 25404.1, the city assumes or has previously assumed responsibility
for the implementation within the Cal. Gov't Code, Title 23, Division 3,
Chapters 16 and 18, pertaining to underground storage of hazardous
substances, and Cal. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 6.75, Division 20,
pertaining to underground petroleum storage tank cleanup, to the extent that
such regulations and statutes authorize such action by the city.



   (B)   The city council designates the City's Certified Unified
Program Agency Program (CUPA Program) as responsible for administering and
enforcing said regulations and statutes on behalf of the City.  The CUPA
Program may adopt regulations to implement this division.



   (C)   Pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code, Sections 25280 et
seq., and Cal. Gov't Code, Chapter 16, Division 3, Title 23, the CUPA Program
shall issue, renew, revoke and modify permits to operate underground storage
tanks.



   (D)   Pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code, Sections 25299.10 et
seq. and Cal. Gov't Code, Chapter 18, Division 3, Title 23, the CUPA Program
shall require correction action with regard to underground storage tanks and
releases therefrom, including the preparation of a workplan, and shall
perform, monitor or oversee corrective action as directed by the State Water
Resources Control Board or the regional water quality control board.



   (E)   The CUPA Program shall charge for services provided under this
ordinance the fees adopted therefor by resolution of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 15-30)  (Ord. No. 2431)



ARTICLE III.  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



DIVISION 1.  ENCROACHMENTS AND EXCAVATIONS



SEC. 19-205.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   ENCROACHMENT - Any physical object or material thing that
occupies space in, under or on a right-of-way, including any obstruction
within or over a right-of-way, but not including structural and architectural
projections permitted by the code, a building being moved under a city permit
and any vehicle, bicycle or similar mechanical means of transportation in
motion on a right-of-way.



   (B)   ENGINEER - The city engineer or designee, including city
inspectors and the city streets superintendent.



   (C)   EXCAVATE - Cutting, digging or boring in a right-of-way,
including any street repair, trenching, patch or fill.



   (D)   RIGHT-OF-WAY - Any real property or interest therein owned by
or under the jurisdiction of the city, located within the city, and used or
reserved for a public purpose, including any public road, street or alley
(including curbs, gutters and parkways), any public waterway, and any public
easement, parking lot, park or landscaped area.



   (E)   STREET CUT FEE - A payment made to the city for the privilege
to excavate in order to reimburse the city for damage to the right-of-way
caused by the excavation and not corrected by any backfill, compaction or
pavement replacement.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-1)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-206.  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A person shall obtain an encroachment permit from the city before doing
any of the following:



   (A)   Excavate in a right-of-way;



   (B)   Construct, alter or repair any driveway, sidewalk, curb,
gutter, or other improvement in a right-of-way;



   (C)   Plant, remove or permanently affect in any manner a tree, a
shrub or other plant life within a right-of-way;



   (D)   Create, alter or remove an encroachment, including the
erection of a temporary structure; and



   (E)   Move any object, except a building, the size or movement of
which would interfere with the normal flow of vehicular traffic on a
right-of-way.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-2)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-207.  APPLICATION; INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY.



   (A)   The engineer shall provide the application for an encroachment
permit.



   (B)   The engineer shall condition the permit as necessary to ensure
that the work is performed according to city standards and specifications. 
If the engineer finds that the proposed work is in the public interest and
not contrary to the public health, safety or welfare, the applicant shall be
granted the permit.



   (C)   Until final acceptance of the work, the permittee shall
indemnify and save harmless the city council, the city and its officers and
employees from all liability and against all loss, cost or expense occasioned
by or arising from any work performed under the encroachment permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-3)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-208.  WORK WITHOUT A PERMIT; REVIEW FEES.



   If a person without an encroachment permit commences any work for which
an encroachment permit is required, the engineer shall review the work before
issuing a permit.  The person commencing such work shall pay a review fee in
addition to any permit fees, whether or not the engineer issues a permit. The
review fee shall be equal to the total amount of the permit and inspection
fees set forth in section 19-220.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-4)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-209.  DURATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   An encroachment permit is valid for the period specified in
the permit, which will usually be 30 days from the date of issuance.



   (B)   A utility encroachment permit is valid for a calendar year, or
for the part thereof stated in the permit.



   (C)   A person conditioned by a land use approval to maintain
landscaping or other improvements in a right-of-way shall obtain an
indeterminate encroachment permit, which shall be valid as long as the
permittee maintains the landscaping or other improvements in accordance with
the conditions of the land use approval and complies with all conditions of
the indeterminate encroachment permit.



   (D)   A person permitted by agreement with the city to place a
structure on a right-of-way for six months or longer shall obtain an
indeterminate encroachment permit, which is valid as long as the agreement
permits the structure to remain and the permittee complies with all
conditions of the agreement and the indeterminate encroachment permit.



   (E)   A permittee shall comply with all conditions of the
indeterminate encroachment permit issued to the permittee.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-5)  (Ord. No. 2444, 2654)



SEC. 19-210.  UTILITY ENCROACHMENT PERMIT.



   A public utility shall obtain a utility encroachment permit.  Before
commencing any work, the public utility shall also obtain an encroachment
permit for the specific work.  In an emergency, a public utility may do work
before obtaining an encroachment permit for the specific work, provided that
within three days after beginning the work, the public utility shall inform
the engineer of the date, location and type of work done.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-6)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-211.  SPECIFICATIONS FOR WORK.



   The permittee shall comply with the specifications in the encroachment
permit.  Copies of approved specifications will be available to any
applicant or permittee.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-7)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-212.  INSPECTION OF CONCRETE WORK.



   Any person doing concrete work under an encroachment permit shall ask
the engineer to inspect the work at least 24 hours before pouring the
concrete.  No person shall pour concrete without prior approval by the
engineer.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-8)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-213.  TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF WORK.



   At any stage of permitted work, the engineer may require the permittee
to do testing and certification, including, but not limited to, materials
testing and certifications by professional engineers or testing businesses,
to the extent required to allow the engineer to determine whether the work is
satisfactory.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-9)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-214.  PROTECTION OF PUBLIC.



   A permittee is responsible for the condition and progress of the work
until its final acceptance and shall use all reasonable and necessary
precautions and measures to protect the work and to prevent accidents and
harm to persons and property arising from the work.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-10)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-215.  REMOVAL OF ITEMS.



   Unless otherwise authorized by the engineer, a permittee shall remove
all equipment, materials and debris from the permitted work site within three
days after acceptance of the work.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-11)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-216.  ACCEPTANCE OF WORK; SECURITY.



   (A)   The permittee shall correct defective work as determined by
the engineer.



   (B)   No permitted work is finished or completed until accepted by
the engineer.



   (C)   The engineer may require the permittee to post security in
order to guarantee satisfactory workmanship after acceptance, in an amount
and for a period of time determined by the engineer to be necessary in order
to protect the public health, safety and welfare.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-12)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-217.  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; ELIMINATION OF DRIVEWAYS.



   (A)   The city shall not issue any certificate of occupancy or use,
or give any final clearance to a public utility for service, for any building
until damage to abutting rights-of-way occasioned by construction of the
building and all required or damaged rights-of-way or driveways serving the
lot on which the building is located are properly repaired or constructed and
meet approved specifications, as determined by the engineer.



   (B)   If the need for or use of a driveway serving a lot has been
eliminated by the conversion, alteration or removal of improvements on the
lot, or by a change in the use of the lot, the driveway should be replaced
with sidewalk, curb and gutter improvements.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-13)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-218.  USE OF CITY FORCES; CHARGE.



   (A)   The city may require that repairs to rights-of-way
necessitated by a permittee other than a public utility or a city utility be
performed by city staff rather than by the permittee.



   (B)   In such case, the permittee shall pay the city the estimated
charge for repairs computed from the city's approved schedule of charges for
repair work by city forces.



   (C)   A schedule of approved charges for repair work by city forces,
adopted by the city council, shall be on file in the offices of the engineer
and the city clerk.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-14)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-219.  CHARGE FOR EXTRA WORK.



   If repairs exceeding those estimated are made by city forces, the
permittee shall promptly pay the city for such work, in accordance with the
schedule of charges and the repairs performed.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-15)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-220.  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   An applicant for an encroachment permit shall pay the
following fees:



      (1)   Encroachment permit fee; and



      (2)   Inspection fee.  If the work is to be performed by city
forces, the applicant shall pay an amount equal to the estimated cost of the
work in lieu of an inspection fee.



   (B)   A schedule of fees to implement this section shall be
established by resolution of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-16)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-221.  STREET CUT FEE; WAIVER.



   (A)   An applicant for an encroachment permit to excavate shall pay
a street cut fee unless otherwise provided for herein.



   (B)   If an applicant intends to excavate in a right-of-way
scheduled in the city's capital improvement program for complete
rehabilitation within one year of the date the encroachment permit is issued,
the applicant is not required to pay the street cut fee.



   (C)   As provided in section 19-222, those public utilities granted
franchises by State statute or by a franchise agreement with the city,
obligating the franchisee to make all repairs to city streets necessitated by
the operations of the franchisee, are not required to pay the street cut fee.



   (D)   As provided in section 19-223, the engineer may waive the
street cut fee for those city utilities that request such waiver and that
present evidence satisfactory to the engineer of the capacity to perform the
conditions of waiver set out in section 19-223.



   (E)   The street cut fee shall be established by resolution of the
city council.



   (F)   If the engineer determines that permitted work is voluntarily
undertaken, rather than required by law, regulation or a condition of land
use approval, and the work will be paid for by the permittee, and benefits
the city, the engineer may waive the fees imposed by this section.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-17)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-222.  PERIODIC INSPECTION AND REPAIR BY FRANCHISED UTILITIES.



   (A)   No later than January 1, 1997, and every five years
thereafter, each franchised public utility (“utility”) for which the
street cut fee is not required pursuant to section 19-221(C) shall inspect,
as directed by the engineer, the pavement in the city's streets where the
utility has made an excavation or street cut at any time, until such portion
of the street is completely resurfaced or reconstructed.



   (B)   As directed by the engineer, the utility shall identify all
defects in the pavement over and around such excavations and street cuts that
arise from such excavations and street cuts and make repairs and perform
maintenance in accordance with city specifications.



   (C)   The utility shall inspect such repairs and maintenance and
report thereon to the engineer.  The inspections and reports may be made by
the utility, by city staff or by an inspector approved by the engineer, as
directed by the engineer.  If the inspections and reports are made by city
staff, the utility shall pay the city for the cost thereof. If the
inspections and reports are made by an inspector approved by the engineer,
the utility shall pay such person for such work.



   (D)   The engineer may, from time to time, inspect such excavations
and street cuts and notify the utility of any defects in the pavement that
arise from such excavations and street cuts, whereupon the utility will make
repairs and perform maintenance as directed by the engineer.



   (E)   Before performing such inspection, repair or maintenance, the
utility may receive from the engineer the locations and names of streets that
will be repaved within one year from the date such information is received. 
The utility need not perform such inspection, repair and maintenance on such
streets.



   (F)   If the utility does not perform one or more of the utility's
duties set out in this section, the engineer shall notify the utility
thereof, specifying the failure.  The utility shall cure the failure within
20 days of receiving the notice, or such additional time as the engineer may
grant.  The engineer may refuse to issue any additional encroachment permits
to the utility until the cure is completed.



   (G)   If, as part of or in the course of doing pavement work or
inspecting pavement conditions, in city streets, city employees or
contractors identify a defect in the pavement over or around an excavation or
street cut that was previously made by a utility and that arises from such
excavation or street cut, such employees or contractors may repair such
defect, and the utility shall pay the city for the cost of making such repair.



   (H)   If the utility does not timely pay any amount authorized by
this section, the engineer may refuse to issue any additional encroachment
permits to the utility until the amount is paid.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-18)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-223.  PERIODIC INSPECTION AND REPAIR BY CITY UTILITIES.



   (A)   Each city utility shall state on its application for an
encroachment permit whether the city utility will pay the street cut fee or
requests a waiver thereof.  A city utility that requests a waiver of the
street cut fee shall also present evidence satisfactory to the engineer that
the city utility has the capacity to perform the conditions of waiver set out
in this section.



   (B)   If the engineer waives the street cut fee for a city utility,
that utility shall, within 90 days of the issuance of the encroachment permit
for which the street cut fee was waived, and every five years thereafter,
inspect, as directed by the engineer, the pavement in the city's streets
where the city utility has made an excavation or street cut at any time,
until such portion of the street is completely resurfaced or reconstructed.



   (C)   As directed by the engineer, the city utility shall identify
all defects in the pavement over and around such excavations and street cuts
that arise from such excavations and street cuts and make repairs and perform
maintenance in accordance with city specifications.



   (D)   The city utility shall inspect such repairs and maintenance
and report thereon to the engineer. The inspections and reports may be made
by the city utility, by other city staff or by an inspector approved by the
engineer, as directed by the engineer.  If the inspections and reports are
made by an inspector approved by the engineer, the city utility shall pay
such person for such work.



   (E)   The engineer may, from time to time, inspect such excavations
and street cuts and notify the city utility of any defects in the pavement
that arise from such excavations and street cuts, whereupon the city utility
shall make repairs and perform maintenance as directed by the engineer.



   (F)   Before performing such inspection, repair or maintenance the
utility may receive from the engineer the locations and names of streets that
will be repaved within one year from the date such information is received. 
The city utility need not perform such inspection, repair and maintenance on
such streets.



   (G)   If the city utility does not perform one or more of the city
utility's duties set out in this section, the engineer shall notify the city
utility thereof, specifying the failure.  The city utility shall cure the
failure within 20 calendar days of receiving the notice, or such additional
time as the engineer may grant.  The engineer may refuse to issue any
additional encroachment permits to the city utility until the cure is
completed or may issue any additional encroachment permits only on condition
that the city utility pay the street cut fee.



   (H)   If, as part of or in the course of doing pavement work or
inspecting pavement conditions in city streets, city employees or contractors
not working for the city utility identify a defect in the pavement over or
around an excavation or street cut that was previously made by the city
utility and that arises from such excavation or street cut, such employees or
contractors may repair such defect.



   (I)   If the city utility is required to pay the street cut fee, or
if city employees or contractors not working for the city utility make
inspections and reports or perform repairs necessitated by the city utility's
excavations or street cuts, the city manager may determine a method for the
city utility to reimburse the city program doing such work or paying such
contractor.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-19)  (Ord. No. 2444)



DIVISION 2.  STREET NUMBERING



SEC. 19-230.  STREET NUMBERING SYSTEM.



   The engineer shall designate on a map of the city a system of street
numbering.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-20)  (Ord. No. 2444)



SEC. 19-231.  DUTY TO AFFIX NUMBER; TYPE AND SIZE.



   (A)   Every person who owns, rents, leases or occupies a dwelling,
building, structure or establishment, hereinafter “premises,” within the
city shall ascertain from the engineer the street number assigned to the
premises and shall cause that number to be painted on, fastened or otherwise
affixed to the front of the premises in a conspicuous place visible from the
street.  If the premises have access from an alley or waterway, the owner,
renter, lessee or occupant shall cause the assigned street number to be
painted on, fastened or otherwise affixed to the rear of the premises in a
conspicuous place visible from the alley or waterway.



   (B)   All street numbers painted on, fastened or otherwise affixed
to any premises shall be plain and legible, shall be reflectorized or of a
color that contrasts with the background, and shall be no smaller than three
inches or larger than five inches.



(`64 Code, Sec. 26-21)  (Ord. No. 2444)



DIVISION 3.  USE OF CITY STREETS AND HIGHWAYS BY OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES



SEC. 19-240.  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this division, shall
be construed as defined in this section.



   (A)   DESIGNATED STREETS - Those city streets or highways, or
portions thereof, that have been designated by the city council by resolution
as being open to travel by overweight vehicles pursuant to a special permit
issued under the provisions of this division.



   (B)   DIRECTOR - The director of development services of the City of
Oxnard, or his/her designee.



   (C)   OVERWEIGHT VEHICLE - A vehicle, combination of vehicles, or
mobile equipment, which, in combination with its load, has a maximum gross
weight in excess of the weight limit of vehicles and loads specified in the
California Vehicle Code, but does not exceed 95,000 pounds gross weight. 
Ocean shipping equipment under the seal of United States Customs shall not be
subject to the provisions of this division.



   (D)   PERSON - Any natural person, firm, association, organization,
partnership, corporation, public corporation, political subdivision or any
department or agency thereof.



   (E)   YEAR - Calendar year commencing January 1 and ending the
following December 31.



(Ord. No. 2871)



SEC. 19-241.  SPECIAL PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate or move an overweight vehicle upon city streets
or highways except pursuant to a special permit issued under the provisions
of this division. A special permit shall be required for each overweight
vehicle to be operated or moved on city streets or highways. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, a person shall not be required to obtain a special permit
pursuant to this division if they are required to obtain a city permit for a
vehicle whose height, length or width exceeds the maximum specified in the
California Vehicle Code, have obtained the permit and the permit is currently
valid.



(Ord. No. 2871)



SEC. 19-242.  DESIGNATED STREETS.



   The city will only issue a special permit for operation or movement of
an overweight vehicle upon designated streets. Designated streets shall be
established by a resolution of the city council.



(Ord. No. 2871)



SEC. 19-243.  AUTHORITY TO ISSUE SPECIAL PERMIT.



   (A)   The director or his/her designee is authorized to issue
special permits under this division for either a single movement or on a
yearly basis for continuous operation. Every permit issued for continuous
operations shall expire on December 31 of the year for which it is issued.
The director may issue or withhold a special permit in his/her discretion or
may issue a special permit conditioned upon the following:



      (1)   The number of trips authorized.



      (2)   Seasonal or other time limitations within which the
overweight vehicle may be operated or moved on the designated streets.



      (3)   An undertaking or other security as may be deemed
necessary to protect the city's streets, highways and bridges from damage.



      (4)   Required proof of financial responsibility in an amount
required for compliance with California Vehicle Code section 16500.5.



      (5)   Such conditions of operation of the overweight vehicle
as may be necessary to assure against undue damage to the road foundations,
surfaces, bridges or other structures.



      (6)   Potential negative safety or environmental impacts in
the opinion of the city traffic engineer, fire chief, or the police chief.



   (B)   No special permit issued pursuant to this section shall
authorize the transport of hazardous materials or hazardous wastes, as those
terms are defined by local, state, and federal law.



(Ord. No. 2871)



SEC. 19-244.  APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   The city will issue a special permit only upon receipt of a signed and
verified application describing the vehicle and load, including weight, and
stating whether the special permit is requested for a single trip or
continuous operations. Each application shall be accompanied with a special
permit fee. The amount of all special permit fees shall be established by a
resolution of the city council.



(Ord. No. 2871)



SEC. 19-245.  SPECIAL PERMIT CONDITIONS.



   Every special permit issued pursuant to this division shall provide
that:



   (A)   The maximum allowable gross combined vehicle weight to be
permitted may not exceed 95,000 pounds with appropriate equipment and the
vehicle, combination of vehicles, or mobile equipment shall conform to the
axle weight limits specified in Section 35550 of the California Vehicle Code.



   (B)   The maximum speed limit for any overweight vehicle shall be 30
miles per hour.



   (C)   Each person to whom a special permit is issued shall agree to
defend and indemnify city, its city council, boards, officers and employees
from any and all damages, costs and expenses sustained or incurred by city,
its boards, officers and employees resulting from or arising out of the
issuance of a special permit and the use of city streets or highways whether
designated or non-designated.



   (D)   Each person to whom a special permit is issued shall agree to
be responsible for all injuries or death of persons and for all damages to
property of every kind caused by or resulting from or arising out of the
issuance of a special permit and use of city streets or highways, whether
designated or non-designated.



   (E)   Each person to whom a special permit is issued shall agree to
carry a copy of the special permit in the overweight vehicle for which the
permit is issued and furnish a copy to any peace officer upon demand.



   (F)   Each person to whom the special permit is issued shall furnish
evidence satisfactory to the director that the overweight vehicle has
undergone safety inspection by a governmental agency having jurisdiction
within 90 days preceding the issuance of the special permit and at least once
each 90 days during the permit period.



   (G)   Each person to whom a special permit is issued shall be
prohibited from using an overweight vehicle to transport hazardous materials
or hazardous wastes, as those terms are defined by local, state and federal
laws, across any city street or highway, or portion thereof.



   (H)   Each person to whom a special permit is issued shall at all
times comply with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of all federal,
state and local governmental authorities having jurisdiction over the
operation and maintenance of the overweight vehicle.



   (I)   No detour from a permitted route may be made without prior
written permission of the director or his/her designee.



   (J)   Except for permitted detours, no route shall be on any street
or highway, or portion thereof, not designated by a resolution of the city
council.



   (K)   Every overweight vehicle permitted under this division and
each special permit issued pursuant hereto shall be subject to inspection by
the director or his/her designee, or any peace officer, at any time it is on
a city street or highway within the limits of the city for the purpose of
determining compliance with the provisions of the special permit.



   (L)   As a condition precedent to the city's issuance of a special
permit, the applicant shall furnish the director evidence that each driver of
an overweight vehicle shall have completed training in the operation of an
overweight vehicle.



(Ord. No. 2871)



SEC. 19-246.  VEHICLE TRIP LOGS.



   All persons operating or moving an overweight vehicle pursuant to a
continuous operation special permit shall maintain a vehicle trip log that
evidences all vehicle trips on a city street or highway within the limits of
the city for the then current year. Vehicle trip logs shall, at a minimum,
contain the following information: license plate number, month and year, date
of trip, driver's name or any other information that the director may deem
appropriate. A copy of the vehicle trip log shall at all times be kept in the
overweight vehicle and shall be presented to any peace officer upon demand.
As a condition precedent to the city's issuance of any new continuous
operation special permit, each application shall be accompanied by a vehicle
trip log from the previous year.



(Ord. No. 2871)



SEC. 19-247.  FURNISHING PROOF OF COMPLIANCE WITH THIS DIVISION.



   All persons operating or moving an overweight vehicle shall carry a
copy of any special permit issued pursuant to this division in the overweight
vehicle for which the permit is issued and furnish a copy to any peace
officer upon demand.



(Ord. No. 2871)



SEC. 19-248.  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The director may revoke all continuous operation special permits issued
to a person, if the person, his/her employee or agent is determined by the
director to have violated any two special permit conditions or violate the
same special permit on two occasions within any 90 calendar period.  No
special permit shall be issued to a person whose special permit has been
revoked pursuant to this section for 90 calendar days following such
revocation. Nothing contained in this division shall be deemed or construed
as limiting the power of a peace officer to issue a citation for or otherwise
enforce violations of law with respect to operation of an overweight vehicle
upon designated streets upon discovery of a violation of a condition of a
special permit.



(Ord. No. 2871)



SEC. 19-249.  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The director or his/her designee may adopt, repeal, amend and modify
administrative regulations implementing the provisions of this division,
including, but not limited to, operating requirements, trailer requirements,
driver requirements, and any other matter deemed necessary for the effective
administration of this division.



(Ord. No. 2871)



SEC. 19-250.  OTHER PERMITS.



   A special permit issued pursuant to this division shall be in addition
to and obtained prior to applying for any other permit which may be required
by law for the operation or movement of an overweight vehicle upon public
streets or highways.



(Ord. No. 2871)



CHAPTER 20:  TREES; SHRUBS



   20-1.   Duties of parks and facilities superintendent



   20-2.   Prohibited acts; exception



   20-3.   Unlawful to interfere with superintendent



   20-4.   Protection during certain construction work



   20-5.   Removal of trees



   20-6.   Notice of removal



   20-7.   Appeal of notice



   20-8.   Hearing officer



   20-9.   Scheduling hearings; notice



   20-10.   Conduct of hearings



   20-11.   Decision



SEC. 20-1.  DUTIES OF PARKS AND FACILITIES SUPERINTENDENT.



   The parks and facilities superintendent or designee
(“superintendent”) shall have the following duties:



   (A)   Monitor, regulate and encourage the preservation, culture, and
planting of trees, plants and shrubbery on public property;



   (B)   Prune, spray, cultivate and maintain trees, plants and
shrubbery located on public property;



   (C)   Trim and direct the time and method of trimming trees, plants
and shrubbery on public property; and



   (D)   Control and exterminate insects, pests and plant diseases that
may be injurious to trees, plants and shrubbery on public property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32-1)  (Ord. No. 2454)



SEC. 20-2.  PROHIBITED ACTS; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   No person shall trim, remove, plant, injure or destroy any
tree, plant or shrub on public property.



   (B)   Notwithstanding subsection (A) above, a person may trim,
remove, or plant a tree, plant or shrub on public property with the prior
written consent of the superintendent.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32-2)  (Ord. No. 2454)



SEC. 20-3.  UNLAWFUL TO INTERFERE WITH SUPERINTENDENT.



   No person shall hinder, prevent or interfere with the superintendent
while the superintendent is lawfully engaged in carrying out the provisions
of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32-3)  (Ord. No. 2454)



SEC. 20-4.  PROTECTION DURING CERTAIN CONSTRUCTION WORK.



   No person in charge of any construction work involving any building or
structure shall leave any tree on public property in the vicinity of such
construction work without sufficient protection to prevent injury to the tree
arising out of the construction work.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32-4)  (Ord. No. 2454)



SEC. 20-5.  REMOVAL OF TREES.



   The superintendent may remove any tree or any part thereof that appears
to be dead, liable to fall, dangerous or obstructing the public right-of-way,
if the tree is on public property or if the tree is on private property and
overhangs or projects into any public right-of-way.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32-5)  (Ord. No. 2454)



SEC. 20-6.  NOTICE OF REMOVAL.



   Except in the case of imminent public danger and immediate necessity,
the superintendent shall not wholly cut down or remove a tree unless ten
days' written notice is provided to the owner, tenant, or occupant or the
agent of the owner, tenant or occupant of the property upon which the tree is
located.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32-6)  (Ord. No. 2454)



SEC. 20-7.  APPEAL OF NOTICE.



   Any person having an objection to a notice provided pursuant to section
20-6 shall file with the city clerk a written request for an appeal before a
hearing officer within ten days of receiving the notice.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32-7)  (Ord. No. 2454)



SEC. 20-8.  HEARING OFFICER.



   The city manager shall act as hearing officer.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32-8)  (Ord. No. 2454)



SEC. 20-9.  SCHEDULING HEARINGS; NOTICE.



   (A)   After receipt of a request for hearing, accompanied by the
hearing fee, the city clerk shall send the request to the hearing officer.



   (B)   The hearing fee shall be established by resolution of the city
council.  The hearing officer shall promptly schedule the matter for
hearing.  At least ten days before the hearing, the hearing officer shall
mail written notice of the date, time and location of hearing to the person
requesting the hearing and to the superintendent.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32-9)  (Ord. No. 2454)



SEC. 20-10.  CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.



   (A)   All hearings shall be open to the public.



   (B)   The person requesting the hearing shall first present evidence
to justify the tree not being removed.  Thereafter, the superintendent may
present evidence.  The burden of proof to justify having the tree remain is
on the person requesting the hearing.



   (C)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
fashion and shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32-10)  (Ord. No. 2454)



SEC. 20-11.  DECISION.



   Within 14 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
shall issue and mail to the person requesting the hearing and to the
superintendent a written decision containing a statement of the reasons on
which the decision is based.  The decision of the hearing officer shall be
final.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32-11)  (Ord. No. 2454)



CHAPTER 21:  UNDERGROUND UTILITIES



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   [Reserved]



ARTICLE II.  UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT FORMATION



   21-5.   Definitions



   21-6.   Public hearing by city council



   21-7.   Report by city engineer



   21-8.   City council may designate underground utility districts by
resolution



   21-9.   Unlawful acts



   21-10.   Exceptions; emergency or unusual circumstances



   21-11.   Other exceptions



   21-12.   Notice to property owners and utility companies



   21-13.   Responsibility of utility companies



   21-14.   Responsibility of property owners



   21-15.   Responsibility of city



   21-16.   Extension of time



   21-17.   Penalty



ARTICLE III.  UNDERGROUND INSTALLATIONS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION



   21-25.   Purposes



   21-26.   Undergrounding required; exceptions



   21-27.   Manner of installation



   21-28.   Plans required



   21-29.   Minimum cost projects; in-lieu payments



   21-30.   Compliance a prerequisite to issuance of building permit



   21-31.   Penalty



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



[Reserved]



ARTICLE II.  UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT FORMATION



SEC. 21-5.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   COMMISSION - The public utilities commission of the state.



   (B)   CONSTRUCTION - Includes the construction of new buildings or
structures and the expansion, modernization, renovation, remodeling, repair,
improvement, equipping, furnishing and alteration of existing buildings or
structures, for which one or more approvals or permits by or from the city
are required, and which adds new floor area.



   (C)   DEVELOPER - Includes a person who is a subdivider, land
developer or property owner.



   (D)   FACILITIES - When used in article III, includes poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, cross-arms, braces,
transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments and appurtenances used or useful in supplying
electric, communication or similar or associated service.



   (E)   LAND DEVELOPMENT - Includes any application to the city for a
building permit, use permit, planned development permit, parcel map,
tentative map or final map.



   (F)   POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES -
Poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platform, cross
arms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication
circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground
within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or
similar associated service.



   (G)   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT or DISTRICT - That area in the
city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures
are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to
the provisions of section 21-8.



   (H)   UTILITY - Includes all persons or entities supplying electric,
communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical
materials or devices.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-4)  (Ord. No. 1158, 2207)



SEC. 21-6.  PUBLIC HEARING BY CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   The city council may from time to time call public hearings to
ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires
the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires
and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or
associated service. 



   (B)   The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as
shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail
of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date
thereof.  Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued
from time to time; at each such hearing all persons interested shall be given
an opportunity to be heard.  The decision of the city council shall be final
and conclusive.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-5)  (Ord. No. 1158)



SEC. 21-7.  REPORT BY CITY ENGINEER.



   Prior to holding such public hearing, the city engineer shall consult
with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such
hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities'
participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected
property owners.  Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time
required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead
facilities.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-6)  (Ord. No. 1158)



SEC. 21-8.  CITY COUNCIL MAY DESIGNATE UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS BY
RESOLUTION.



   If, after any such public hearing, the city council finds that the
public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such
underground installation within a designated area, the city council shall, by
resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and
order such removal and underground installation.  Such resolution shall
include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the
time within which such removal and underground installation shall be
accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to
receive underground service.  A reasonable time shall be allowed for such
removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability
of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the
installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-7)  (Ord. No. 1158)



SEC. 21-9.  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   Whenever the city council creates an underground utility district and
orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures therein, as provided in section 21-6, no person or utility shall
erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles,
overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the
date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such
resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish
service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such
owner or occupant of the underground work necessary, and for such reasonable
time required to remove such facilities after the work has been performed,
and except as otherwise provided in this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-8)  (Ord. No. 1158)



SEC. 21-10.  EXCEPTIONS; EMERGENCY OR UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, overhead facilities may
be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed 30 days, without
authority of the city council in order to provide emergency service.  The
city engineer may grant special permission, on such terms as he/she may deem
appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to
any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate
poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures for an additional
period of time not to exceed an additional 60 days.  The city council may
grant special permission, on such terms as the city council may deem
appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to
any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate
poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures for any additional
period of time.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-9)  (Ord. No. 1158)



SEC. 21-11.  OTHER EXCEPTIONS.



   This article and any resolutions adopted pursuant to section 21-8
shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the
following types of facilities:



   (A)   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the
supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;



   (B)   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;



   (C)   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing
any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited,
or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires
originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures are not prohibited;



   (D)   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used
for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of
34,500 volts;



   (E)   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building
by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the
building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building
without crossing any public street;



   (F)   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used
by a utility for furnishing communication services;



   (G)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as
surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter
cabinets, and concealed ducts; and



   (H)   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-10)  (Ord. No. 1158)



SEC. 21-12.  NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES.



   (A)   Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution
adopted pursuant to section 21-8, the city clerk shall notify all affected
utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by
such resolution of the adoption thereof.  Such city clerk shall further
notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any
person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric,
communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall
provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive
such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new
location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the
respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.



   (B)   Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy
of the resolution adopted pursuant to section 21-8, together with a copy of
this article, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last
equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-11)  (Ord. No. 1158)



SEC. 21-13.  RESPONSIBILITY OF UTILITY COMPANIES.



   If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service
within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to section 21-8,
the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors
and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable
rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-12)  (Ord. No. 1158)



SEC. 21-14.  RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS.



   (A)   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting
a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that
portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities
referred to in section 21-13 and the termination facility on or within such
building or structure being served.  If the above is not accomplished by any
person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to
section 21-8, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in
possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as
shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required
underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice.



   (B)   The notice to provide the required underground facilities may
be given either by personal service or by mail.  In case of service by mail
on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States
mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in
possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be
addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be
addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last
equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery,
City of Oxnard.  If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to
have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within 48 hours
after the mailing thereof.  If notice is given by mail to either the owner
or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within 48 hours after
the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than
eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on
such premises.



   (C)   The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required
underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be
done, and shall state that if such work is not completed within 30 days after
receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required
underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be
assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon such property.



   (D)   (1)   If upon the expiration of the 30-day period, the
required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer
shall forthwith proceed to do the work, provided, however, if such premises
are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished
thereto, the city engineer may in lieu of providing the required underground
facilities, authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead
service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such
property.  Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he/she shall
file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the
required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof,
together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is
to be assessed.



      (2)   The city council shall thereupon fix a time and place
for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon
such premises, which such time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.



   (E)   The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing
such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in
possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner
thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to
provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the
city council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such
assessment.  Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed
assessment.



   (F)   Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the
city council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be
any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.



   (G)   (1)   If any assessment is not paid within five days after
its confirmation by the city council, the amount of the assessment shall
become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the
city engineer, and shall be a personal obligation of the property owner or
owners, jointly and severally.  If not paid when due and payable, such
assessment shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent per annum.



      (2)   The city engineer may turn over to the assessor and tax
collector a notice of lien on each of such properties on which the assessment
has not been paid, and such assessor, and tax collector may add the amount of
such assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the
premises upon which such assessment was not paid.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-13)  (Ord. No. 1158)



SEC. 21-15.  RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY.



   The city shall remove, at its own expense, all city-owned equipment
from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the
owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in
the resolution enacted pursuant to section 21-8.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-14)  (Ord. No. 1158)



SEC. 21-16.  EXTENSION OF TIME.



   In the event that any act required by this article or by a resolution
adopted pursuant to section 21-8 cannot be performed within the time provided
on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities,
strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances
beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be
accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such
limitation.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-15)  (Ord. No. 1158)



SEC. 21-17.  PENALTY.



   (A)   No person shall violate any provision or to fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article.  Any person violating any
provision of this article or, failing to comply with any of its requirements
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.



   (B)   Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense
for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the
provisions of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such
person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this article.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-16)  (Ord. No. 1158)



ARTICLE III.  UNDERGROUND INSTALLATIONS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION



SEC. 21-25.  PURPOSES.



   The city council hereby finds and determines that the public interest
requires, except as otherwise provided in this article, that all facilities
for the supply and distribution of electric energy and service, television
cable service, and telephone and telegraph service for all construction and
land development and adjacent to all construction and land development shall
be placed underground in order to promote and preserve the health, safety and
general welfare of the public and to assure the orderly development of the
city.  In particular, the city council finds that the undergrounding of such
facilities will promote and contribute to the safety of the public and
persons frequenting the new construction and land development, and the
appearance of the new construction and land development and the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-30)  (Ord. No. 1733, 2113, 2207)



SEC. 21-26.  UNDERGROUNDING REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   In general - Except as provided herein, every developer who
proposes construction or land development (other than construction or land
development on land used exclusively for agricultural purposes both before
and after the construction or land development) shall cause all facilities,
both existing and installed as part of the construction or land development,
both on and adjacent to the developer's construction or land development, to
be placed underground according to the following requirements.



      (1)   Facilities shall be deemed adjacent if they are within a
public entity or public utility right-of-way which abuts the developer's
property (whether the public entity or public utility owns an easement or
other interest in land, or owns the land underlying the right-of-way),
including a flood control or drainage channel or a street, or which is
separated from the developer's property only by one or more such
rights-of-way.



      (2)   Undergrounding shall be completed to the nearest
suitable riser pole beyond the boundaries of the developer's property.



   (B)   Undergrounding not required -



      (1)   Appurtenances and associated equipment, such as surface
mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and
concealed ducts in an underground system, need not be undergrounded.



      (2)   Facilities on or in a building need not be undergrounded.



   (C)   New facilities; service laterals - Notwithstanding any other
provision of this article except subsections (B) and (G) of this section:



      (1)   All new facilities, including new service laterals,
shall be placed underground.



      (2)   Existing service laterals to commercial and industrial
structures shall be placed underground when changes in service are made which
require meter relocation, a change of voltage classification, or an increase
in meter panel ampacity.



   (D)   Reimbursement - If adjacent facilities which the developer is
required to underground are located on property which is not owned by the
developer and which is beyond the developer's side of the center line of all
rights-of-way, if any, which are between the developer's property and such
other property, and at the time of undergrounding the owner of such other
property refuses to pay the developer's cost of undergrounding performed on
the owner's property and beyond the center line of all such rights-of-way:



      (1)   On completion of undergrounding, the city will offer to
enter into an agreement with the developer whereby the city will reimburse
the developer up to the developer's cost of undergrounding such adjacent
facilities from an amount collected by the city from the owner of such
property for such purpose when the owner proposes construction or land
development thereon.



      (2)   When the owner of such property proposes construction or
land development thereon, if the owner's project qualifies as a “smaller
project” under section 21-29(A), the owner may choose either option (1)(a)
or option (1)(c) from subsection (A) of section 21-29, but may not choose
option (1)(b).  If the owner chooses option (1)(a), the owner shall, in
addition to complying fully with the other provisions of section 21-26, pay
to the city the cost of undergrounding performed by the developer on the
owner's property and on the owner's side of the center line of all
rights-of-way between the developer's property and the owner's property,
which the city shall then pay to the developer on the terms and conditions of
the agreement referred to in subsection (D)(1) of this section.  If the
owner chooses option (1)(c) from subsection (A) of section 21-29 and makes
the in-lieu payment provided for therein, the city shall then pay to the
developer on the terms and conditions provided for in such agreement the cost
of undergrounding performed by the developer on the owner s property and on
the owner's side of the center line of all rights-of-way between the
developer's property and the owner's property, but not to exceed the amount
of such in-lieu payment.



      (3)   When the owner of such property proposes construction or
land development thereon, if the owner's project does not qualify as a
“smaller project” under section 21-29(A), the owner must, in addition to
complying fully with the other provisions of this article, pay to the city an
amount equal to the developer's cost of undergrounding performed by the
developer on the owner's land and on the owner's side of the center line of
all rights-of-way between the developer's property and the owner's land,
which amount the city will pay to the developer on the terms and conditions
of the agreement referred to in subsection (D)(1) of this section.



      (4)   The provisions of this subsection apply whether the
owner of such land who proposes construction or land development is the same
person who owned the property when the developer performed the undergrounding
thereon, and whether all or part of such property is proposed for
construction or land development.



   (E)   Deferral; security -



      (1)   The city engineer may defer undergrounding of facilities
and accept security to guarantee later undergrounding if, on either of the
following criteria, the engineer finds undergrounding to be infeasible at the
time of construction or land development:



         (a)   The construction or land development is not within
an underground utility district, but will be included in one within three
years; or



         (b)   The location, topography, soil conditions, or
geological factors make undergrounding technically or economically infeasible
at the time of construction or land development, but such factors are likely
to change within five years to make undergrounding feasible.



      (2)   At the developer's expense, the developer shall obtain
an estimate of the cost of undergrounding and submit the estimate to the city
engineer.  The developer may have the estimate prepared by the affected
utilities, by an engineer licensed in the state, or by the city engineer. 
The estimate shall include a separate item for contingencies in the amount of
15 percent of the estimated actual cost.  Based on such estimate, the city
engineer shall determine the estimated cost for the undergrounding, including
an amount for inflation and other increases pending completion of the
undergrounding.  The developer shall post security for the undergrounding
for the full amount of the estimated costs as determined by the city
engineer.  The security shall be of a type specified in Cal. Gov’t Code,
Section 66499 and must be approved by the city attorney as to form and legal
sufficiency before being accepted by the city engineer.



   (F)   Waiver - The city engineer may waive the requirement of
undergrounding if the engineer finds that the location, topography, soil
conditions, or geological factors make undergrounding technically or
economically infeasible, and the developer makes to the city the in-lieu
payment provided by section 21-29(D).



   (G)   Exceptions - The requirements of this article shall not apply
to:



      (1)   Facilities approved by the city engineer to be installed
and maintained for a period not to exceed 30 days in order to provide
emergency services;



      (2)   Temporary facilities approved by the city engineer used,
or to be used, in conjunction with construction projects;



      (3)   Facilities used for the transmission of electrical
energy at voltages in excess of 33,000 volts; or



      (4)   The rewiring of existing utility services.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-31)  (Ord. No. 1733, 2113, 2135, 2207, 2493)



SEC. 21-27.  MANNER OF INSTALLATION.



   (A)   Installation prior to street widening or paving - Except as
provided herein, all facilities, including service laterals, shall be
installed in the ground prior to street widening or the paving of new
streets.  The city engineer may authorize installation of facilities after
street improvements are made if the installation will not require
reconstruction or repair of the street improvements or if unusual
circumstances warrant. At the time of approval of the tentative map for a
proposed subdivision, the planning commission may modify this requirement for
all or part of a subdivision where, due to physical conditions, undue
hardship would be caused.



   (B)   Minimize hazards - The developer shall place above-ground
associated equipment and access points so as to safeguard the public against
any hazard created by such equipment and access points and so as to enhance
the appearance of the neighborhood.



   (C)   Placement of facilities - Facilities shall be placed within
the street, alley or walkway dedication or in easements adjacent thereto
obtained by the utility companies, as approved by the city engineer.  The
city engineer may allow deviations from this requirement if compliance is
deemed impractical, or if any conflicting paramount law requires such
deviations.



   (D)   Arrangements with utility companies - The developer shall make
all necessary arrangements for underground installations and for relocation
of existing facilities with the utility companies involved, subject to
applicable utility company rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the
commission.  The developer shall provide the trenching, conduits and
miscellaneous substructures necessary for the installation of cable
television and electronic gear.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-32)  (Ord. No. 1733, 2113, 2207)



SEC. 21-28.  PLANS REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   The developer shall submit plans detailing the
location of all underground utilities to be installed to the city engineer
for approval.



      (2)   The city engineer shall inspect the installation of all
underground utilities for conformance to city-approved plans.



   (B)   The developer shall pay the city for the cost of such
inspection.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-33)  (Ord. No. 1733, 2113, 2207)



SEC. 21-29.  MINIMUM COST PROJECTS; IN-LIEU PAYMENTS.



   (A)   Smaller projects - A “smaller project” is construction or
land development subject to this article which is carried out in its entirety
on less than ten acres and which involves construction of less than 134,000
square feet of floor area.



      (1)   Notwithstanding section 21-26(A), and except as
otherwise provided in this subsection, developers of smaller projects may
choose to:



         (a)   Comply fully with section 21-26(A);



         (b)   Unless section 21-26(D)(2) applies, comply with
section 21-26(A) to the extent of providing undergrounding for a minimum cost
project approved by the city engineer as provided in subsection (B) of this
section; or



         (c)   Make to the city the in-lieu payment provided in
subsection (C) of this section.



      (2)   If poles must be relocated in order to provide street
improvements or other public improvements, and the cost of undergrounding
which removes the poles to be relocated exceeds the minimum cost provided for
in subsection (B) of this section, the city engineer may, in his or her
discretion, require that the undergrounding be accomplished pursuant to
subdivision (b) above and agree to reimburse the developer in the amount that
the cost of undergrounding exceeds the minimum cost for that project.  In
such case, the developer may not choose subdivision (c) above and may choose
subdivision (a) above only if compliance with section 21-26 removes the poles
to the same extent as the city engineer would require under subdivision (b)
above, or to a greater extent.



   (B)   Minimum cost projects -



      (1)   The developer of a smaller project may perform less
undergrounding than is required by section 21-26(A) if the cost of the
undergrounding performed is at least equal to a certain amount per square
foot of floor area to be constructed.  The city engineer will determine such
cost on the basis of construction plans submitted when the developer applies
for a building permit.



      (2)   The developer's determination of the undergrounding to
be performed as a minimum cost project must be approved by the city engineer
before a building permit may be issued or work begun on the project or on the
undergrounding.



      (3)   The amount to be paid per square foot is $1.3202 for
smaller projects in the Oxnard Shores Zone and $0.1726 for smaller projects
elsewhere.



      (4)   The Oxnard Shores Zone is bounded by Harbor Boulevard on
the east, Amalfi Way on the south, the shoreline on the west, and Fifth
Street on the north.  A map of the Oxnard Shores Zone is on file with the
city clerk.



   (C)   In-lieu payments for smaller projects -



      (1)   In lieu of undergrounding and subject to the following
provisions, the developer of a smaller project may pay to the city an amount
equal to the minimum cost for the project provided in subsection (B) of this
section.



      (2)   The developer of a smaller project may have an
independent impact analysis performed to determine the impact of the project
on the need to underground facilities within the city.



      (3)   The city engineer may require the developer of a smaller
project to submit such an independent impact analysis if the nature, size,
location or density of use of the project indicates that the demand for
undergrounding facilities within the city would be substantially higher than
that assumed for purposes of establishing the in-lieu payment.



      (4)   Such an independent impact analysis shall be prepared in
accordance with city procedures, standards and guidelines.



      (5)   All costs related to the independent impact analysis
shall be paid by the developer.



      (6)   Prior to submittal of any independent impact analysis,
the developer shall meet with the city engineer to review the scope,
standards, procedures and preliminary findings of the independent impact
analysis.



      (7)   When the independent impact analysis shows that the
impact of the specific development proposal varies substantially from the
level of impact used in the in-lieu payment calculations, the payment amount
shall be calculated using the methodology established in the staff report
concerning this ordinance, dated July 11, 1989.



      (8)   All payments calculated pursuant to subsection (C)(7)
shall be established by the city council.



   (D)   In-lieu payments when undergrounding waived - When
undergrounding is waived by the city engineer as infeasible, as provided by
subsection (F) of section 21-26, the developer of the construction or land
development, whether or not it qualifies as a “smaller project” under
subsection (A) of this section, shall pay to the city an amount equal to the
minimum cost for the construction or land development provided in subsection
(B) of this section.



   (E)   Undergrounding fund -



      (1)   The city shall reserve the in-lieu payments for
undergrounding along major arterial streets within different parts of the
city, except that $1.1476 per square foot of in-lieu payments from the Oxnard
Shores Zone will be reserved for undergrounding utilities in the Oxnard
Shores Zone.



      (2)   The finance director is directed to establish an
undergrounding fund, and the city will spend or commit in-lieu payments in
such fund on or to such undergrounding within five years of receipt of
in-lieu payments.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-34)  (Ord. No. 1733, 2113, 2207)



SEC. 21-30.  COMPLIANCE A PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT.



   City staff shall not issue a building permit for any construction or
land development unless the applicant's plans comply with the provisions of
this article or the applicant has made the in-lieu payment provided by this
article.  The developer of a residential project may defer making the
in-lieu payment until the date of final inspection or the date the
certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first, subject to the
provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 66007.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-35)  (Ord. No. 1733, 2113, 2207)



SEC. 21-31.  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this article or failing to comply
with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.  Such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for
each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions
of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person.



(`64 Code, Sec. 32.5-36)  (Ord. No. 1733, 2113, 2207)



CHAPTER 22:  WATER



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   22-1.   Definitions



   22-2.   Supplying water within city



   22-3.   Areas served by water division



   22-4.   Tampering with water system



   22-5.   Authority of city manager



   22-6.   Appeals



   22-7.   Right of ingress and egress



   22-8.   Penalty for violation of chapter



ARTICLE II.  RENDERING WATER SERVICE



   22-15.   Application



   22-16.   Special contracts



   22-17.   Unauthorized use of water



   22-18.   Conditions of pressure and supply



   22-19.   Deposit guaranteeing payment



   22-20.   Changes in customer's equipment



   22-21.   Service connections



   22-22.   Effect of subdivision of land



   22-23.   Service connection to each consumer discretionary



   22-24.   Service and meter sizes



   22-25.   Meters required



   22-26.   Exception



   22-27.   Ownership of connections



   22-28.   Access



   22-29.   By-passes



   22-30.   Moving meters, services and associated facilities



   22-31.   Temporary service



   22-32.   New system connections; charges for connections inside city
limits



   22-33.   Alterations to size of water system connection



   22-34.   Conditions of connection



   22-35.   Connection fees for replacement structures



   22-36.   Plans required



   22-37.   New service connections; charges for inside city limits



   22-38.   Charges for outside city limits



   22-39.   Charges for changing size of service connections



   22-40.   Turning water on or off



   22-41.   Temporary turn off of water service



   22-42.   Billing and collection; generally



   22-43.   Estimated bills



   22-44.   Proration of bills



   22-45.   Exception



   22-46.   Meter testing



   22-47.   Reserved



   22-48.   Delinquent bill; authority to turn off water



   22-49.   Nonpayment



   22-50.   No new service until bill paid and penalty paid



   22-51.   Discontinuing water service



ARTICLE III.  RATES



   22-60.   Water rates



   22-61.   Monthly water usage fees and charges



   22-62.   Monthly fixed water meter fees and charges



   22-63.   Special water services



   22-64.   Water service and meter rates



   22-65.   Other deposits, fees and rates



   22-66.   Agricultural use



ARTICLE IV.  CROSS-CONNECTIONS



   22-70.   Prohibition; purpose



   22-71.   Definitions



   22-72.   Cross-connection control standards



   22-73.   Types of required protection



   22-74.   Frequency of inspection of protective devices



   22-74.1.   Inspection fee



   22-75.   Qualifications and certification of persons to inspect and
maintain backflow prevention devices



   22-76.   Regulation of booster pumps



   22-77.   Protection of water system within premises



   22-78.   Penalties for violations of article



ARTICLE V.  WATER MAINS



   22-85.   Definitions



   22-86.   All service to be from distribution main



   22-87.   Charges for new mains



   22-88.   Extension at applicant's expense



   22-89.   Exception



   22-90.   Installation in boundary streets



   22-91.   Refunds of main charges



ARTICLE VI.  WATER RIGHTS AND WELLS



   22-100.   Water rights and groundwater pumping allocation



   22-101.   Permit for drilling wells required



ARTICLE VII.  CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR, MODIFICATION AND DESTRUCTION OF WELLS



   22-110.   Purpose



   22-111.   Definitions



   22-112.   Permit required



   22-113.   Application for permit



   22-114.   Permit requirements and expiration



   22-115.   Time to complete permitted work and satisfy permit
requirements



   22-116.   Guarantee of permitted work



   22-117.   License and registration required of persons performing
permitted work



   22-118.   Suspension or termination of permit



   22-119.   Standards



   22-120.   Log of well



   22-121.   Well inspection report



   22-122.   Corrective actions



   22-123.   Destruction of abandoned wells



   22-124.   Certificate of exemption



   22-125.   Fees



   22-126.   Inspection



   22-127.   Misdemeanor/infraction



   22-128.   Abatement



   22-129.   Exemption



ARTICLE VIII.  WATER WASTE



   22-135.   Declaration of policy and purpose



   22-136.   Water waste prohibited



   22-137.   Failure to comply



   22-138.   Notice to customer



   22-139.   Right to hearing



   22-140.   Restoration of discontinued water service



   22-141.   Limitations on curtailment



   22-142.   Enforcement personnel



ARTICLE IX.  WATER CONSERVATION AND WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE PROCEDURES



   22-150.   Short title



   22-151.   Declaration of water shortage conditions



   22-152.   Policy and purpose



   22-153.   General prohibition: enforcement



   22-154.   Mandatory water conservation measures



   22-155.   Public notification



   22-156.   Exceptions



   22-157.   Enforcement



   22-158.   Request for adjustment



   22-159.   Notice of violation



   22-160.   Reduction in water supplied



   22-161.   Water shortage emergency; health and safety impacts



   22-162.   Appeal



ARTICLE X.  RECYCLED WATER USE



   22-175.   Short title



   22-176.   Findings



   22-177.   Policies and purpose



   22-178.   Powers and duties of manager



   22-179.   Recycled water master plan



   22-180.   Mandatory recycled water use



   22-181.   Conversion of existing potable water service



   22-182.   Development and water service approvals



   22-183.   Recycled water use; prevention of improper use



   22-184.   Sanctions



ARTICLE XI.  ANNEXATION VERIFICATION



   22-190.   Short title



   22-191.   Policy and purpose



   22-192.   Definition, customer



   22-193.   Proof of annexation prior to delivery of water service



   22-194.   Annexation procedure



   22-195.   Determination letter as conclusive evidence of annexation
status



   22-196.   Timely submission of a request for determination of
annexation status



   22-197.   Verification prior to or concurrent with annexation into
city



   22-198.   Verification prior to or concurrent with subdivision
approval



   22-199.   Verification prior to or concurrent with conditional land
use approval



   22-200.   Verification prior to final land use clearance



   22-201.   Verification prior to issuance of a building permit



   22-202.   Suspension of conflicting ordinances, resolutions, rules
and regulations



ARTICLE XII: STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT



   22-215.   Purpose and intent



   22-216.   Definitions



   22-217.   Prohibition of illicit connections and illicit discharges



   22-218.   General discharge prohibitions



   22-219.   Specific discharge prohibitions



   22-220.   Reduction of pollutants in storm water



   22-221.   Reduction of litter



   22-222.   Construction development



   22-223.   Post construction development



   22-224.   Best management practices



   22-225.   Compliance with NPDES permits



   22-226.   Watercourse and storm water drain system protection



   22-227.   Prohibited acts affecting watercourses or storm drains



   22-228.   Inspections



   22-229.   Inspections of critical source facilities



   22-230.   Remedies for violation



   22-231.   Appeals



ARTICLE XIII:  LANDSCAPE WATER CONSERVATION STANDARDS



   22-240.   Introduction



   22-241.   Applicability



   22-242.   Definitions



   22-243.   Compliance requirements



   22-244.   Exceptions



   22-245.   Building and engineering plan check submittals



   22-246.   Determination of conforming installation



   22-247.   Compliance verification



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 22-1.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   ACTIVE SERVICE - A service connected from the premises to the
water main, is turned on and through which water may readily be drawn.



   (B)   APPLICANT - A person applying for water service.



   (C)   BILLING DATE - The date the meter is read, or, for unmetered
accounts, the date the bill ismailed.



   (D)   CITY-OWNED RECYCLED WATER FACILITIES - The city-owned
facilities intended to provide for the delivery of recycled water only, that
are separate from any potable water distribution system, up to and including
the point of connection to the customer's on-site recycled water facilities
which point of connection is usually the meter assembly at the customer's
point of service.



   (E)   CONSUMER - A person receiving water from the city.



   (F)   CUSTOMER - Any person applying for water service and
responsible for payment of waterbills.



   (G)   INACTIVE SERVICE - An active service, but which has been shut
off and is currently in a state of nonuse.



   (H)   MANAGER - The manager of the water resources division.



   (I)   MANDATORY RECYCLED WATER USE AREA - Any area within each
recycled water use area which is designated for mandatory recycled water use
by the recycled water master plan.



   (J)   ON-SITE RECYCLED WATER FACILITIES - The customer-owned
facilities used to make use of recycled water, that are separate from any
potable distribution system, downstream of the point of connection from the
city-owned recycled water facilities.



   (K)   POTABLE WATER - Water that conforms to federal, state, and
local standards for human consumption.



   (L)   RECYCLED WATER - Highly purified water that, as a result of
the treatment of wastewater, is suitable for a direct beneficial use, subject
to the restrictions in article IX of this chapter and applicable state and
federal laws and regulations.



   (M)   RECYCLED WATER MASTER PLAN - The plan to be developed and
periodically updated by the water resources division manager, which provides
detailed procedures, rules and regulations to implement the policies and
mandates of article IX of this chapter.



   (N)   RECYCLED WATER USE AREA - An area identified in the recycled
water master plan that can presently or may in the future use recycled water
in lieu of potable water.



   (O)   SEALED SERVICE - An existing service which has never been
activated and which does not have a meter installed.



   (P)   TEMPORARY SERVICE - Any service installed for a defined period
of time and which will be abandoned at the expiration of the period of time.



   (Q)   WASTEWATER - Water discharged from city customers into the
city wastewater collection system that contains dissolved or suspended matter.



   (R)   WATER RESOURCES DIVISION - The water resources division of the
city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-1)  (Ord. No. 1009, 1318, 2728)



SEC. 22-2.  SUPPLYING WATER WITHIN CITY.



   (A)   In order to avoid costly duplication of facilities, to ensure
conservation of water and regulation of the use thereof, to avoid undesirable
competition among private suppliers, public agencies and public utilities,
and to assure equal service and uniform lowest water rates to all properties
within the city, the water division is designated as the sole supplier of
water within the city, except as follows:



      (1)   Water supplied by means of portable containers;



      (2)   Agricultural and appurtenant domestic uses existing at
the time of annexation, when approved by the city council;



      (3)   Uses which may be authorized by the city council for
periods of two years or less; or



      (4)   By franchise agreement with the city council.



   (B)   No person or agency other than the water division shall be
allowed to install mains or appurtenant facilities above or under a city
street for the purpose of supplying water.



   (C)   Supplying of water within the city is prohibited except as
above specified.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-2)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-3.  AREAS SERVED BY WATER DIVISION.



   (A)   Outside city - The water division shall not serve water
outside the city, without prior permission of the city council.  When such
service is rendered, the service shall be on a temporary basis and shall be
subject to the terms of this chapter and all terms and conditions established
by the city council.



   (B)   Outside MWD - Customers within the city but not in the
Calleguas Municipal Water District or the Metropolitan Water District shall
be required to pay a higher rate than regular city customers.  The
accumulation of these funds and the permissible expenditures therefrom are
set forth in section 22-61.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-3)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-4.  TAMPERING WITH WATER SYSTEM.



   (A)   No person shall open, meddle with, tap, break, turn off or on,
damage or endanger any fire hydrant, valve, water service, meter, main pipe
or facility used in connection with the city water system, without prior
permission of the public works director.  Any person authorized to operate
fire hydrants shall use only an approved spanner wrench.  Except in
emergencies, no water shall be drawn from a fire hydrant without the use of
an auxiliary control valve.



   (B)   No person shall place upon or about a fire hydrant any object,
material, debris or structure of any kind that shall prevent free access to
the fire hydrant at all times.



   (C)   All contractors or persons working in a street, alley or water
easement in such manner as to necessitate relocation, removal or protection
of a water main or facility, shall make written application to the water
division for such relocation, removal or protection.  The application shall
be made ten days in advance of the work to be done and shall be accompanied
by a deposit to cover the cost of the work to be done.  Water division
facilities which are moved for the convenience of the city will be paid for
by the city out of an appropriate fund, subject to the approval of the city
manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-4)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-5.  AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   The city manager shall prescribe from time to time as he shall
deem necessary or desirable, additional rules and regulations relating to the
conditions of service, the applications, administration and interpretation of
rates, and to the sale of water by the city and of products, commodities and
service incidental thereto, and the charges to be made therefor.



   (B)   Such rules and regulations shall be of a general application,
not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-5)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-6.  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by any act, determination, rule or
regulation of the water division or city manager may appeal therefrom to the
city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within
30 days after receiving notice of such act or determination, rule or
regulation.



   (B)   After hearing the objections of such person and giving due
consideration thereto, the city council may confirm, amend, alter, modify or
correct such action, determination, rule or regulation, and its action shall
be final and conclusive.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-6)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-7.  RIGHT OF INGRESS AND EGRESS.



   Any duly authorized agent of the water division shall have the right of
ingress to and egress from the consumer's premises at reasonable hours for
any purpose reasonably related to the furnishing of water service and the
exercise of any and all rights secured to it by law or this chapter,
including inspection of the consumer's piping and equipment.  Such agents
shall, carry an identification card issued by the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-7)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-8.  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and is subject to the penalties provided herein and in section
1-10.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-8)  (Ord. No. 1009)



ARTICLE II.  RENDERING WATER SERVICE



SEC. 22-15.  APPLICATION.



   Each prospective customer will be required to provide the necessary
information for application by telephone or in person.  This applicant by
such application and use of city water service also agrees to abide by the
provisions of this chapter and all rules and regulations of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-9)  (Ord. No. 1009, 1771)



SEC. 22-16.  SPECIAL CONTRACTS.



   In unusual circumstances, the water division may require that the
applicant enter into a contract with the city.  Such contracts shall be
approved by the city council and approved as to form by the city attorney.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-10)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-17.  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF WATER.



   (A)   General - No person shall draw water from any service, fire
hydrant, blow off, main, valve or any other water division facility without
first arranging with the department for same, and paying all charges provided
in this chapter.



   (B)   Fire service - The water division shall charge $25 for each
and every incident of unauthorized use of a fire service.  Each day will be
construed as a separate incident.  If unauthorized use of a fire service
persists, the water division shall notify the fire department and the
customer in writing, and within ten days discontinue all service until all
charges have been paid and assurance given that the unauthorized use will be
discontinued.  The public works director may authorize the use of private
fire services for testing purposes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-11)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-18.  CONDITIONS OF PRESSURE AND SUPPLY.



   All persons applying for or receiving water service shall be required
to accept and shall be deemed to have consented to such conditions of
pressure and service as are provided by the distribution system at the
location served and to hold the city harmless from any damages arising out of
low pressure or high pressure conditions, interruptions of service, or
quality of water.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-12)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-19.  DEPOSIT GUARANTEEING PAYMENT.



   (A)   Each applicant for service shall be required to place a
deposit with the city to guarantee the payment of all water, sewer, and
rubbish charges.



   (B)   The amount of this deposit shall be established by resolution
of the city council.



      (1)   Public agencies shall not be required to make
deposits.  Industrial, commercial, or church customers may be exempted from
placing deposits providing said customer established credit references
satisfactory to the city.  Should the required deposit exceed $250, a
corporate surety bond in a form satisfactory to the city attorney may be
deposited in lieu of cash.



      (2)   A deposit shall be required from all customers who are
sent a final notice five or more times within any two-year period, and from
every customer whose service is disconnected for nonpayment of water
charges.  After the deposit has been held for two consecutive years, during
which service has been continuous and no final notices were required to be
sent, the deposit shall be automatically refunded without interest by the
city.



      (3)   Upon the disconnection of any service, the deposit may
be applied to any outstanding water, sewer, or rubbish bills, and any balance
of deposit then remaining in the hands of the city shall be returned to the
person by whom such deposit was made.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-13)  (Ord. No. 1009, 1771)



SEC. 22-20.  CHANGES IN CUSTOMER'S EQUIPMENT.



   Customers making any change in the character or extent of their
equipment or operation, and whose change in operation results in changes in
plumbing or water usage, shall immediately give the water division written
notice of the nature of the change.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-14)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-21.  SERVICE CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   Each premises shall have a connection.  No water service
connection shall serve more than one premises.



   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, “premises” means any:



      (1)   Detached single-family residence;



      (2)   Apartment building;  (Any building with two or more
leased dwelling units held under single ownership.)



      (3)   Residential condominium unit or residential stock
cooperative unit;



      (4)   Mobile home park, unless the spaces in that mobile home
park are individually owned, in which case each space shall be a separate
connection;



      (5)   Office, commercial or industrial building, except
office, commercial or industrial buildings with separately-owned individual
condominium or stock cooperative units, in which case each unit shall be a
separate premises;



      (6)   Irrigation system; and



      (7)   Unimproved lot or parcel.



   (C)   (1)   The public works director may waive the requirement
of a separate service connection for each unit of a condominium or stock
cooperative office, commercial or industrial building, or for each
individually owned space of a mobile home park, subject to such terms and
conditions deemed reasonable and prudent by the public works director.



      (2)   At a minimum, such conditions shall protect the city
from claims for damages arising from interruptions in water service or
inadequate water pressure, and provide for the issuance and payment of a
single bill for all sewer and water services rendered to the complex as a
whole.



   (D)   (1)   The requirement of a separate water service
connection may not be waived in cases involving a restaurant or commercial
laundry.



      (2)   The public works director may impose other requirements
when the directory determines that public health and safety, system
protection, maintenance costs, or liability concerns so dictate.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-15)  (Ord. No. 1009, 1769, 2030)



SEC. 22-22.  EFFECT OF SUBDIVISION OF LAND.



   When property provided with a service connection is subdivided, each
service connection shall be considered as belonging to the lot or parcel of
land which is nearest to it.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-16)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-23.  SERVICE CONNECTION TO EACH CONSUMER DISCRETIONARY.



   Where more than one consumer is supplied through one service
connection, the city shall hold the owner of the property or other person
agreed upon, responsible for payment of all service.  Where practicable to
serve each consumer through a separate service connection, the water division
may install separate service connections or separate meters for each consumer
at the owner's or customer's expense, and collect at the established rates
for water supplied through each service connection.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-17)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-24.  SERVICE AND METER SIZES.



   The minimum size service and meter for each customer shall be
determined by the water division.  Applicants may obtain services and meters
larger than the minimum required to accommodate future use.  The water
division will determine the minimum size by use of engineering design or
through the use of the Plumbing Code.  Customers shall not circumvent the
intent of this section by reducing the service or meter size after the
initial installation or by increasing the demand on the service and meter
beyond the original design.  The water division retains the right to approve
or disapprove all requests for reduction in service or meter size.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-18)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-25.  METERS REQUIRED.



   A separate meter shall be placed upon each separate service connection
and the rate to be paid shall be computed separately upon each meter.  The
water division may in lieu of a single meter and where special operating or
service conditions require, install such number of meters on a service
connection as shall be necessary to equal the capacity of such a single
meter.  For billing purposes, the consumption as registered by a battery of
meters installed pursuant to this section shall be combined and charged for
at such rate including the monthly minimum charge, as though the water were
supplied through a single meter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-19)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-26.  EXCEPTION.



   Whenever the water superintendent determines that it is impracticable
to install meters on existing services due to plumbing and other physical
conditions, the water division may so continue existing unmetered services
until such time as the water division deems it practical to install the
required meters.  The water superintendent may require advance payment of
the costs of such installation; provided, that such premises will not be
required to pay more than the cost of current meter installation charges
elsewhere provided in this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-20)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-27.  OWNERSHIP OF CONNECTIONS.



   All services and meters shall remain the property of the water
division.  The expense of maintenance, repair and renewal due to normal wear
and tear shall be borne by the water division except that expenses incurred
by an act, careless or otherwise on the part of the customer, or any member
of his/her family, or any person in his/her employ, or any of his tenants,
shall be charged to such customer.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-21)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-28.  ACCESS.



   Each customer has the duty to keep the space about the meter, the
shut-off box, and all backflow and cross-contamination prevention devices
serving the property free and clean of any material or obstruction which may,
in any way, interfere with the free access to such equipment by water
division employees or representatives. The water superintendent or
representative may give notice, either in writing or in person, to the owner,
customer or occupant of the property to remove any such material or
obstruction within 24 hours. Upon a failure to comply with this notice, the
water division staff may remove such material or obstruction, and the cost of
doing so, plus any administrative expenses, shall be paid by the owner,
customer, or occupant of the property.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-22)  (Ord. No. 1009, 2661)



SEC. 22-29.  BY-PASSES.



   Any by-pass or connection around the meter except those installed and
approved by the water division for purposes of continuing service during
meter testing or repair of the meter is prohibited.  All water used, except
as provided in these regulations, shall pass through the meter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-23)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-30.  MOVING METERS, SERVICES AND ASSOCIATED FACILITIES.



   When the water superintendent determines a meter, service or associated
facilities must be moved, city staff or representatives shall perform this
work. The property owner served through the meter, service or associated
facilities shall pay for such work. The property owner shall pay the cost of
the material and labor, plus any associated administrative expenses.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-24)  (Ord. No. 1009, 2661)



SEC. 22-31.  TEMPORARY SERVICE.



   (A)   Temporary service from a fire hydrant may be provided upon
proper application, subject to the approval of the fire chief and the water
superintendent. The charges for installing temporary service and for water
used through the temporary service shall be established pursuant to this
chapter. The person requesting the temporary service shall pay the
installation charges in advance.



   (B)   The water superintendent shall determine whether a temporary
connection may be made to any existing water facility. Prior to making a
temporary connection other than to a fire hydrant, the water superintendent
shall estimate the cost of installation and removal, and the applicant shall
pay in advance the estimated cost. Upon removal of the temporary connection,
the actual cost of installation and removal shall be determined by the water
superintendent. The city shall refund to the applicant the amount paid in
excess of the actual cost. If the amount paid in advance is less than the
actual cost, the applicant shall pay to the city the difference between the
amount paid and the actual cost. The applicant shall also pay for the water
used as provided in this chapter.



   (C)   All temporary service connections shall include backflow
prevention devices and any other cross-contamination prevention facilities
that the water superintendent deems necessary and appropriate.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-25)  (Ord. No. 1009, 2661)



SEC. 22-32.  NEW SYSTEM CONNECTIONS; CHARGES FOR CONNECTIONS INSIDE CITY
LIMITS.



   (A)   All water service connections within the city must be
connected to the city's water system, unless authorized by the public works
director.  The number of service connections for any development shall
comply with the code.



   (B)   The connection fees and charges required by this chapter shall
be set by a resolution approved by the city council.  The connection fee
shall be paid, at the rates set forth in the resolution, prior to the
issuance of building permits.



   (C)   Prior to installation of any new or additional water service
connection or the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall pay any
reimbursement obligation for existing mains, or construct any necessary water
mains as required by this code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-26)  (Ord. No. 1875, 1949, 2030, 2163)



SEC. 22-33.  ALTERATIONS TO SIZE OF WATER SYSTEM CONNECTION.



   When a decrease in size of an existing meter is requested by the
customer, the water resources division, water section shall make the meter
change at no cost to the applicant; provided, the reduced size is determined
adequate for the contemplated use. When an increase in size of an existing
service or meter is requested by a customer, or an increase is required
because of a change in the customer's water use, the water resources division
shall make such change; provided, the requested size is determined adequate
for the contemplated use.  The applicant shall pay in advance the current
cost of the new service or meter, less a credit for the meter removed.  The
credit shall be established by the public works director based upon the age
of the existing service connection, but in no event shall the credit exceed
60% of the current value of a meter of that size.  Where the larger service
is in a location different from the existing service, the applicant shall pay
the cost of abandoning the existing service in addition to any other
applicable fees and charges.  The cost for abandoning a water meter shall be
based on the administration, labor and materials required to complete the
work.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-26.1)  (Ord. No. 1875, 2819)



SEC. 22-34.  CONDITIONS OF CONNECTION.



   Each water system connection shall be made subject to the following
conditions:



   (A)   Every connection made between private property and any public
water system shall be made in the manner and with such materials as are
required by the specifications for public water system approved by the city
council and in accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   All connections shall be maintained at the expense of the
property owner.



   (C)   No person shall connect any private property with any public
water system without first procuring a permit from the city to make such
connection.  Any person desiring to obtain such a permit shall make
application for such permit and pay the fees provided for in this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-26.2)  (Ord. No. 1875)



SEC. 22-35.  CONNECTION FEES FOR REPLACEMENT STRUCTURES.



   (A)   If a demolished residential, commercial or industrial
structure is subsequently replaced, no additional service connection fee is
required if the building permit for the replacement structure is issued
within five years of the date of demolition of the previous structure.



   (B)   If the building permit is issued more than five years but less
than ten years from the date of demolition, the service connection fee shall
be reduced by 50%.



   (C)   If the building permit is requested for any replacement
structure after ten years from the date of demolition, the full service
connection fee shall be required.



   (D)   The property owner shall pay for any increased fee between the
connection fee based upon the original water meter size and the connection
fee based upon the water meter size to serve the replacement structure as
well as for any increase in the number of water meters.  The owner shall
bear the burden of proving the date of demolition of the original structure
and that structure's water meter size.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-26.3)  (Ord. No. 2030)



SEC. 22-36.  PLANS REQUIRED.



   (A)   In order for the public works director to have sufficient
information to make a determination of appropriate fees to be charged,
building permit applicants shall submit water and wastewater service plumbing
plans prepared by a registered engineer or project architect in conjunction
with the building permit application for all new and replacement structures. 



   (B)   In instances where an irrigation plan is required by other
development conditions, the irrigation plan shall be prepared by a suitable
licensed professional and submitted in conjunction with the building permit
application.  The plumbing plans and irrigation plans shall show all the
proposed line sizes and locations.  All appurtenances must conform to public
works department design criteria and guidelines.  The water superintendent
or designee must approve all plumbing plans and irrigation plans prior to the
issuance of building permits.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-26.4)  (Ord. No. 2030, 2661)



SEC. 22-37.  NEW SERVICE CONNECTIONS; CHARGES FOR INSIDE CITY LIMITS.



   (A)   A charge shall be made for the installation of each new water
service and water meter within the city in order to recover the cost of
current labor, equipment, materials and overhead.  These charges shall be
paid in advance according to the schedule of charges established by
resolution of the city council.  Separate schedules of charges shall be
established for installation of each new meter on a new service; installation
of each new meter on an existing service, previously installed and paid for
within the city for these services less than five years old; and installation
of each new meter on an existing service for those services more than five
years old.



   (B)   Whenever the installation of a service or meter within the
city is determined by the public works director to require special materials,
labor or equipment, or where services or meters larger than two inches are
required within the city, the charge shall be the actual cost thereof, plus
indirect costs.



   (C)   Prior to installation thereof, the public works director shall
estimate the charge and the applicant for service shall advance to the city
such estimated charge.  Upon completion of the installation, the actual
charge shall be determined by the finance director.  The city shall refund
to the applicant any portion of the amount paid which is in excess of such
charge.  In case the estimated charge paid by the applicant is less than the
actual charge, the applicant shall pay to the city the difference between the
estimated charge and the actual charge.  In addition to the service
connection charge set forth in this section and prior to such service
connection or issuance of a building permit, applicant shall have paid a
charge for existing mains, or leave constructed a water main, as set forth
hereinafter.



   (D)   The water superintendent may, at his/her discretion, permit
the installation of services by private contractors.  The cost of inspection
of these installations shall be borne by the applicant.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-27)  (Ord. No. 1003, 1319, 1771)



SEC. 22-38.  CHARGES FOR OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.



   (A)   The charges for installing each new service or meter outside
the city, which amount shall be paid in advance, shall be determined by the
water division and approved by the city council when granting outside city
service.



   (B)   However, such charge shall not be less than the charge for
installing a similar service or meter within the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-28)  (Ord. No. 1003)



SEC. 22-39.  CHARGES FOR CHANGING SIZE OF SERVICE CONNECTIONS.



   When a decrease in size of an existing meter is requested by the
customer, the water division shall make the meter change at no cost to the
applicant; provided, the reduced size is determined adequate for the
contemplated use.  When an increase in size of an existing service or meter
is requested by a customer, or an increase is required because of a change an
the customer's water use, the water division shall make such change;
provided, the requested size is determined adequate for the contemplated
use.  The applicant shall pay in advance the current cost of the new service
or meter as hereinbefore provided, less a credit for the meter removed.  The
credit shall be established by the public works director from time to time as
approximately 60 percent of the current value of a meter of that size. 
Where the larger service is in a location different from the existing
service, the applicant shall pay in addition the cost of abandoning the
existing service.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-29)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-40.  TURNING WATER ON OR OFF.



   (A)   All curb cocks or valves installed by the water resources
division, water section of the inlet side of the water meter shall be for the
exclusive use of the water division and shall not be operated by anyone other
than authorized employees of the water resources division, water section,
unless prior approval has been obtained from the water resources division,
water section.



   (B)   Turn on and turn off charges shall be established by ordinance
or resolution of the city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-30)  (Ord. No. 1009, 1319, 1538, 1771, 2819)



SEC. 22-41.  TEMPORARY TURN OFF OF WATER SERVICE.



   The water division will not discontinue water service to enable a
customer to avoid payment of minimum charges.  In the event that service is
ordered off for short periods of time to avoid payment of minimum charges,
the city may consider the service active for the full period of
discontinuance and may back bill the customer therefor.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-31)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-42.  BILLING AND COLLECTION; GENERALLY.



   Bills shall be rendered on a periodic basis for a time period as deemed
appropriate by the city’s treasurer.  All bills shall be due and payable
at the place or places designated by the city upon the date sent.  If not
paid within 15 days after the bill is sent, the bill shall be considered
delinquent and a final notice given.  If bills are not paid as required by
the final notice, the service shall be discontinued, unless satisfactory
arrangements for payment are made with the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-32)  (Ord. No. 1009, 1920, 2804)



SEC. 22-43.  ESTIMATED BILLS.



   In the event a meter is not read or in the event a meter has not
registered or has registered incorrectly, the city shall estimate the
quantity or water used, and a bill shall be rendered for that quantity.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-33)  (Ord. No. 1009, 1920)



SEC. 22-44.  PRORATION OF BILLS.



   When meters are specially read between regular meter readings for the
purpose of commencing or terminating service to a customer, the minimum
charge and all rate blocks will be prorated for the number of days of
service, in calculating the water bill.  Flat rate bills for partial billing
periods will be prorated for the number of days of service.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-34)  (Ord. No. 1009, 1771)



SEC. 22-45.  EXCEPTION.



   No proration will be made on short term water service, where water is
required for total periods less than two months.  These customers will pay
at least the bimonthly minimum for that size service.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-35)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-46.  METER TESTING.



   Upon written request and deposit by a customer of an amount equal to
the bimonthly minimum, the water division shall test the customer's water
meter.  If such meter, upon testing, registers two percent or less over the
correct value,  the deposit shall be forfeited and all water bills paid as
presented.  If the meter registers greater than two percent of the correct
value, the deposit shall be returned and a proportional reduction made in the
current bill, and another meter substituted for the inaccurate meter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-36)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-47.  RESERVED.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-37)



SEC. 22-48.  DELINQUENT BILL; AUTHORITY TO TURN OFF WATER.



   (A)   When water is furnished to customers through more than one
service at the same or different locations, all such services may be shut off
when a bill for any one of them becomes delinquent.  In addition, the water
superintendent shall have the authority to discontinue water service without
notice for failure to comply with this chapter or the rules and regulations
of the water division, or when the superintendent that water is being unduly
or unnecessarily wasted.



   (B)   The city shall not be liable for any damage to persons or
property caused in any manner by the use of water beyond its meters or, where
no meters have been installed, beyond the point where service connections
enter upon private property nor shall the city be liable for any damages
resulting from its failure to deliver water for any length of time.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-38)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-49.  NONPAYMENT.



   (A)   (1)   The water division may charge a fee for each trip
made to a customer's property for the purpose of collecting a water bill
which is delinquent under the terms of this chapter.  If water service is
discontinued due to nonpayment or noncompliance with this chapter, in
addition to all other amounts due, the city shall charge a fee for resuming
service.



      (2)   The fees shall be established by resolution of the city
council.



   (B)   In the event a consumer turns on the water service or permits
or causes it to be turned on after the water has been turned off for
nonpayment or noncompliance, the water division shall again turn off the
service, remove the meter and shall charge and collect a fee as established
by resolution of the city council for reinstallation of the meter in addition
to other amounts due before water service is restored.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-39)  (Ord. No. 1009, 1319, 1538, 1771)



SEC. 22-50.  NO NEW SERVICE UNTIL BILL AND PENALTY PAID.



   (A)   Should a customer fail to pay a water bill within one month
after the billing date indicated on the face of the bill, the city may
disconnect the customer's water service, and decide not to provide the
customer with new water service at any location until the customer has
brought the outstanding water bill current and paid a penalty.



   (B)   Should a customer fail to pay a fee or charge for water
service, within one month after the billing date provided on the face of the
bill, the city shall assess a penalty in an amount of 10% of the overdue
balance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-40)  (Ord. No. 1009, 1771, 2167, 2918)



SEC. 22-51.  DISCONTINUING WATER SERVICE.



   The city may require each customer to give advance written
notifications of that date when they want water service discontinued in their
name.  The customer shall be liable for all bills incurred until such
notification is received.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-41)  (Ord. No. 1009)



ARTICLE III.  RATES



SEC. 22-60.  WATER RATES.



   (A)   The rates charged for all water supplied by the city shall be
established by ordinance of the city council.  Each customer receiving water
service is liable for payment for such service at the rates so established.



   (B)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 53756, and after notice
is provided as required by law, the adopted rates shall automatically adjust
over a five-year period for inflation in the cost of operating the city’s
water system. If the actual inflation in the rates paid by the city to every
third party water supplier (including but not limited to United Water
Conservation District and Calleguas Municipal Water District) and the
management agency from whom the city purchases some or all its water
supplies, or to whom the city pays a groundwater extraction, replenishment or
pump charge, since the effective date of the rates exceeds the Rate Study’s
cumulative forecast for inflation in such costs for that same period, the
rates will be automatically adjusted to recover the difference between the
two. For example, if in year three of these rates the actual inflation paid
by the city since the effective date of the rates is 8.75% and the Rate Model
estimates a cumulative increase of 7.5% over that same time period, then the
inflation adjustment for that year would be 1.25%. On the other hand, if the
actual inflation for this example time period is 7.5%, then no inflation
adjustment would be made for that year as the actual inflation would equal
the estimated inflation in the Rate Model. The city shall issue the
adjustments no more than once per calendar year, and these adjustments will
be effective at least 60 calendar days thereafter.



   (C)   Annually on July 1 of each year, the rates provided in
sections 22-61 through 22-66 of the city code shall automatically adjust to
reflect the prior year, April to April, annual percentage change in the
Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers, Los Angeles - Riverside - Orange
County, California, published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. For
example, on July 1, 2018, the inflation adjustment percent is to be
calculated based on the percentage change from April 2017 to April 2018 for
the above referenced index.



   (D)   When the city council declares the existence of a water
shortage condition pursuant to section 22-154 of the city code, the water
rates and charges provided in sections 22-61 through 22-66 of the city code
that are based on water use shall be adjusted to reflect the level of
severity and corresponding mandatory water conservation percentage reflected
in the water shortage condition declaration. For example, if the council
declares a Stage 2 water shortage condition with a mandatory water use
reduction goal of 20% then the rates provided in sections 22-61 through 22-66
of the city code that are based on water use shall be concurrently adjusted
upward by the same percentage - 20%. This adjustment shall be initiated as of
the effective date of the water shortage declaration and terminate as of the
date of the termination of that water shortage declaration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-42)  (Ord. No. 1771, 2306, 2490, 2921)



SEC. 22-61.  MONTHLY WATER USAGE FEES AND CHARGES.



   The following fees and methods for charging and collecting for services
relating to the water system of the city are established and effective during
the dates indicated, as follows:



   (A)   Monthly rates for single-family residential water use:



 

Tier
 

Usage in HCF

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017



1
 

0 to 9

 

$3.36



2
 

> 9 to 15

 

$5.16



3
 

> 15

 

$6.14




 



   (B)   Monthly rates for multi-family residential water use (per
dwelling):



 

Tier
 

Usage in HCF (Per Dwelling Unit)

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017



1
 

0 to 8

 

$3.58



2
 

> 8

 

$5.76




 



   (C)   Monthly rates for commercial and industrial water use:



 

Tier
 
Usage in HCF
 
Effective Sept. 1, 2017



2" Meters and Below



1
 

0 to 62

 

$3.26



2
 

> 62

 

$5.77




3" Meters and Below



 

Uniform Rate

 

$4.54




 



   (D)   Monthly rates for commercial and industrial recycled water in
lieu of potable:



 

Tier
 

Usage in HCF

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017: Rate per HCF



1
 

Uniform Rate

 

$3.34




 



   (E)   Monthly rates for irrigation:



 


Tier

 

Tier Breaks: Usage in HCF

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017: Rate per HCF




2" Meters and Below




1

 

0 to 24

 

$3.37




2

 

> 24

 

$6.00




3" Meters and Above





 

Uniform Rate

 

$5.16




 



   (F)   Monthly rates for irrigation recycled water in lieu of potable:



 

Tier
 
Usage in HCF
 
Effective Sept. 1, 2017


1
 
Uniform Rate
 
$3.52



 



   (G)   Monthly rates for ocean view agricultural irrigation:



 

Usage in HCF
 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017



Uniform Volumetric Rate per HCF
 

$1.19




 



   (H)   Monthly rates for metered construction:



 

Tier
 

Usage

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017



1
 

All Usage

 

$4.54




 



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-43)  (Ord. 2373, 2451, 2576, 2624, 2661, 2750, 2819,
2859, 2921)



SEC. 22-62.  MONTHLY FIXED WATER METER FEES AND CHARGES.



   In addition to monthly rates for water use (per HCF) as set forth in
section 22-61, all accounts shall pay one of the following monthly meter
rates, based on service connection or meter size, and the associated customer
class or use:



   (A)   Monthly fixed rates for single-family residential/ocean view
non-agricultural:



 


Meter Size

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017






3/4"

 

$19.52




1"

 

$31.47




1-1/2"

 

$61.10




2"

 

$96.80




3"

 

$209.96




4"

 

$358.63




6"

 

$745.40




8"

 

$1,072.56




10"

 

$1,727.05





 



   (B)   Monthly fixed rates for multi-family residential:



 


Meter Size

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017






3/4"

 

$17.73




1"

 

$28.49




1-1/2"

 

$55.16




2"

 

$87.28




3"

 

$189.13




4"

 

$322.93




6"

 

$671.03




8"

 

$965.47




10"

 

$1,554.51





 



   (C)   Monthly fixed rates for commercial, industrial and irrigation:



 


Meter Size

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017






3/4"

 

$14.16




1"

 

$22.53




1-1/2"

 

$43.27




2"

 

$68.26




3"

 

$147.47




4"

 

$251.54




6"

 

$522.28




8"

 

$751.29




10"

 

$1,209.44





 



   (D)   Monthly fixed rates for fire service:



 


Meter Size

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017






3/4"

 

$1.99




1"

 

$3.32




1-1/2"

 

$6.61




2"

 

$10.58




3"

 

$23.15




4"

 

$39.68




6"

 

$82.66




8"

 

$119.02




10"

 

$191.76





 



   (E)   Monthly fixed rates for non-metered construction:



 


Meter Size

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017




3/4"

 

$36.86




1"

 

$67.93




1-1/2"

 

$156.77




2"

 

$295.26




 



   (F)   Monthly fixed rates for metered construction:



 


Meter Size

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017




1"

 

$22.53




3"

 

$147.47




 



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-44) (Ord. No. 2921)



SEC. 22-63.  SPECIAL WATER SERVICES.



   Each customer shall pay the following fees, according to the service
received.



   (A)   Flat rates: Effective Sept. 1, 2017. Where meters are not
installed, water services shall be paid for each dwelling facility, business
activity, construction site, or service, whether or not such facility,
activity, site or service is at the same location, at a monthly rate which
shall be determined by the public works director subject to the approval of
the city manager. Any unmetered service shall be temporary and limited to the
shortest duration practical.



   (B)   The monthly security and contamination prevention fee shall be
as follows:



 


Service

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017




Security and contamination prevention fee

 

$1.24




 



   (C)   The monthly water resource fee shall be as follows:



 


Service

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017



Water resource fee
 

$0.50




 



   (D)   Service to the city.



      (1)   The city shall pay for all installation services
furnished to the city at the rates established by this section. However, the
Water Division shall be exempt from paying for installation service.



      (2)   The city shall pay for all water furnished to the city
at the rates established by this section. However, the Water Division and the
Fire Department shall be exempt from paying for water provided to them.



      (3)   Unmetered water used for street sweeping, plant
watering, storm drain flushing, construction purposes, and all miscellaneous
uses not herein specifically mentioned shall be deemed to have been furnished
through a single meter for each department. The public works director shall
estimate the monthly volume of unmetered water used for such purposes.



      (4)   All water furnished to property owned by the city shall
be metered.



   (E)   Temporary agricultural use. The city may provide water on a
temporary basis for agricultural purposes in accordance with section 22-66 of
the city code. Monthly water rates for temporary agricultural purposes shall
be the same as commercial/industrial blended rates.



   (F)   Broken locks. In the event a customer breaks a lock placed on
the water meter, in addition to all other amounts due, the customer shall pay
a fee of $12 to replace the broken lock.



   (G)   Billing and collection; delinquent bills; nonpayment. The
customer shall pay a fee of $15 for each visit to a customer’s property to
collect a water bill that is delinquent. If water service is discontinued due
to nonpayment or non-compliance with the city code or this section, in
addition to all other amounts due, the customer shall pay a fee of $80 for
resuming service.



   (H)   Billing procedure for periodic charge for city water service.
Water service bills shall be computed according to the rates then in effect
and the number of days in the service period at each rate.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-45) (Ord. No. 2921)



SEC. 22-64.  WATER SERVICE AND METER RATES.



   As provided in section 22-37 of the city code, the customer shall pay
for installation of each water service and water meter.



   (A)   In addition to the cost of administration and materials, the
rates for installing each new service and each new meter, which amount shall
be paid in advance, shall be as follows:



 


Service (inches)

 

Meter (inches)

 

Meter Box and Tail Piece (inches)

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017




3/4

 

3/4

 

3/4

 

$1,500




1

 

1

 

1

 

$1,700




1-1/2

 

1-1/2

 

1-1/2

 

$2,200




2

 

2

 

2

 

$2,500




 



   (B)   The rates for installing each new box on a service, previously
installed and paid for, shall be as follows in addition to the cost of
materials:



 


Service (inches)

 

Meter (inches)

 

New Box (inches)

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017




3/4

 

3/4

 

3/4

 

$450




1

 

1

 

1

 

$525




1-1/2

 

1-1/2

 

1-1/2

 

$925




2

 

2

 

2

 

$1,100




 



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-46) (Ord. No. 2921)



SEC. 22-65.  OTHER DEPOSITS, FEES AND RATES.



   As provided in sections 22-19, 22-26, 22-33, 22-35, 22-39, 22-40,
22-46, 22-48, 22-49, 22-61, 22-62, 22-63, 22-64, and 22-66 of the city code,
the city shall require the payment of deposits, fees and charges as follows:



   (A)   Fully allocated hourly rates:



 

 

Effective Sept. 1, 2017



Meter repair worker
 

$68



Water distribution operator I
 

$62



Water distribution operator II
 

$71



Senior water distribution operator
 

$78




 



   (B)   Deposit guaranteeing payment. Each applicant for service shall
be required to place a deposit with the city to guarantee the payment of all
water charges. The amount of this deposit for monthly water service shall be:



 

 
Meter (inches)
 
Effective Sept. 1, 2017


For each
 

3/4

 

$44



For each
 

1

 

$65



For each
 

1-1/2

 

$120



For each
 

2

 

$185



For each meter over two inches, an amount equal to an approximate one-month
minimum bill, but not less than $205.



 



   (C)   Meter testing. Upon written request to test a meter, the
customer shall deposit $100 for a meter size of up to eight inches and $200
for a meter size of over eight inches.



   (D)   Turning water on or off. Except in an emergency situation, the
charge to have water turned on or off during customary business hours (8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday) shall be $80. To have the water
turned on or off at any time after hours (this includes weekends and
city-observed holidays), the charge shall be $145.



   (E)   Removal of meter and reinstallation. In the event a customer
turns on the water service or permits or causes water service to be turned on
after water service has been turned off for nonpayment or non-compliance, the
city shall again turn off service and remove the meter, and the customer
shall pay a fee of $120, in addition to other amounts due, before water
service is restored.



   (F)   Request for relocation or abandonment of meters or service
will be estimated in accordance with the following schedule:



      (1)   Relocate meter box laterally (not in paved area):



 

Meter
 
Sept. 1, 2017
 
Sept.1, 2017



3/4"

 

$440 + Abandonment Cost

 

$560




1"

 

$615 + Abandonment Cost

 

$735




1-1/2"

 

$835 + Abandonment Cost

 

$985




2"

 

$1,190 + Abandonment Cost

 

$1,370




 



      (2)   Relocate meter box from yard to sidewalk:



 

Service
 
Effective Sept. 1, 2017



Relocate meter box from yard to sidewalk

 

$240




 



      (3)   Relocate meter box from driveway to sidewalk:



 

Service
 
Effective Sept. 1, 2017


Relocate meter box from driveway to sidewalk
 

$300




 



      (4)   Abandonment of water services:



 

Meter
 
Effective Sept. 1, 2017



3/4"

 

$120




1"

 

$120




1-1/2"

 

$150




2"

 

$180




 



         *   Relocation or abandonment of services will be done
by Water Distribution personnel unless it is determined by the water
resources manager that a contractor will be used. It is required that the
contractor follow the proper public works procedures, obtain all necessary
permits, have all necessary inspections performed and pay all required fees.



      (5)   Credit for existing meter removed and replaced with a
larger service and meter in the same location:



 

Meter Size Removed
 
Effective Sept. 1, 2017



3/4"

 

$235




1"

 

$290




1-1/2"

 

$505




2"

 

$715




 



   (G)   Backflow prevention and cross-connection control. Timely
submission of forms demonstrating completed testing and inspection compliance
for backflow prevention and cross-connection control device(s) shall include
a $21 fee for each device. If the properly completed compliance forms are not
returned within 30 days, the water resources manager shall send a second
notice and assess an additional $16 late fee. If the properly completed
compliance forms are not returned within 60 days of the original notice, the
water resources manager shall send a third notice and assess an additional
$27 late fee. If the properly completed compliance forms are not returned
within 90 days of the original notice, the customer or owner shall pay an
additional $53 plus the cost of all administrative, labor and materials
required to complete the work. Inspection services by city employees shall be
provided for a fee of $48 plus $16 per device.



   (H)   Fire hydrant testing, inspection and repair fees:



 

Service
 
Effective Sept. 1, 2017


Hydrant flow test inspection
 
$150



 



 

Temporary Hydrant Meter
 
Effective Sept. 1, 2017


Setup/retrieval
 

$100



Move
 

$65



Deposit - meter replacement cost
 

$850



Damaged hydrant meter repair
 

Labor + materials



Water curbs stop repair
 

Labor + materials




 



(Ord. No. 2921)



SEC. 22-66.  AGRICULTURAL USE.



   (A)   Water may be provided on a temporary basis for agricultural
purposes, provided the area to be served was within the CMWD on August 19,
1976.  The words “agricultural purposes” shall mean the growing or
raising, in conformity with recognized practices in husbandry, for the
purposes of commerce, trade, or industry, or agricultural, horticultural, or
floricultural products, and produced:



      (1)   For human consumption or for the market;



      (2)   For the feeding of fowl or livestock produced for human
consumption or for the market;



      (3)   For the feeding of fowl or livestock for the purpose of
obtaining their products for human consumption or for the market, such
products to be grown or raised on a parcel of land having an area of not less
than one acre utilized exclusively therefor; or



      (4)   For the feeding of fowl or livestock for the purpose of
obtaining their products for human consumption or for the market, such
products to be grown or raised on a parcel of land having an area of not less
than five acres on which incidental domestic uses of water related to
residency may also occur.



   (B)   Monthly water rates for agricultural purposes shall be set by
ordinance of the city council.  The agricultural rates shall be calculated
to three decimal places by subtracting the agricultural subsidy rate from
other metered water rates so that the total subsidy is passed on to
agricultural users.  The “agricultural subsidy” is defined as the
“water for all other purposes” rate less the “agricultural water”
rate as promulgated by CMWD.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-47)  (Ord. No. 1771, 2306, 2921)



ARTICLE IV.  CROSS-CONNECTIONS



SEC. 22-70.  PROHIBITION; PURPOSE.



   (A)   No water service connection to any premises shall be installed
or maintained by the water division unless the water supply is protected as
required by state regulations and the provisions of this article.



   (B)   The purposes of this article are:



      (1)   To protect the public potable water supply from actual
or potential cross-connections by isolating within the premises contamination
or pollution that could backflow or siphon back into the water supply system
because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises;



      (2)   To eliminate existing connections between drinking water
systems and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable
for human consumption;



      (3)   To eliminate cross-connections between drinking water
systems and other sources of water or process water used for any purpose
whatsoever that jeopardize the safety of the potable water supply;



      (4)   To prevent the making of cross-connections in the future;



      (5)   To encourage the exclusive use of public sources of
water supply;



      (6)   To protect the potable water supply within the premises
where plumbing defects or cross-connection may endanger the potable water
supply available on the premises;



      (7)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program
of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent
the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.



   (C)   The intent of this article is to recognize that there are
varying degrees of hazard and to apply the principle that the degree of
protection should be commensurate with the degree of hazard.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-51)  (Ord. No. 1009, 2661)



SEC. 22-71.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   BACKFLOW - The physical process by which contaminants can
enter the potable water supply.



   (B)   BACKFLOW PREVENTION - Is to the equipment and technology
necessary to prevent potential contamination from cross-connection.



   (C)   CROSS-CONNECTION - Any actual or potential connection or
structural arrangement between a public, private or consumer's potable water
system and any other source or system through which it is possible to
introduce into the potable water system any substance, and shall include
bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or
changeover devices and other devices (temporary or permanent) through which
or because of which backflow can occur and is used in conjunction with
backflow prevention.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-52)  (Ord. No. 1009, 2661)



SEC. 22-72.  CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL STANDARDS..



   (A)   Those provisions of the California Department of Health
Services promulgated rules and regulations and the California Uniform
Plumbing Code applicable to cross-contamination control are adopted and made
a part of this section by reference.



   (B)   The city manager is authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations governing cross-connections in the form of a Backflow Prevention
and Cross-Connection Control Program Manual, which shall include
implementation of the California Department of Health Services promulgated
rules and regulations and the California Uniform Plumbing Code applicable to
cross-connection control. The Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection
Control Program Manual shall include the requirements for design,
construction, installation, and maintenance of backflow prevention devices
and assemblies.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-53)  (Ord. No. 1009, 2661)



SEC. 22-73.  TYPES OF REQUIRED PROTECTION.



   The protective device required shall depend on the degree of the
potential hazard, and the requirements for which shall be included in the
Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control Program Manual.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-54)  (Ord. No. 1009, 2661)



SEC. 22-74.  FREQUENCY OF INSPECTION OF PROTECTIVE DEVICES.



   The customer or the owner of backflow prevention devices has the duty
to have competent inspections made of all such devices installed on their
premises at least once a year or as often as the water superintendent or
representative deems appropriate. These devices shall be inspected, repaired,
or replaced at the expense of the customer. The Backflow Prevention and
Cross-Connection Control Program Manual shall establish the requirements for
the conduct and reporting of the inspections, repairs and replacements.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-55)  (Ord. No. 1009, 2661)



SEC. 22-74.1.  INSPECTION FEE.



   (A)   The public works director shall issue an annual notice to the
customer or the owner of each backflow prevention device to arrange for the
inspection and testing of each device on the premises. The notice shall
include the method of reporting compliance to the city, along with
information necessary to arrange for the inspection and testing.  The city
shall establish the fees associated with compliance with this section by
ordinance or resolution.



   (B)   Completed forms demonstrating testing and inspection
compliance shall be returned to the water resources manager, along with
applicable fee, within 30 days of the notice.



   (C)   If the properly completed compliance forms are not returned
within 30 days, the water resources manager shall send a second notice, and
assess an additional late fee.



   (D)   If the properly completed compliance forms are not returned
within 60 days of the original notice, the water resources manager shall send
a third notice, and assess an additional late fee.



   (E)   If the properly completed compliance forms are not returned
within 90 days of the original notice, the water resources manager shall send
a final notice indicating that the water resources manager will arrange for
the completion of the testing and inspection. The customer or owner shall pay
an additional fee, plus the cost of all administrative, labor and materials
required to complete the work.



   (F)   Compliance with this section 22-74.1 shall be deemed complete
when the water resources manager receives both the completed compliance
inspection form and the associated fee.



(Ord. No. 2661, 2819)



SEC. 22-75.  QUALIFICATION AND CERTIFICATION OF PERSONS TO INSPECT AND
MAINTAIN BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.



   (A)   No person shall inspect, maintain, repair or replace backflow
prevention devices unless the person's qualifications have been established
and maintained as required in the Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection
Control Program Manual. Each qualified person shall receive from the water
superintendent a "Certificate of Competence," and the water superintendent
shall make available a list of qualified persons. Every qualified person
shall be provided identification that shall be kept in the person's immediate
possession during the inspection, maintenance, repair or replacement of any
backflow prevention device.



   (B)   Any person issued a Certificate of Competence who violates or
fails to comply with any provision of this article, or willingly falsifies
inspection or maintenance reports submitted to the water superintendent,
shall, in addition to any other applicable penalties, have the Certificate of
Competence revoked, and shall not be considered for recertification for two
years from the date of revocation.



   (C)   The water superintendent may provide inspection, maintenance,
repair and replacement services from city employees, as provided in the
Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control Program Manual.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-56)  (Ord. No. 1009, 2661)



SEC. 22-76.  REGULATION OF BOOSTER PUMPS.



   When necessary, on account of low pressure or special operating
conditions, to install a booster pump on the service to any premises, such
pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off switch designed to shut
off the pump when the pressure on the inlet side is 25 p.s.i.g. or lower. 
The consumer shall maintain the cut-off device in proper working order, and
to certify to the city at least once a year that the device is operable.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-57)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-77.  PROTECTION OF WATER SYSTEM WITHIN PREMISES.



   (A)   In some unique or special circumstances, more stringent
cross-connection and backflow prevention protection may be required to
provide adequate protection to the public potable water supply.



   (B)   In addition to the standards provided in section 22-72, the
Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control Program Manual shall contain
additional, more stringent standards and criteria for the cross-connection
control, including but not limited to, whenever:



      (1)   The water superintendent or designee, the county health
department, or the city building inspector determines that it is not
practical to protect drinking water systems through the use of standard back
flow prevention devices;



      (2)   Water systems for fighting fires are derived from a
supply that cannot be approved for potable or safe for human consumption;



      (3)   Potable water pipelines are connected to equipment used
in industrial processes;



      (4)   Sewage pumps or storm water pumps require fresh water
priming connections;



      (5)   Potable water is supplied to facilities containing a
sewage treatment plant, sewage pumping station, or storm water pumping
station;



      (6)   Water supplies are provided to vessels at piers or
waterfronts; or



      (7)   Potable water is supplied to premises containing dual or
multiple water systems or piping.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-58)  (Ord. No. 1009, 2661)



SEC. 22-78.  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF ARTICLE.



   (A)   Any violation of the provisions of this article shall
constitute a public nuisance. The water superintendent may discontinue water
service immediately without notice to any premises where a required backflow
prevention device is not installed, inspected, tested, properly operating and
maintained, or if a backflow prevention device is found to have been removed
or bypassed, or if unprotected cross-connections or other hazards to the
water system are found to exist. The water superintendent shall not again
authorize service to such premises until such hazards are eliminated in
accordance with this article.



   (B)   Any customer who violates any of the provisions of this
article or alters, bypasses or renders inoperative any backflow prevention
device installed under the provisions of this chapter shall, in addition to
any other applicable penalties, be subject to immediate discontinuance of
water service. Water service shall not again be rendered until such violation
or noncompliance has been corrected to the satisfaction of the water
superintendent.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-59)  (Ord. No. 1009, 2661)



ARTICLE V.  WATER MAINS



SEC. 22-85.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   DISTRIBUTION MAIN - A water main, or part of the capacity
thereof, designed or used to distribute water for fire protection and
domestic use within a given territory served by the city.



   (B)   TRANSMISSION MAIN - A water main, or a part of the capacity
thereof, designed or used for the purpose of transporting water to a
distribution main.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-60)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-86.  ALL SERVICE TO BE FROM DISTRIBUTION MAIN.



   (A)   As a condition to obtaining a new service, except where the
city council determines that it is impracticable to do so, all property shall
be connected directly to a city distribution main through a city water meter
for the particular property, and shall not be served with water through the
property of another.



   (B)   If there be no such main, an extension of an existing water
main shall be required.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-61)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-87.  CHARGES FOR NEW MAINS.



   In addition to all other charges set forth in this chapter, an
applicant for service to property which has never before received city water
shall pay to the city a proportional share, as determined by the water
division, of the cost of all abutting distribution mains for which a main
charge has been established.  The applicant shall not be required to
contribute to the cost of more than 12 inches of the size of any such
mains.  If the abutting mains are of a size larger than 12 inches, the water
division shall determine the cost as if the mains had been 12 inches in
diameter.  If an applicant is required to install transmission and blending
facilities called for in the water master plan, the applicant may be eligible
for a credit against connection fees.  No applicant may receive a credit for
more than the total amount of water connection fees which would be normally
required.  If any distribution main was previously installed by the
applicant or his predecessor in interest in the property to which service is
desired, the applicant shall be entitled to credit for such previous
installation against any main charge otherwise required provided that such
installation was made less than 20 years before the application.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-62)  (Ord. No. 1009, 1726, 2030)



SEC. 22-88.  EXTENSION AT APPLICANT'S EXPENSE.



   (A)   The owner, renter or lessee of a single lot, tract of land or
subdivision which is not adjacent to a city distribution main, or which is
adjacent to a main which is determined by the water division to be inadequate
for the contemplated use, may apply to the water division for a water main to
serve such property.



   (B)   The water superintendent shall approve or disapprove such
application.  If approved, the extension may be constructed by the city or
by a contractor selected by the city, or the water superintendent may elect
to allow the applicant to hire a contractor to make the extension.  All such
extensions shall be in dedicated streets or alleys or in easements granted to
the city and readily accessible from a dedicated right of way.  They may
include, but not be limited to mains, fire hydrants, valves and other
appurtenances determined necessary by the water division, and shall be
constructed in accordance with standard specifications approved from time to
time by the city council and in accordance with detailed plans prepared by
the water division.  The city shall determine the size main required for the
area to be served, giving consideration to the requirements of adjacent land
and the growth of the city.  The applicant shall not be required to pay or
contribute towards the cost of more than 12 inches of the size of any main,
which latter cost shall be determined by the water division.



   (C)   If the water main extension as to be constructed by the city
or by a contractor to be selected by the city, the applicant shall deposit
with the city in advance the estimated cost thereof, including cost of plans
and specifications, materials, installation, inspection and administrative
expense.  Upon completion of the work, the actual cost shall be determined
by the finance director.



   (D)   The city shall refund to the applicant any portion of the
deposit which is in excess of such actual cost.  In case the estimated
charge paid by the applicant is less than the actual charge, the applicant
shall pay to the city the difference between the estimated charge and the
actual charge.



   (E)   If the water main extension is to be constructed by a
contractor to be selected by the applicant, such main shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications and the detailed plans prepared by the
water division.  The applicant shall deposit with the city, in advance, the
estimated cost of preparing the plans and specifications.  Upon completion
the finance director shall determine the actual cost thereof, and the
applicant shall be either billed or refunded as above.  Prior to
construction of the extension, the applicant shall furnish a bond or cash
deposit in the amount of the estimated cost of the extension, securing the
applicant's agreement to construct the extension.



   (F)   When installed, connected and finally inspected, all water
main extensions shall be deemed automatically offered to the city and upon
acceptance by the water division shall become the property of the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-63)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-89.  EXCEPTION.



   (A)   When determined by the city council to be in the best interest
of the city, the water division may extend water mains to the applicant's
property at city expense.



   (B)   This shall not relieve the applicant of the cost of installing
on-site or boundary mains, or paying his/her proportional share of existing
mains.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-64)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-90.  INSTALLATION IN BOUNDARY STREETS.



   (A)   (1)   The owner of a single lot, tract of land or
subdivision shall be required to install water mains, as deemed necessary by
the water division after giving consideration to the requirements of adjacent
land and the growth of the city, in streets, alleys or public easements along
the exterior boundaries of such lot, tract of land or subdivision.



      (2)   If all or any part of such mains are already installed
along the exterior boundaries of such lot, tract of land or subdivision, the
owner thereof shall be required to pay his/her proportional share, as
determined by the water division, of the cost of the existing mains and
install at his expense any additional mains deemed necessary by the water
division.



   (B)   When installed, connected and finally inspected, all water
main extensions shall be deemed automatically offered to the city and upon
acceptance by water division shall become the property of the city.  All
necessary easements shall be granted to the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-65)  (Ord. No. 1009)



SEC. 22-91.  REFUNDS OF MAIN CHARGES.



   (A)   Upon completion of a main which is not in the current water
master plan implementation schedule and to which future connections could be
made, the water division shall determine the actual cost thereof and shall
determine the existing main charge against each front foot of abutting
property taking into consideration intersections and other property that
would not receive water service.



   (B)   If a non-master planned water main extension is made or paid
for, in whole or in part by an applicant pursuant to this article, the main
charges collected by the city within five years from the date on which water
is first served through the extension shall be refunded to the person who
paid for such extensions, or to his successors or assigns.  If the water
main was installed in conformance with a contract between the city and the
applicant, any refunds shall be made only in accordance with the conditions
of such contract.  In no event will any person be refunded more than the
amount paid by such person for construction of the extension main.



   (C)   In the event a water main extension is made through or
adjacent to a city park or other city-owned land, no refund for that portion
of the main will be made to the applicant, unless otherwise provided by city
council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-66)  (Ord. No. 1009, 2030)



ARTICLE VI.  WATER RIGHTS AND WELLS



SEC. 22-100.  WATER RIGHTS AND GROUNDWATER PUMPING ALLOCATION.



   Before the city commits to provide water service to new lands or for an
intensification of water use on old lands in the event of:



   (A)   Annexation of land into boundaries of the city;



   (B)   The subdivision of property as evidenced by the filing of a
parcel map, tract map or other discretionary development approval;



   (C)   The application for a new water system connection pursuant to
section 22-36 of this code; or



   (D)   The application for a new water service connection pursuant to
section 22-37 of this code, the land owner requesting such water service for
his/her property shall transfer or assign to the city any water rights, water
wells, mains, easements, and water production equipment or facilities which
may be appurtenant to such property or which may be used exclusively thereon
as follows:



      (1)   Any and all applicable groundwater pumping allocations
and/or credits attributable to the property to be served by the city and
available from the Fox Canyon Groundwater Management Agency, shall be
transferred to the city by the property owner.  The property owner shall be
responsible for all fees and charges necessary to obtain the approval of the
transfer of pumping allocations and/or credits from the Fox Canyon
Groundwater Management Agency to the city;



      (2)   However, when the water rights and appurtenant
facilities as described in this section are used to supply water to land
which will not concurrently be supplied with water service from the city,
such water rights and appurtenant facilities may continue to supply the lands
not receiving city water service until such time and upon such terms and
conditions as the public works director may establish.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-67)  (Ord. No. 1009, 2502)



SEC. 22-101.  PERMIT FOR DRILLING WELLS REQUIRED.



   (A)   The drilling, digging, sinking or deepening into another
aquifer of any water well within the city or the tapping or penetrating of
any subterranean water bearing gravel underlying the city, by other than the
water division, is prohibited unless a permit to do same is first obtained
from the city council.  Any person may apply for such permit upon payment to
the water division of an application fee of $1,000 and the filing of a
verified application setting forth:



      (1)   The design and specifications for the proposed well;



      (2)   A map showing its proposed locations;



      (3)   A statement showing the aquifer into which the applicant
proposes to drill the well;



      (4)   A statement of the exact circumstances under which the
water superintendent believes that the water division is unable to furnish
the required water service; and



      (5)   A statement that the overdraft on the Oxnard Zone
Aquifer and the Fox Canyon Aquifer, which overdrafts are existing as of the
effective date of this chapter, no longer exists and that such aquifers are
being replenished to the same extent as they are being depleted.



   (B)   Such application fee shall be used to investigate the
statements of the applicant and shall not be refundable.  The city council
shall hold a public hearing on such application within 30 days following its
receipt.  The city clerk shall mail written notice of time, date and place
of such hearing to the applicant, such mailing to be accomplished not less
than ten days prior to the date hereof.  At the hearing, the applicant and
other interested parties may present sworn testimony pertaining to the
application.  In order to obtain additional information, the city council
may continue the hearing from time to time.  The city council may disapprove
the application unless the city council is satisfied in its discretion that
drilling of the well and the operation thereof will not deplete or
contaminate the city water supply.  If the city council grants a permit for
the well, the council may impose thereon reasonable conditions to prevent
depletion and contamination of the city water supply and to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare, including but not limited to a
prohibition against operation of the well during periods when an overdraft of
the abovementioned aquifers exists.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-67)  (Ord. No. 1009)



ARTICLE VII.  CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR, MODIFICATION AND DESTRUCTION OF WELLS



SEC. 22-110.  PURPOSE.



   This article shall provide, in cooperation with the county, for the
city's construction, maintenance, operation, use, repair, modification and
destruction of wells within the city in such a manner that the ground water
of the city and the county will not be contaminated or polluted and that
water obtained from wells will be suitable for beneficial use and will not
jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-70)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-111.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   ABANDONED WELL - Any of the following:



      (1)   A well, other than a monitoring well, which has been in
continuous disuse for one year or more, unless such disuse is attributable to
removal of the pump for repair or replacement and efforts to repair or
replace the pump are being diligently pursued;



      (2)   A monitoring well from which no monitoring data has been
taken for a period of three years;



      (3)   A well which is in such a state of disrepair that it
cannot be made functional for its original use or any other use regulated by
this article; or



      (4)   An engineering test hole 24 hours after construction and
testing work has been completed on the site.



   (B)   APPLICANT - Any person applying for a permit required by this
article.



   (C)   CATHODIC PROTECTION WELL - Any artificial excavation
constructed by any method for the purpose of installing equipment or
facilities for the protection electrically of metallic equipment in contact
with the ground.



   (D)   CITY INSPECTOR - A person authorized by the public works
director to inspect all work for which a permit is issued pursuant to this
article.



   (E)   COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY WELL - Any water well which provides
water for public water systems as defined in the Cal. Health and Safety Code.



   (F)   COMPLETION OPERATION - Any of the following work conducted
after artificial excavation:



      (1)   Placement of a well casing;



      (2)   Gravel packing;



      (3)   Sealing;



      (4)   Perforation of a well casing; or



      (5)   Any other work listed on a permit issued pursuant to
this article as being a required part of a completion operation.



   (G)   CONTAMINATION - An alteration of waters by waste, salt-water
intrusion or other material to a degree which creates a hazard to the public
health through actual or potential poisoning or through an actual or
potential spreading of disease.



   (H)   DESTROY A WELL - To fill a well, including both interior and
annular spaces if the well is cased, completely in such a manner that it will
not produce water or act as a conduit for the interchange of water between
any water-bearing formations penetrated.



   (I)   ENGINEERING TEST HOLE - An uncased excavation used to
determine the engineering or geological properties of subsurface materials by
seismic investigation, direct observation or any other means.



   (J)   INDIVIDUAL DOMESTIC WELL - Any water well used to supply water
for domestic needs of an individual residence, commercial establishment, or
farming operation.



   (K)   INSPECT A WELL - To personally witness, record and certify
work pursuant to a condition or conditions of a valid permit.



   (L)   MODIFY OR REPAIR A WELL - To replace its casing in a manner
which involves removal or partial removal of the old casing, to install a
liner in the well, or to change the depth of the well.



   (M)   MONITORING WELL - A cased or uncased well used exclusively for
monitoring or sampling the conditions of a water-bearing aquifer, such as
water pressure, depth, movement or quality.



   (N)   OWNER - A person who owns the land on which a well is located.



   (O)   POLLUTION - An alteration of waters by waste, saltwater
intrusion or other material to a degree which adversely affects either the
suitability of such waters for beneficial uses or the facilities employed in
conjunction with such beneficial uses.



   (P)   POSSESSES - That a person is in actual possession of the well
or has a legal right to the possession thereof.



   (Q)   REGISTERED INSPECTOR - A professional engineer or registered
geologist currently registered in the State and approved by the public works
director to inspect drilling and sealing operations for engineering test
holes and monitoring wells.  A technician trained and experienced in
drilling and sealing operations who is working under the direct supervision
of one of the aforementioned professionals shall be deemed qualified to
perform required inspections) provided one of the aforementioned
professionals reviews the well inspection record and assumes responsibility
for the accuracy and completeness of the work by signing the well inspection
record.



   (R)   WATER WELL - Any artificial excavation constructed by any
method for the purpose of determining the availability of water, extracting
water from or injecting water into the underground, except the following:



      (1)   Oil well, gas wells, and geothermal wells subject to
regulation under the public resources code;



      (2)   Wells used exclusively for the purposes of dewatering
excavation during construction or of stabilizing hillsides or earth
embankments; and



      (3)   Seepage pits approved for use under permit from the
public works director.



   (S)   WELL - A cathodic protection well, engineering test hole,
monitoring well or water well.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-71)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-112.  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person, shall, within the city, construct, repair, modify
or destroy any cathodic protection well or engineering test hole which is
over 50 feet deep, any monitoring well or any water well unless such work is
done pursuant to and in compliance with an unexpired written permit for such
work issued by the public works director as provided in this article.



   (B)   If the well to be constructed, repaired, or modified is a
community water supply well or water well, as defined herein, except for one
operated by the city, then in addition to the permit required herein, a
permit shall be obtained as required by section 22-101.  The public works
director may issue an annual permit for one or more engineering test holes
which are 50 feet deep and are inspected by registered inspectors.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-72)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-113.  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Applications for permits shall be made to the public works
director, and shall include the following:



      (1)   A plot plan indicating the exact location of a well with
respect to the following items within a radius of 500 feet of the well:



         (a)   Approximate property lines;



         (b)   Sewage disposal systems or works carrying or
containing sewage;



         (c)   All intermittent or perennial, natural or
artificial water bodies or watercourses;



         (d)   Drainage pattern of the property;



         (e)   Existing wells of all types, regardless of whether
they are subject to regulation under this article; and



         (f)   Access roads.



      (2)   Location of property;



      (3)   Name of the person who will perform the work on the well;



      (4)   Name and affiliation of registered inspector (monitoring
wells and engineering test holes only);



      (5)   Proposed depth of well;



      (6)   Use of well;



      (7)   Proof satisfactory to the public works director that the
person who will construct the well is in possession of a valid license
appropriate to such work which has been issued in accordance with the
contractor's license law of the business and professions code;



      (8)   A certificate satisfying the requirements of the labor
code (workers' compensation); and



      (9)   Such other information as the public works director may
deem necessary in order to determine whether underground waters will be
protected.



   (B)   Permits shall be issued or denied within 30 days after the day
on which the completed applications are received by the water division.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-73)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-114.  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND EXPIRATION.



   (A)   Permits shall require compliance with all applicable standards
set forth in section 22-119.  A permit to be valid must comply with all
other applicable provisions of law.  A permit shall expire six months from
the date of issuance unless extended by the public works director.



   (B)   The public works director may grant one or more extensions of
a permit, each for a period not to exceed three months, if the permittee
proves to the satisfaction of the public works director that circumstances
beyond the control of the permittee make it infeasible to complete the
permitted work prior to the expiration date. 



   (C)   Annual permits for engineering test holes shall expire one
year from the date of issuance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-74)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-115.  TIME TO COMPLETE PERMITTED WORK AND SATISFY PERMIT
REQUIREMENTS.



   The permittee shall complete work authorized by the permit and satisfy
all the requirements of the permit prior to the expiration date of the permit.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-75)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-116.  GUARANTEE OF PERMITTED WORK.



   Prior to the issuance of a permit or any extension thereof, the
applicant may be required to post with the public works director a cash
deposit or bond to guarantee compliance with the provisions of this article
and the applicable permit, such cash deposit or bond to be in an amount
deemed necessary by the public works director to remedy improper work, but
not in excess of the total estimated cost of the permitted work.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-76)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-117.  LICENSE AND REGISTRATION REQUIRED OF PERSONS PERFORMING
PERMITTED WORK.



   No person shall perform any work, either on such person's own property
or on the property of another, for which a permit is required by section
22-112 unless such person is in possession of a valid license appropriate to
such work which has been issued in accordance with the contractors license
law of the business and professions code and is registered with the director
to perform work permitted by this article.  Licensed water well contractors
(Class C-57) registered with the public works director may perform all types
of permitted work while licensed engineering contractors (Class A) and
limited specialty contractors (Class C-61) registered with the public works
director may only perform permitted work on engineering test holes.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-77)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-118.  SUSPENSION OR TERMINATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Any permit issued pursuant to section 22-112 is subject to
suspension or termination prior to expiration as provided in this section.



      (1)   Grounds - Any of the following occurrences constitutes a
ground for termination of the permit:



         (a)   Suspension, revocation, or termination of the
license required by section 22-117 of the person who is to perform the work;



         (b)   Failure of such person to comply with any
provision of the labor code; or



         (c)   Failure of such person or of any person who owns
or possesses the well to comply with any provision of this article or any
permit issued pursuant thereto.



      (2)   Notice - To initiate proceedings to terminate a permit,
the public works director shall send written notice to the person to whom the
permit was issued.  The notice shall briefly describe the suspected
occurrence which constitutes a ground for termination, shall specify a time
and place of a hearing at which such person shall be afforded an opportunity
to present evidence showing that there has been no such occurrence, and shall
state that failure to appear and present such evidence may result in
termination of the permit.



      (3)   Hearing - The public works director shall conduct the
hearing specified in the notice.  The hearing shall be informal and shall
not be governed by rules of evidence applicable to courts of law.  The
person to whom the permit was issued shall have the right to present relevant
evidence at the hearing.  The public works director may, but need not,
permit other persons to present relevant evidence. 



      (4)   Determination - At the conclusion of the hearing, or
within 30 days thereafter, the public works director shall determine, based
upon the preponderance of the evidence accepted at the hearing, whether there
has been such an occurrence.  The determination of the public works director
shall be final and conclusive.  Such determination shall be in writing and
shall contain a brief statement of the findings of fact upon which the
determination is based. 



      (5)   Termination of permit - If the determination is that
there has been such an occurrence, the public works director shall terminate
the permit; provided, however, that the public works director shall have the
discretion not to terminate the permit if the public works director
determines that the occurrence was not willful, is not ongoing, and is not
likely to recur.



      (6)   Prehearing suspension - The public works director may
suspend a permit prior to the hearing when the public works director
determines that such action is necessary to protect the public health and
safety or the environment from imminent danger.  The public works director
shall notify the person to whom the permit was issued of such suspension. 
The suspension shall remain in effect until the public works director makes a
final determination based upon the hearing; provided, however, that the
public works director may lift the suspension at any earlier time at which
the public works director determines that it is no longer necessary.



   (B)   This section shall not deprive the public works director of
the authority to pursue any other action or remedy otherwise available under
the law.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-78)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-119.  STANDARDS.



   (A)   Standards for the construction, repair, modification or
destruction of wells shall be those set forth in the California Department of
Water Resources (“DWR”) Bulletin No. 74-1 entitled “Cathodic Protection
Well Standards,” Bulletin No. 74-9, Chapter IV, entitled “Water Well
Standards -Ventura County” and Bulletin No. 74-81, Chapter II, entitled
“Water Well Standards State of California,” as supplemented or revised
from time to time by DWR, with the following exceptions:



      (1)   The public works director may adopt additional or more
stringent standards to be applicable in any or all zones of the city as
delineated in Bulletin No. 74-9.



      (2)   All community water supply wells and individual domestic
wells shall be provided with a pipe or other effective means through which
chlorine or other disinfecting agents may be introduced directly into the
well.  If a pipe is provided, it shall be installed at a height equal to the
pump slab or at least four inches above the finished grade, shall be kept
sealed, and shall be provided with a threaded or equivalently secure cap. 
Equivalent protection for excluding contamination from the well shall be
provided for subsurface pump discharge installations.  If an air relief vent
is used, it shall terminate downward and be screened with 16-inch screen to
prevent contaminating material from entering the vent.



      (3)   Every new, repaired or modified community water supply
well or individual domestic water well, after construction, modification or
repair, and before being placed into service, shall be thoroughly cleaned of
all foreign substance and shall be thoroughly disinfected utilizing the
procedures set forth in Appendix C of Bulletin No. 74-81.



      (4)   In Sealing Zone III as described in Bulletin No. 74-9,
no permit shall be issued pursuant to section 22-112 for the construction,
repair or modification of any well which is perforated in the city's aquifer
zone and/or the aquifer unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
public works director either that:



         (a)   There is no substantial possibility that use of
the well will cause overdraft or seawater intrusion into an aquifer; or



         (b)   All of the following conditions apply:



            (i)   The well is necessary to carry out seawater
intrusion control programs and projects;



            (ii)   The well has a casing diameter no greater
than six inches;



            (iii)   The pump will have no more than five
horsepower;



            (iv)   Extraction will not exceed ten acre-feet
per year; and



            (v)   The well will be used only for domestic
purposes.



      (5)   Engineering test holes greater than 50 feet deep shall
be destroyed immediately upon completion of testing by complete filling
and/or sealing of the borehole in accordance with criteria established by the
public works director.  The public works director may waive complete sealing
if the permittee demonstrates to the public works director's satisfaction
that the purpose of this article as set forth in section 22-110 will be
satisfied.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-79)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-120.  LOG OF WELL.



   (A)   Any person who has performed any work for which a permit is
required by section 22-112 and which involves drilling, digging, excavating
or boring of a well shall, within 30 days of completion of such work, submit
to the public works director an accurate and complete well log on forms
satisfactory to the public works director.  In areas for which the public
works director deems the available subsurface information to be insufficient,
the permit may require any person performing a completion operation to submit
a well log prior to commencement of the completion operation.



   (B)   A well log shall include all of the following:



      (1)   A detailed record of the boundaries, character, size,
distribution and color of all lithologic units penetrated;



      (2)   The type and size of well casing;



      (3)   The location of perforations and sealing zones;



      (4)   Reports on the quantity and quality of groundwater (if
available); and



      (5)   Any other data required by the public works director in
the permit conditions.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-80)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-121.  WELL INSPECTION REPORT.



   (A)   Any registered inspector who has inspected any work pursuant
to conditions of a permit required by section 22-112 which involves drilling,
digging, excavating or boring a well shall, within 30 days of completion of
such work, submit to the public works director an accurate and complete well
inspection report on forms satisfactory to the public works director.



   (B)   A well inspection report shall include all of the following:



      (1)   Permit number;



      (2)   Type and volume of sealing material and depth of seal;



      (3)   Diameter of borehole and well casing in sealing zone;



      (4)   Method of placement (if grout pipe, include number and
length of sections);



      (5)   Confirmation that casing was ripped or perforated
(destruction only);



      (6)   Conditions which may have caused sealing to be less than
satisfactory;



      (7)   Date sealed;



      (8)   An opinion as to whether the well sealing operation was
satisfactory or unsatisfactory certified by signature of the registered
inspector; and



      (9)   Any other data required by the public works director in
the permit conditions.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-81)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-122.  CORRECTIVE ACTION.



   Any person who owns a well and any person who is in possession of a
well may be required to take corrective action with respect to the well as
provided in this section.



   (A)   Grounds - Any of the following occurrences constitutes a
ground for ordering corrective action:



      (1)   Maintenance, operation or use of the well in a manner
that will cause or contribute to, or run a substantial risk of causing or
contributing to, the pollution or contamination of the groundwater; or



      (2)   Construction, maintenance, repair, modification or
destruction of the well in a manner that violates any provision of this
article.



   (B)   Notice - To initiate proceedings to order corrective action,
the public works director shall send written notice to the person who owns
the well or the person in possession of the well or both of them.  The
notice shall briefly describe the suspected occurrence which constitutes a
ground for ordering corrective action, shall describe the proposed corrective
action, shall specify a time and place of hearing at which such person shall
be afforded an opportunity to present evidence showing that there has been no
such occurrence or that the proposed corrective action is inappropriate, and
shall state that failure to appear and present such evidence may result in an
order requiring such person to take some or all of the proposed corrective
action.



      (3)   Hearing - The public works director shall conduct the
hearing specified in the notice.  The hearing shall be informal and shall
not be governed by rules of evidence applicable to courts of law.  The
person to whom the permit was issued shall have the right to present relevant
evidence at the hearing.  The public works director may, but need not,
permit other persons to present relevant evidence.  At the conclusion of the
hearing, or within 30 days thereafter, the public works director shall
determine, based upon the preponderance of the evidence accepted at the
hearing, whether there has been such an occurrence, and, if so, whether the
proposed corrective action is appropriate.  The determination of the public
works director shall be final and conclusive.  Such determination shall be
in writing and shall contain a brief statement of the findings of fact upon
which the determination is based.



   (D)   Order - If the determination is that there has been such an
occurrence and that some or all of the proposed corrective action is
appropriate, the public works director may issue and serve upon the person or
persons who were served with notice of the hearing a written order requiring
such appropriate corrective action.  The order shall state a deadline for
commencing the corrective action if such action is to be ongoing and shall
state a deadline for completing the corrective action if such corrective
action is not to be ongoing.  The order shall further state that, if the
corrective action is not taken in compliance with the order, such action may
be taken by the public works director at the expense of the person served
with the order and, in addition, such person may be subject to criminal
prosecution.



   (E)   Compliance - Any owner or possessor of the well who is served
with such an order shall, on or before the deadline stated therein, commence
every corrective action described therein as being ongoing and complete every
corrective action described therein as not being ongoing.  Any owner or
possessor of the well served with such an order, and any person who
thereafter acquires ownership or possession of the well with actual or
constructive notice of the order, shall, for so long as such person owns or
possesses the well, continue to take every corrective action described in the
order as ongoing, until such time as either the well is destroyed pursuant to
this article or the public works director states in writing that such ongoing
corrective action is no longer necessary.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-82)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-123.  DESTRUCTION OF ABANDONED WELLS.



   No person shall own or possess an abandoned cathodic protection well
which is over 50 feet deep, an abandoned monitoring well, an abandoned
engineering test hole which is over 50 feet deep, or an abandoned water well
unless either such well has been destroyed pursuant to this article or a
current certificate of exemption has been issued for such well pursuant to
section 22-124.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-83)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-124.  CERTIFICATE OF EXEMPTION.



   Any person who owns or possesses a water well or monitoring well which
is abandoned or about to become abandoned but who intends to use such well
again may apply to the public works director, in a form satisfactory to the
public works director, for a certificate of exemption from the requirement
that such well be destroyed.  If the public works director determines from
such application that exemption from the requirement that the well be
destroyed would not result in pollution or contamination of ground water and
would not create a hazard to health or safety, the public works director
shall issue such a certificate of exemption.  A certificate of exemption
shall expire three years after issuance and may be terminated by the public
works director at any time prior to expiration upon a determination that
destruction of the well is necessary to prevent pollution or contamination of
ground water or to avoid a hazard to health or safety.  Successive
certificates of exemption may be issued with respect to a well in same manner
as the original certificate.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-84)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-125.  FEES.



   The city council may, by resolution, establish fees for the processing
of any application for approval as a registered inspector, for registration
with the public works director pursuant to section 22-119, or for a permit,
extension of a permit, or certificate of exemption pursuant to this
article.  The payment of such fee, if any, established by such resolution
shall accompany the application.  If the application is withdrawn before
issuance of the permit, the public works director shall compute the cost to
the city of processing the application up to that point in accordance with
the city's standard cost accounting procedures and, if such cost is less than
the amount of the fee paid, the difference shall be refunded to the applicant.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-85)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-126.  INSPECTION.



   The public works director and the city inspectors may, at any and all
reasonable times, enter any and all places, property, enclosures and
structures for the purpose of making examinations and investigations to
determine whether any provision of this article is being violated.  The
public works director may require that any work for which a permit is
required by this article be completed in stages and that work completed for
any stage be inspected prior to any further work.  Registered inspectors
must inspect drilling and sealing operations for engineering test holes and
monitoring wells if required by permit conditions.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-86)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-127.  MISDEMEANOR/INFRACTION.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day or portion thereof during which such violation is committed,
continued or permitted, and shall be subject to the same punishment for each
such separate offense as for the original offense.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, where the prosecuting attorney has determined that such action
would be in the best interests of justice, the prosecuting attorney may
specify in the accusatory pleading that the violation shall be an infraction
and the violation shall then be prosecuted as an infraction.



   (B)   The provisions of this section are in addition to and
independent of any other sanctions which are or may be imposed under this
article or any other provision of law.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-87)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-128.  ABATEMENT.



   If any corrective action required by an order issued pursuant to
section 22-122 is not taken in full compliance with such order, the public
works director may cause the corrective action to be taken by the city and
all persons required by section 22-122 to take such corrective action shall
be jointly and severally liable to the city for the cost of such action.  In
cases where the public health and safety require emergency corrective action,
the public works director may cause the emergency corrective action to be
taken by the city without a prior order or notice and all persons who own or
possess the well shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for the
cost of such action.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-88)  (Ord. No. 2219)



SEC. 22-129.  EXEMPTION.



   The foregoing provisions of this article do not apply to any leak
detection system installed or destroyed pursuant to the provisions of the
health and safety code or of the county ordinance code.  The public works
director may also waive permit requirements for installation or destruction
of monitoring and recovery wells which are not more than 50 feet deep to
determine the extent of or remove underground tank contamination, pursuant to
requirements of the State or the county, if the public works director
determines that the purpose of this article as set forth in section 22-110
will be satisfied.  The public works director may also waive permit
requirements for installation or destruction of natural gas monitoring and
recovery wells which are not more than 50 feet deep pursuant to requirements
of the State or the county if the public works director determines that the
purpose of this article as set forth in section 22-110 will be satisfied.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-89)  (Ord. No. 2219)



ARTICLE VIII.  WATER WASTE



SEC. 22-135.  DECLARATION OF POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   The city council hereby declares that because of the normally arid
conditions in Southern California, the recurrent critical low levels of
precipitation throughout the State, and the limited available supply of local
and imported water, the general welfare of the city requires that water
resources available to the city be used for the maximum beneficial purpose.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-90)  (Ord. No. 2232)



SEC. 22-136.  WATER WASTE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The city council further declares that any waste or
unreasonable use, or unreasonable method of use of water is hereby prohibited
and that the conservation of water shall be mandatory on all persons using
city water within and outside the city limits.



   (B)   Therefore, the city council orders the restrictions on water
use as specified below:



      (1)   Limits on watering hours.  Watering of lawns,
ornamental turf, trees, shrubs, vegetation, landscape and other outside
irrigation is prohibited except between 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Testing of,
repairs to and replacement of irrigation systems may occur outside of the
normally allowed irrigation period.



      (2)   No outdoor irrigation during rain. Outdoor irrigation is
prohibited during rain.



      (3)   Limits on watering duration. Watering or irrigating of
lawns, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water using a landscape
irrigation system or a watering device that is not continuously attended is
limited to no more than 15 minutes per day per station. This subsection does
not apply to landscape irrigation systems that exclusively use high
efficiency irrigation equipment, very low-flow drip type irrigation systems
when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour, and weather
based controllers or high-efficiency stream rotor sprinklers.



      (4)   No run-off. Watering of turf, ornamental landscape, open
ground crops and trees (including agricultural irrigation) in a wasteful
manner is prohibited. Wasteful practices include, but are not limited to,
allowing water to run off onto sidewalks, driveways, gutters or streets, or
allowing the pooling or puddling of water on any hard-surfaced area.



      (5)   No use of water to clean surfaces. The use of running
water from a hose, pipe, or faucet to clean buildings, pavement, tile, wood,
plastic, driveways, parking lots, and other paved surfaces is prohibited,
except for public health and safety reasons and then only with a hose with an
automatic shut-off nozzle.



      (6)   Recycled water for ornamental ponds and fountains. Where
and when available, approved non-potable water shall be used to fill or
refill recreational or ornamental lakes, ponds or fountains. When using
non-potable water, the user shall post signs in conspicuous areas identifying
the fact that non-potable water is being used. Newly installed or replacement
ponds and fountains shall include recirculation pump(s) that maximize the
efficiency and reuse of fill water.



      (7)   Prompt leak repair. All leaks, breaks or malfunction
within a plumbing or water distribution system shall be repaired as promptly
as practical. All repairs shall be completed within 72 hours after discovery
of such leak, break or malfunction, or receipt of notice from the city of
such condition, whichever comes first.



      (8)   Boat and vehicle washing. Boats, vehicles and other
mobile equipment shall be washed only at commercial wash facilities that
recycle their wash water; by use of a bucket and hose equipped with a
self-closing valve that requires operator pressure to activate the flow of
water; or by mobile high pressure/low volume professional services.



      (9)   Drinking water service upon request. Service of drinking
water at all restaurants, hotels, cafes, cafeterias, coffee shops, fast-food
operations, banquet facilities or other public places where food is served or
offered for sale, shall only be made upon customer request.



      (10)   Commercial dish washing. No later than July 1, 2010,
all food preparation establishments shall use water conserving dish wash
spray valves when washing dishes.



      (11)   Commercial lodging water conservation measure.
Operators of hotels, motels, and other commercial establishments offering
lodgings shall post in each room prominent notice encouraging water
conservation practices, including the option of not having towels and linen
laundered daily.



      (12)   Commercial/industrial cooling systems. Installation
of  new or replacement single pass cooling systems in commercial or
industrial buildings is prohibited.



      (13)   Commercial car wash and laundry systems. Installation
of new or replacement non re-circulating water systems in commercial conveyor
car wash or commercial laundry systems is prohibited.



      (14)   Swimming pools. Filling and refilling of a swimming
pool, with the exception of the first filling of a swimming pool and the
occasional adding of small quantities of water to maintain proper water
level, or for health or safety reasons, is prohibited.



      (15)   Waste, generally. Any indiscriminate use of water not
otherwise addressed above and which is wasteful, is prohibited.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-91)  (Ord. No. 2232, 2265, 2826, 2810)



SEC. 22-137.  FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   Any violation of the provisions of this article may be prosecuted under
the provisions of section 1-10 of this code. In addition, the following
remedies may be imposed against any person for violation of any of the
sections of this article:



   (A)   For the first violation, a written warning shall be entered
upon the person's, water service record.



   (B)   For the second violation during a 12-month period, a surcharge
shall be imposed on the customer in an amount equal to 25 percent of the most
recent utility bill (exclusive of the sewer and refuse portion of the bill),
or $25, whichever is greater, payable as part of the utility bill for the
location at which the violation occurred.



   (C)   For the third violation during a 12-month period, a surcharge
shall be imposed on the customer in an amount equal to 50 percent of the most
recent utility bill (exclusive of the sewer and refuse portion of the bill),
or, $50, whichever is greater, payable as part of the utility bill for the
location at which the violation occurred.



   (D)   (1)   For a fourth violation during a 12-month period, the
city shall be able to install, at the expense of the customer, a
flow-restricting device of one gpm capacity on the location receiving water
service through up to 1½-inch size distribution systems and comparatively
sized restricting devices on locations receiving water service through larger
distribution systems.  These devices shall be installed for a period of not
less than 48 hours on the service of the customer at the location at which
the violation occurred.



      (2)   The charge for installation of such a flow-restricting
device shall be based upon the size of the customer's meter and the actual
cost of installation.



      (3)   The flow-restricting device shall remain installed until
removed as authorized by the city manager.  The charge for removal of the
flow-restricting device and restoration of normal service shall be based on
the city's actual cost.  In addition, a surcharge of 50 percent of the most
recent utility bill (exclusive of the sewer and refuse portion of the bill)
shall be imposed for restoration of service.  Both of these charges shall be
payable by the customer as part of the utility bill.  Restoration of service
shall be performed during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on regular
working days.



      (4)   For any violations after the fourth violation during a
12-month period, the city may discontinue water service to the customer at
the location at which the violation occurred, or impose such other penalty as
deemed appropriate by the city manager, until such time that the city manager
determines that further violations are not likely to occur.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-92)  (Ord. No. 2232, 2810)



SEC. 22-138.  NOTICE TO CUSTOMER.



   (A)   The city shall provide notice of each violation of this
article to the customer of the location at which the violation occurred, as
follows:



      (1)   For a first violation, the city shall give written
notice of the fact of such violation to the customer by personal service, by
delivery through regular United States mail addressed to the customer's
residence, or any other means reasonably designed to notify the customer of
the violation.



      (2)   If a surcharge is to be assessed, or if the installation
of a flow restricter is scheduled, or the discontinuance of water service to
the customer for any period of time may occur, advance notice shall be given
in the following manner:



         (a)   Written notice to the customer by personal service;



         (b)   If the customer is absent from or unavailable at
either the customer's residence or place of business, by leaving a copy of
the notice with an adult at either location, and by delivery of the notice
through regular United States mail addressed to the customer at either the
customer's place of business or residence; or



         (c)   If such residence and place of business cannot be
ascertained, or an adult cannot be found at the location of the violation,
then by affixing a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place at the location
where the violation has occurred, and by delivery of a copy of the notice
through regular United States mail addressed to the customer at the
customer's billing address and to the subject location.



   (B)   All notices shall contain, in addition to the facts of the
violation, a statement of the possible remedies for each violation, a
statement informing the customer of his/her right to an administrative
hearing on the violation, when the surcharge shall be assessed, and the date
and time the water flow shall be restricted, or the water service
discontinued.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-93)  (Ord. No. 2232)



SEC. 22-139.  RIGHT TO HEARING.



   (A)   Any customer against whom a surcharge is to be assessed on
whose water service is scheduled for flow restriction, or whose water service
may be discontinued, shall have a right to a hearing to be conducted by a
person selected by the city manager.  The customer shall file the written
request for a hearing with the city manager's designee within 15 days of the
date of notification of the violation and intended remedy.  The imposition
of any remedy shall be stayed until any such hearing is conducted and a
written decision is made by the city manager's designee and written notice of
the decision is delivered to the customer by any means specified in section
22-138(A)(2).



   (B)   (1)   The hearing shall be conducted promptly following the
request for hearing.  The customer may present any relevant evidence at the
hearing which tends to show that the alleged violation has not occurred.



      (2)   The formal rules of evidence shall not apply and all
relevant evidence customarily relied upon by reasonable persons in the
conduct of serious business affairs shall be admissible, unless a sound
objection warrants its exclusion.



      (3)   The decision of the city manager's designee shall be
final and exhaust the administrative process.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-94)  (Ord. No. 2232)



SEC. 22-140.  RESTORATION OF DISCONTINUED WATER SERVICE.



   When water service is discontinued, the service shall be restored upon
the following conditions:



   (A)   Proof submitted by the violator of correction of the condition
or activity satisfactory to the city manager; and



   (B)   Payment of the estimated restoration charge, including the
cost of any inspection fees or required staff time, and all other fees and
charges still outstanding, including, but not limited to, surcharges and/or
installation and removal charges for flow restricters.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-95)  (Ord. No. 2232)



SEC. 22-141.  LIMITATIONS ON CURTAILMENT.



   Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to allow the city
to curtail the supply of water to any customer when, in the discretion of the
city manager or Ventura County Environmental Health Department, such water is
required by that customer to maintain a minimum level of public health and
safety.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-96)  (Ord. No. 2232)



SEC. 22-142.  ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL.



   The employees of the police, fire, development services and public
works departments and other designated persons shall be responsible for
enforcement of the various sections of this article under their respective
authority or as is specifically assigned to them by the city manager.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-97)  (Ord. No. 2232, 2826, 2810)



ARTICLE IX.  WATER CONSERVATION AND WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE PROCEDURES



SEC. 22-150.  SHORT TITLE.



   This article IX shall be known and cited as the "City of Oxnard Water
Conservation and Water Shortage Response Ordinance."



(Ord. No. 2729)



SEC. 22-151.  DECLARATION OF WATER SHORTAGE CONDITIONS.



   (A)   The city council may, by resolution, declare that water
shortage conditions are present within the city. The city council shall
establish mandatory water conservation measures associated with the water
shortage conditions, as further provided in section 22-154.



   (B)   This article shall apply to all customers and properties that
receive city water service.



   (C)   All mandatory water conservation measures shall remain in
effect until the city council declares that the water shortage conditions
have eased so that the shortage responses may be modified or eliminated.



(Ord. No. 2729)



SEC. 22-152.  POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   During a declared water shortage condition, the water sources
available to the city shall be allocated to the maximum beneficial use to the
greatest extent possible, and the waste or unreasonable use or unreasonable
method of use of water shall be prevented, and water available is to be
conserved with a view to the reasonable and beneficial use thereof in the
interests of the people of the city and for the public welfare.



   (B)   The purpose of this article is to provide water shortage
condition response procedures to minimize the effect of any existing or
threatened water shortage conditions on customers and businesses within the
city. These provisions are intended to significantly reduce the consumption
of city water over an extended period of time and, thus, extend the
availability of water for city customers while reducing the hardship on the
city and the general public to the greatest extent possible.



(Ord. No. 2729)



SEC. 22-153.  GENERAL PROHIBITION: ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   No customer shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water
in a manner contrary to any provision of this article or article VIII in an
amount in excess of any reduction levels described in a city council adopted
water shortage condition resolution. For any violation of the provisions of
this article or article VIII may be prosecuted under the provisions of
section 1-10 of this code, and each violation of each during which such
unauthorized use occurred, continued or was permitted shall be considered a
separate violation.



   (B)   In addition to prosecution under the provisions of section
1-10, any unauthorized water use in violation of this article shall be a
public nuisance. The city may prosecute any violation of the use restrictions
set forth in this article by means of criminal and civil filings, as deemed
appropriate by the city attorney.



(Ord. No. 2729, 2810)



SEC. 22-154.  MANDATORY WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES.



   (A)   Whenever the city council declares that water shortage
conditions exist, the city council shall also designate the severity of the
shortage conditions and establish mandatory conservation measures.



   (B)   The severity of each water shortage condition shall be
designated in stages, from 1 to 4. Each stage shall correspond to the degree
to which the city has or is likely to suffer reduced availability of water
supplies, as follows:



 


Stage

 
Severity: Reduction in Available Supplies


1
 
Up to 15%


2
 
15-25%


3
 
25-35%


4
 
Greater than 35%



 



   (C)   Each resolution declaring or modifying a water shortage
condition shall include mandatory water use restrictions. Any required
reductions in water use shall begin with the customer's next full billing
period following the declaration or as otherwise provided in the resolution.
In addition to the restrictions set forth in section 22-136, the required 
water use restrictions may include, but are not limited to the following:



      (1)   Maximum allowed water use. The manager shall establish a
method of determining each customer’s water use (baseline use) against
which any required reductions shall be measured. The methodology for
determining each customer’s baseline use shall be described in the water
shortage resolution, and shall include historical use and usage for similar
situated customers. To the extent practical, customers who have already
implemented up-to-date conservation practices shall not be penalized in
establishing their baseline use.



      (2)   One-time and short-term uses:



         (a)   The manager shall grant prior approval for water
to be used on a one-time or short-term basis for construction and dust
control. The user shall submit to the manager its water use plan at least 30
days in advance of the proposed use.



         (b)   The use of potable water for sanitation,
irrigation and construction purposes, including but not limited to dust
control, settling of backfill, flushing of plumbing lines, and washing of
equipment, buildings and vehicles, shall be prohibited in all cases where the
manager has determined that use of reclaimed, recycled or other forms of
nonpotable water use is a feasible alternative.



         (c)   Depending upon the severity of the water shortage,
the city may not issue new construction meters or short term water use unless
reclaimed or non-potable water is used, unless potable water use is necessary
to protect the health, safety or welfare.



      (3)   Fire hydrants. The use of water from fire hydrants shall
be limited to fire fighting and related activities and other uses of water
for municipal purposes shall be limited to activities necessary to maintain
the public health, safety and welfare.



      (4)   Exceptions for fire/erosion protection. Irrigation may
be permitted for ground cover for fire protection purposes and erosion
control. Depending on the severity of the water shortage conditions, outside
residential, municipal or commercial landscape irrigation may be limited or
prohibited.



      (5)   Expeditious leak repair. All leaks, breaks or
malfunction within a plumbing or water distribution system shall be repaired
as expeditiously as practical. All repairs shall be completed within 48 hours
after discovery of such leak, break or malfunction, or receipt of notice from
the city of such condition, whichever comes first.



      (6)   Restrictions on potable water use for irrigation.
Depending upon the drought severity, the use of potable water for irrigation
uses may be restricted or prohibited. The manager shall have the right to
shut off water service to any such irrigation service upon seven days advance
notice to the customer.



      (7)   Limits on swimming pools. Watering to maintain the level
of water in swimming pools shall occur only when essential. A pool cover
shall be used to conserve water at all times. Draining of pools or refilling
shall be done only for health or safety reasons as determined by the health
department or manager. Depending on the severity of the declared drought
emergency, the introduction of water into residential swimming pools and spas
may be prohibited.



      (8)   Limits on agricultural use. Agricultural customers,
commercial nurseries and livestock facilities shall use water only when
necessary. The water shortage resolution may invoke appropriate measures to
limit or prohibit certain use of potable water for commercial agricultural
use.



      (9)   Irrigation of public works. Irrigation of parks, school
ground areas, and road median landscaping will not be permitted more than
twice a week and only if necessary. Depending on the severity of the drought
emergency, these water uses may be prohibited unless recycled water is used.



      (10)   Limits on golf courses. Golf course water use shall be
limited based upon the severity of the drought. To the extent potable water
is used for golf course irrigation, limitation on the irrigation of roughs
shall be implemented before limitations on fairway irrigation. Efficient use
of recycled water on any golf course shall not be limited.



      (11)   Limit new water service. Depending on the severity of
the drought, issuance of building permits which require new or expanded water
service may be limited or withheld, except to protect the public's health,
safety and welfare, or in cases which meet city council adopted conservation
offset requirements.



      (12)   Other prohibited uses. The city may implement other
water-related restrictions or prohibitions based on the severity of the
emergency.



   (D)   Each water shortage condition resolution shall set forth a
scheduled time for its expiration or further review of the water shortage
situation.



(Ord. No. 2729, 2810)



SEC. 22-155.  PUBLIC NOTIFICATION.



   Concurrent with the hearing on the adoption of a water shortage
condition resolution and following its adoption, the city council shall
implement all reasonable measures to inform city customers of all water use
restrictions. The city manager may issue notices through press releases, to
print and broadcast media and with customer water bills. The city manager may
also provide written and verbal notification to specific impacted industry
groups, such as public services, hotels, golf courses, school districts,
developers and restaurants.



(Ord. No. 2729)



SEC. 22-156.  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Based on the severity of the declared water shortage
conditions, the city council may except any or all of the following uses, in
their entirety or in part, from the mandatory conservation measures:



      (1)   Commercial vehicle washes with water recycling systems,
mobile high pressure/low volume professional vehicle wash services and
commercial laundries, as consumers commonly use these types of businesses as
a water conservation measure.



      (2)   Water use necessary for public health and safety, for
essential health care services or governmental services such as police, fire
and other similar public safety or emergency services.



      (3)   Use of reclaimed or recycled water.



   (B)   Public agency or other customers who utilize multiple water
meters, or who have unique circumstances, may seek approval from the manager
to implement a customized water conservation plan in lieu of the mandatory
conservation measures set forth in the city council resolution. Such a plan
must reduce water consumption to a level consistent with other customers, and
shall be effective upon written approval of the manager.



(Ord. No. 2729)



SEC. 22-157. ENFORCEMENT.



   In addition to the remedies provided pursuant to section 1-10 of the
city code, the manager shall take the following steps in response to the
failure of any customer to comply with water use restrictions established in
any water shortage conditions resolution.



   (A)   A surcharge shall be imposed on the customer based on the
magnitude of the water overuse, and the number of separate occasions the
customer has exceeded the designated allotment during the water shortage
condition. The charges shall be as follows:



 


Shortage Stage

 

Infractions



 

Up to two

 

Three or more



1
 
Water use in excess of allotment billed at two times the highest unit rate
for that customer class
 
Water use in excess of allotment billed at four times the highest unit rate
for that customer class.


2
 
Water use in excess of allotment billed at three times the highest unit rate
for that customer class
 
Water use in excess of allotment billed at five times the highest unit rate
for that customer class


3
 
Water use in excess of allotment billed at four times the highest unit rate
for that customer class
 
Water use in excess of allotment billed at six times the highest unit rate
for that customer class


4
 
Water use in excess of allotment billed at five times the highest unit rate
for that customer class
 
Water use in excess of allotment billed at seven times the highest unit rate
for that customer class



 



   (B)   In addition to the imposition of the surcharge described in
subsection (A) above, for the fourth failure to comply, the manager shall
install on the customer service a flow-restricting device of one gallon per
minute capacity for services up to one and one-half inch size, and
comparatively sized restricting devices for larger services. The device shall
remain installed at the discretion of the manager, or until the water
shortage resolution is terminated.



   (C)   The city shall charge the customer for the costs incurred for
installing and  removing the flow-restricting devices and for restoration of
normal service. The charge and any surcharges shall be paid before normal
service is restored.



   (D)   In every case, the excess water use penalty is in addition to
the regular rate charged for water.



   (E)   Each failure to comply will be cumulative for the duration of
a water shortage condition.



(Ord. No. 2729, 2810)



SEC. 22-158.  REQUEST FOR ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   A customer shall have the right to request relief from or an
adjustment to an allowed allocation. The timing and processing of the request
shall be as provided in section 22-162.



   (B)   In determining whether relief shall be granted, the hearing
officer shall consider all relevant factors including, but not necessarily
limited to, the following:



      (1)   Any considerations that might warrant modifications to
the maximum allowed water use based on the customer's historical use.



      (2)   Whether the required reduction in water consumption will
result in unemployment or economic hardship dissimilar to other similarly
situated customers.



      (3)   Whether additional members have been added to the
household.



      (4)   Whether any additional landscaped property has been
added to the property subsequent to the historical base period.



      (5)   Changes in vacancy factors in multi-family housing.



      (6)   Increased number of employees in commercial, industrial
and governmental offices.



      (7)   Water uses during new construction.



      (8)   Adjustments to water use caused by emergency, health or
safety issues.



      (9)   First filling of a swimming pool constructed under
permit.



      (10)   Water use necessary for reasons related to family
illness or health.



      (11)   Increased production requiring increased processed
water.



      (12)   Water use in multi-family housing or mobile home parks
where more than one dwelling unit is provided water service by a single water
meter.



      (13)   Unusual or unexplained water usage.



      (14)   Water usage that is substantially less than adjacent
and similar properties as a direct result of historic water conservation
practices. In no event, however, may an adjustment be made which would permit
a water use higher than that which historically existed.



(Ord. No. 2729)



SEC. 22-159.  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   The city manager shall give the following written notice of
violation to the customer committing the violation:



      (1)   Notice of the applicable water use allotment or
restriction, along with the actual measured use and alleged violation, shall
be given in writing by regular mail or personal delivery to the customer's
address on file with the city.



         (a)   If personal delivery is used, the notice of
violation shall be provided to the customer or to an adult at the premises
and by sending a copy through the regular mail to the address at which the
customer is normally billed;



         (b)   If the customer or an adult cannot be located at
the premises, then by affixing a copy in a conspicuous place at the premises
at which the violation occurred and also by sending a copy through the
regular mail to the address at which the customer is normally billed.



      (2)   The notice shall contain a description of the facts of
the violation, a statement of the possible penalties for each violation and a
statement informing the customer of his/her right to request an adjustment or
an appeal.



(Ord. No. 2729)



SEC. 22-160.  REDUCTION IN WATER SUPPLIED.



   If any customer fails to comply with any provision of this article, the
city manager may reduce the amount of water provided to that customer to the
level which that customer would be using if he/she were complying with the
provisions of this article. The provisions of this section shall be applied
in lieu of, or in addition to, any of the other provisions of this article,
at the discretion of the city manager, and may be applied without regard to
the status or nature of the customer.



(Ord. No. 2729)



SEC. 22-161. WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCY; HEALTH AND SAFETY IMPACTS.



   Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to: (A) alter the
city council's authority to declare and implement a water shortage emergency,
as provided in Water Code Section 350 et seq.; or (B) require the city to
curtail or reduce the supply of water to any customer when, in the discretion
of the city, substantial damage to equipment could occur or such water is
required by that customer to maintain an adequate level of health and safety.



(Ord. No. 2729)



SEC. 22-162.  APPEAL.



   (A)   Each customer shall have the right to appeal the restrictions
or allocation granted under the water shortage resolution or any notice of
violation by filing a written request for appeal with the city clerk within
fifteen days of receipt of the relevant decision or notice.



   (B)   If the request for appeal is not received by the city clerk
within the required period, the customer shall forfeit the right to appeal.



   (C)   Each customer filing an appeal shall be given a hearing before
a hearing officer designated by the city manager. The hearing shall be
conducted promptly following the request.



   (D)   The customer may present any relevant evidence at the hearing.
The formal rules of evidence shall not apply. All relevant evidence shall be
admissible, unless a sound objection warrants its exclusion.



   (E)   No relief shall be granted to any customer who, when
requested, fails to provide any information necessary for resolution of the
customer's appeal. The imposition of any remedy, surcharge, and installation
of a flow-restricting device or fine shall be stayed during the processing of
the appeal.



   (F)   A final decision on the appeal shall be provided to the
customer in writing within thirty days of receipt of the appeal. The customer
shall have exhausted his/her administrative remedies upon the issuance of
this final decision.



(Ord. No. 2729)



ARTICLE X. RECYCLED WATER USE



SEC. 22-175.  SHORT TITLE.



   This article shall be known and cited as the "City of Oxnard Recycled
Water Use Ordinance".



(Ord. No. 2728)



SEC. 22-176.  FINDINGS.



   (A)   The people of the State of California have a primary interest
in the development of programs and facilities to recycle water to supplement
existing water supplies and assist in meeting future water demands. The
conservation of all available water resources requires the maximum reuse of
water for beneficial uses.



   (B)   Implementing these state policies is in the best interests of
the city and its residents and businesses. This article is necessary to
further these policies, to ensure the long-term integrity and reliability of
the common water supplies in the region, and to preserve the health, safety
and welfare of the community.



   (C)   The city is developing, and will own and operate recycled
water distribution facilities, providing highly purified recycled water for
irrigation, groundwater recharge and approved municipal and industrial uses
within and adjacent to the city's sphere of influence.



   (D)   By developing and utilizing recycled water, the city can
reduce its need for additional imported water and local groundwater supplies.
Where recycled water is available, certain uses of potable water may be
considered unreasonable or wasteful.



   (E)   The purpose of this article is to promote water conservation
and recycled water use, to ensure the maximum public benefit from the use of
city water supplies.



(Ord. No. 2728)



SEC. 22-177.  POLICIES AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   In implementing the mandates of Water Code Sections 13550 and
13551 and Government Code Sections 65601 through 65607, the policy of the
city is that:



      (1)   Recycled water shall be used for suitable, non-potable
purposes whenever and wherever recycled water is available at a reasonable
cost and of an adequate quality, and



      (2)   Prior planning for the use of recycled water will enable
the city to maximize its reasonable and beneficial use.



   (B)   The intent of the city council in adopting this article is
that recycled water shall be used whenever it is available at a reasonable
cost and of an adequate quality because doing so is in the best interests of
public health, safety and welfare, and provides a beneficial use to customers
and the community. The city council reserves the right to require customers
to use recycled water in lieu of potable water for all approved uses,
consistent with state law. This mandate applies to existing and potential new
customers.



   (C)   Recycled water shall be used in a manner that complies with
all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations, and in circumstances that
will:



      (1)   Replace the use of potable water supplies in instances
where the use of recycled water is available at a reasonable cost and of an
adequate quality;



      (2)   Reduce the discharge of water from city facilities to
the ocean;



      (3)   Prevent direct human consumption of recycled water;



      (4)   Not result in any material negative impact to the
environment; and



      (5)   Prevent the run-off of recycled water from irrigated
areas.



(Ord. No. 2728)



SEC. 22-178.  POWERS AND DUTIES OF MANAGER.



   (A)   The manager shall be primarily responsible for implementing
this article. The manager may delegate this responsibility to appropriate
representatives or agents of the city.



   (B)   The manager shall set and enforce regulations necessary to
implement and enforce this article by developing and periodically updating
the recycled water master plan, as provided in section 22-179.



   (C)   The manager shall coordinate efforts between the city and
other local, regional, state, or federal agencies to implement this article,
and otherwise ensure that the city maximizes the production and use of
recycled water to the extent practical.



(Ord. No. 2728)



SEC. 22-179.  RECYCLED WATER MASTER PLAN.



   (A)   Within one year of the effective date of this article, the
manager shall prepare and present to the city manager for adoption a recycled
water master plan. The recycled water master plan shall be updated
periodically, as the manager determines necessary to maintain consistency
with local, state and federal laws, regulations and policies with respect to
recycled water. The city manager shall approve all substantive updates to the
recycled water master plan.



   (B)   The recycled water master plan shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:



      (1)   Policies encouraging the use of recycled water. This
includes requiring the use of recycled water when the manager has provided
the customer an analysis showing that recycled water is a cost-effective
alternative to potable water for such uses and the customer has had a
reasonable time to make the conversion to recycled water.



      (2)   General rules and regulations governing the distribution
and use of recycled water.



      (3)   Standards to which all city owned and on-site recycled
water distribution facilities must conform.



      (4)   An evaluation of the location and size of present and
future recycled water treatment facilities, distribution pipelines, pump
stations, reservoirs, and other related facilities, including cost estimates
and potential financing methods.



      (5)   Identification of those areas within and adjacent to the
city's sphere of influence where recycled water may be used.



      (6)   For each recycled water use area, or use type within
each recycled water use area, identification of those areas within which or
types of uses where recycled water use shall be mandatory.



      (7)   Identification of resources and recommendations of
specific measures to assist recycled water users in financing recycled water
use projects, including, but not limited to, identifying incentives,
discounts in water rates, and other measures.



      (8)   A public awareness program to educate the public about,
and promote the safe use of recycled water.



      (9)   Best management practices, standards, protocols, and
guidelines to ensure that recycled water use at each on-site recycled water
facility is conducted safely and consistently with all local, state and
federal laws and regulations. These best management practices shall include
comprehensive rules and guidelines regarding: operational controls;
conversion requirements; cross-connection controls; posting of notices;
worker education and protection; facilities use and maintenance; supervisory
controls; and notification requirements.



(Ord. No. 2728, 2810)



SEC. 22-180.  MANDATORY RECYCLED WATER USE.



   Within each mandatory recycled water use area identified in the
recycled water master plan:



   (A)   For suitable uses, no customer shall use water from any other
source when recycled water is available. The procedures provided in section
22-181 shall be utilized to convert existing potable water uses to recycled
water, where appropriate; and



   (B)   The city shall condition the permitting of all new customers
to include the construction of on-site recycled water facilities so that
recycled water use is maximized.



(Ord. No. 2728)



SEC. 22-181.  CONVERSION OF EXISTING POTABLE WATER SERVICE.



   (A)   Based upon the designation of mandatory water reuse areas, or
the commencement of the design of new city owned recycled water facilities,
the manager shall make a determination as to which existing potable water
uses shall be converted to use recycled water. Each affected customer shall
be notified of the basis for the determination to convert to mandatory
recycled water service, as well as the proposed conditions and schedule for
the conversion.



   (B)   The notice of the manager's determination, including the
proposed conditions and time schedule for compliance, shall be sent to the
customer using certified mail.



   (C)   The customer may file an objection with the manager within
thirty days of the delivery of the notice of determination, and may request
reconsideration or modification of the determination, proposed conditions or
schedule for conversion to recycled water use. The objection must be in
writing and specify the reasons for the objection.



   (D)   The manager's determination shall be final if the customer
does not file an objection within the thirty-day period. The manager shall
review the objection, meet with the customer as appropriate, and shall,
within 30 days of the filing of the notice of objection, confirm, modify, or
abandon the determination. The customer may appeal the manager's
determination as provided by section 22-6.



(Ord. No. 2728)



SEC. 22-182.  DEVELOPMENT AND WATER SERVICE APPROVALS.



   (A)   Upon application for any new industrial, commercial, or
residential subdivision or building permit located within a designated
recycled water use area, the manager shall, based upon the recycled water
master plan, make a determination whether the proposed use of the property
shall include the use of recycled water. All applicable subdivisions and
building permits may include, as a condition of approval, the requirement for
construction of:



      (1)   Recycled water transmission facilities which shall be
dedicated to the city as city-owned recycled water facilities, and



      (2)   On-site recycled water facilities, as may be necessary
to allow for the delivery and use of recycled water.



   (B)   When a customer applies for a permit for the alteration or
remodeling of multi-family, commercial, or industrial structures, the manager
shall make a determination consistent with the recycled water master plan
whether the project permit shall include, as a condition of approval, the
requirement for construction of on-site recycled water facilities necessary
to allow for the delivery and use of recycled water.



   (C)   Any customer may request the manager to make a determination
whether recycled water may be used in lieu of potable water for all or some
portion of the customer's water uses. The manager shall review such requests
on a case-by-case basis and make a determination consistent with the recycled
water master plan.



(Ord. No. 2728, 2810)



SEC. 22-183.  RECYCLED WATER USE; PREVENTION OF IMPROPER USE.



   The manager shall implement all appropriate methods of inspection,
public education, individual customer on-site training, and monitoring that
may be necessary to ensure that recycled water is used in a manner that poses
no risk to human health and safety, and no material negative impact to the
environment. At a minimum, the manager shall:



   (A)   As a part of any development or building permit requiring the
construction of on-site recycled facilities, impose a condition requiring
compliance with all applicable federal, state and local recycled water use
laws and regulations.



   (B)   Review the plans for the on-site recycled facilities and
non-recycled water distribution systems and conduct appropriate field
inspections during construction.



   (C)   Ensure that recycled water shall not be supplied to any
customer until the customer is in compliance with applicable statutory and
regulatory requirements.



(Ord. No. 2728)



SEC. 22-184.  SANCTIONS.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall,
for each day of violation, or portion thereof, be subject to a fine not
exceeding $1000. In addition, the city may discontinue water service to the
customer. Each day that each violation is committed or allowed to continue
shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   The use of recycled water in any manner in violation of this
article or applicable statutes or regulations is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as ordered by the city manager. Any
person creating such a public nuisance may be charged with a misdemeanor.



   (C)   The city may seek to enjoin the use of recycled water in
violation of this article or in a manner that otherwise causes or threatens
to cause a condition of nuisance.



   (D)   The enforcement actions authorized by this article are in
addition to, and do not supersede, any other remedies available under city,
state, or federal laws applicable to activities subject to this article, and
any other remedies available under law.



(Ord. No. 2728)



ARTICLE XI.  ANNEXATION VERIFICATION



SEC. 22-190.  SHORT TITLE.



   This article shall be known and cited as the Annexation Verification
Ordinance.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-120)  (Ord. No. 2378)



SEC. 22-191.  POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this article is to provide a procedure by which
the city can verify that each property for which the owner requests water
service from the city is properly annexed into Calleguas Municipal Water
District (Calleguas) and Metropolitan Water District of Southern California
(Metropolitan) boundaries prior to commencement of water delivery by the city.



   (B)   The city intends this article to operate as a long term
measure to define the responsibilities of the city, Metropolitan and
Calleguas in the annexation verification process and to ensure that no
property will receive water service from the city without first being
properly annexed into Calleguas and Metropolitan boundaries.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-120.1)  (Ord. No. 2378)



SEC. 22-192.  DEFINITION, CUSTOMER.



   “Customer” means any natural person or public or private entity,
including but not limited to, any State or local governmental agency, private
corporation, firm, partnership, individual, group of individuals, or, to the
extent authorized by law, any federal agency, who is or seeks to be supplied
with water service from the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-120.2)  (Ord. No. 2378)



SEC. 22-193.  PROOF OF ANNEXATION PRIOR TO DELIVERY OF WATER SERVICE.



   Prior to delivery of water service by the city to any property, the
city may require the customer to submit to the city written verification
providing proof that the customer's property has been annexed into Calleguas
and Metropolitan boundaries and that the customer has paid all applicable
fees and costs to Calleguas, Metropolitan and the Local Agency Formation
Commission (LAFCO) as may be required.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-120.3)  (Ord. No. 2378)



SEC. 22-194.  ANNEXATION PROCEDURE.



   If a customer's property requires annexation into Calleguas and
Metropolitan boundaries, the customer is responsible for complying with any
and all annexation procedures required by Calleguas, Metropolitan and LAFCO.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-120.4)  (Ord. No. 2378)



SEC. 22-195.  DETERMINATION LETTER AS CONCLUSIVE EVIDENCE OF ANNEXATION
STATUS.



   (A)   A customer may provide written verification of annexation into
Calleguas and Metropolitan boundaries and payment of all applicable fees, by
submitting to the city a copy of the annexation and capital construction
charges determination (Determination Letter), in a form approved by the city
manager.



   (B)   A valid Determination Letter submitted to the city shall be
deemed conclusive evidence that the customer's property is properly annexed
into Calleguas and Metropolitan boundaries and that all annexation fees and
costs have been paid to Calleguas, Metropolitan and LAFCO.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-120.5)  (Ord. No. 2378)



SEC. 22-196.  TIMELY SUBMISSION OF A REQUEST FOR DETERMINATION OF ANNEXATION
STATUS.



   The customer should submit a written request for a determination letter
to Calleguas early in the applicable permitting or development approval
process.  The city encourages Calleguas to respond promptly to annexation
determination requests.  If a property requires annexation into Calleguas
and Metropolitan boundaries, the annexation process may take six months or
more to complete. Annexation approval is discretionary to Calleguas,
Metropolitan and LAFCO.  The city acknowledges that both Calleguas and
Metropolitan have the right to reject a customer's annexation request.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-120.6)  (Ord. No. 2378)



SEC. 22-197.  VERIFICATION PRIOR TO OR CONCURRENT WITH ANNEXATION INTO CITY.



   If the city manager determines that annexation of the customer's
property into Calleguas and Metropolitan bound aries should be accomplished
in conjunction with annexation into the city, the customer shall submit
written verification of annexation into Calleguas and Metropolitan boundaries
prior to or concurrent with final approval of annexation into the city.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-120.7)  (Ord. No. 2378)



SEC. 22-198.  VERIFICATION PRIOR TO OR CONCURRENT WITH SUBDIVISION APPROVAL.



   A customer seeking water service from the city who is also requesting
subdivision approval from the city may, in the discretion of the city
manager, be required to submit written verification providing proof that the
customer's property has been annexed into Calleguas and Metropolitan
boundaries and that the customer has paid all applicable annexation fees and
costs to Calleguas, Metropolitan and LAFCO as may be required.  The customer
shall submit such written verification of annexation into Calleguas and
Metropolitan service areas prior to or concurrent with subdivision approval.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-120.8)  (Ord. No. 2378)



SEC. 22-199.  VERIFICATION PRIOR TO OR CONCURRENT WITH CONDITIONAL LAND USE
APPROVAL.



   A customer seeking water service from the city who is also requesting
conditional land use approval from the city may, in the discretion of the
city manager, be required to submit to the city written verification
providing proof that the customer's property has been annexed into Calleguas
and Metropolitan boundaries and that the customer has paid all applicable
annexation fees and costs to Calleguas, Metropolitan and LAFCO as may be
required.  The customer shall submit written verification of annexation into
Calleguas and Metropolitan boundaries prior to or concurrent with the
conditional land use approval.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-120.9)  (Ord. No. 2378)



SEC. 22-200.  VERIFICATION PRIOR TO FINAL LAND USE CLEARANCE.



   A customer seeking water service from the city who is also requesting
final land use clearance from the city shall submit to the city written
verification providing proof that the customer's property has been annexed
into Calleguas and Metropolitan boundaries and that the customer has paid all
applicable annexation fees and costs to Calleguas, Metropolitan and LAFCO as
may be required.  The customer shall submit written verification of
annexation prior to the final issuance of land use clearance for the proposed
development.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-120.10)  (Ord. No. 2378)



SEC. 22-201.  VERIFICATION PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF A BUILDING PERMIT.



   Prior to issuance of a building permit from the city, a customer shall
submit written verification providing proof that the customer's property has
been annexed into Calleguas and Metropolitan boundaries and that the customer
has paid all applicable fees and costs to Calleguas, Metropolitan and LAFCO.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-120.11)  (Ord. No. 2378)



SEC. 22-202.  SUSPENSION OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, RULES AND
REGULATIONS.



   To the extent that the terms and provisions of this article are
inconsistent or in conflict with the terms and provisions of any previously
adopted city ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations, the terms of this
article and its implementing rules and regulations shall prevail.



(`64 Code, Sec. 33-120.12)  (Ord. No. 2378)



ARTICLE XII.  STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT



SEC. 22-215.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This article implements the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (the
“Clean Water Act” or “CWA”), 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., as
amended, and Division 7 of the California Water Code by prohibiting the
discharge of any pollutant to navigable waters of the United States from a
point source unless the discharge is authorized by a permit issued pursuant
to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”) required
by CWA Section 402 (33 U.S.C. Section 1342), and by prohibiting non-storm
water discharges into the storm drain system.



(Ord. No. 2459, 2876)



SEC. 22-216.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases will
have the meanings set forth this section.  Words and phrases not defined in
this section or elsewhere in this article will have the meanings set forth in
the regulations implementing the NPDES, Clean Water Act Section 402, and
Division 7 of the California Water Code, as they may be amended from time to
time, and if not defined in such laws, then the applicable definitions in the
municipal storm water permit will apply.



   (A)   BASIN PLAN - The Water Quality Control Plan for Coastal
Watersheds of Los Angeles and Ventura Counties, adopted by the regional board
on June 13, 1994, as amended from time to time.



   (B)   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (“BMPs”) - Measures, practices,
and procedures to prevent or reduce, to the maximum extent that is
technologically and economically feasible, the discharge of pollutants to the
city’s storm drain system and receiving waters.  A BMP may consist of a
structural BMP, source control BMP, treatment control BMP, or any other BMP
promulgated by the California Stormwater Quality Association (CASQA),
California Department of Transportation (Caltrans), or approved by the
director for the purpose of controlling or eliminating storm water pollution.



   (C)   CHANNEL - An open conduit either naturally or artificially
created that periodically or continuously contains moving water, or which
forms a connecting link between two waterbodies.



   (D)   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY - Any construction or demolition
activity, clearing, grading, grubbing, or excavation or any other activity
that results in a land disturbance.  Construction activity does not include
emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public
health and safety or routine maintenance activities required to maintain the
integrity of structures by performing minor repair and restoration work,
maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of
the facility.



   (E)   CONTAMINATION - An impairment of the quality of waters of the
State by waste to a degree that creates a hazard to the public health through
poisoning or spread of disease.  Contamination also includes any equivalent
effect resulting from the disposal of waste, whether or not waters of the
State are affected.



   (F)   CRITICAL SOURCE FACILITIES - Those commercial or industrial
facilities or businesses that have a potential to contribute pollutants to
storm water runoff and are listed in Part 4.D and Attachment D of the
municipal storm water permit.



   (G)   DECHLORINATED/DEBROMINATED SWIMMING POOL DISCHARGE - Any
swimming pool discharge with a residual chlorine or bromine level of 0.1 mg/L
or less; and that does not contain any detergents, wastes, algaecides, or
cyanuric acid in excess of 50 ppm, or any other chemicals including salts
from pools commonly referred to as “salt water pools”.  The term does
not include swimming pool filter backwash or swimming pool water containing
bacteria.



   (H)   DEVELOPMENT - Any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment
or reconstruction for which either discretionary land use approval or a
permit is required, for any public or private residential (whether
single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial;
commercial; retail; institutional; and other non-residential projects,
including public agency projects; or mass grading for future construction.



   (I)   DIRECTOR - The public works director or designee.



   (J)   DISCHARGE - When used without qualification, the discharge of
a pollutant.



   (K)   DISCHARGE OF A POLLUTANT - Any addition of any pollutant to
waters of the United States, to the city’s storm drain system, or any
addition of any pollutant to waters of the contiguous zone from any point
source other than a vessel or other floating craft which is being used as a
means of transportation.



   (L)   DISCHARGER - Any person causing a discharge.



   (M)   EPA - The Environmental Protection Agency of the United States
of America.



   (N)   ENVIRONMENT - The physical conditions that exist within the
area and that will be affected by a proposed project.  The environment means
both naturally occurring and man-made conditions.  The area involved will be
the area in which significant effects would occur, either directly or
indirectly, as a result of the project.



   (O)   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES - Those substances designated as
hazardous substances under Section 311(b)(2)(A) of the Clean Water Act, which
are listed in the table at 40 CFR Section 116.4, and other applicable law.



   (P)   HEARING OFFICER - The director, who will preside at the
administrative hearings authorized by this article and issue final decisions
on matters raised in such hearings.



   (Q)   ILLICIT CONNECTION - Any engineered conveyance that is
connected to the storm drain system, without a permit, through or by which an
illicit discharge may occur.



   (R)   ILLICIT DISCHARGE - Any discharge to the storm drain system
that is prohibited under local, State, or federal statutes, ordinances,
codes, or regulations.  The term illicit discharge includes all non-storm
water discharges not composed entirely of storm water except discharges
pursuant to a NPDES permit and discharges which are exempt or conditionally
exempt in accordance with any applicable order of the regional board or
authorized by the regional board executive officer.



   (S)   INVOICE FOR COSTS - An invoice for the actual costs and
expenses of the city, including, but not limited to administrative overhead,
salaries, attorney fees and other expenses recoverable under applicable law,
incurred during any inspection, investigation or proceeding conducted
pursuant to this article, where a notice of violation or other enforcement
remedy under this article is used to obtain compliance with this article.



   (T)   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE - The level of pollutant control
that is derived from available technology or other controls at the maximum
level that is practicable.  Pollution prevention and source control BMPs in
combination with structural and treatment methods where appropriate are
emphasized to achieve compliance.  The maximum extent practicable approach
is an ever evolving and advancing concept that considers technical and
economic feasibility.



   (U)   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (“MS4”) or STORM
DRAIN SYSTEM - A conveyance or system of conveyances, including roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
man-made channels, or storm drains, as defined in 40 CFR Section
122.26(b)(8): (1) owned or operated by the city; (2) designed or used for
collecting or conveying storm water; (3) which is not a combined sewer; and
(4) which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works, as defined in 40
CFR Section 122.2.



   (V)   MUNICIPAL STORM WATER PERMIT - NPDES Permit No. CAS004002
Waste Discharge Requirements for Storm Water (Wet Weather) and Non-Storm
Water (Dry Weather) Discharges from the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
Systems within the Ventura County Watershed Protection District, County of
Ventura, and the Incorporated Cities Therein (Regional Board Order
R4-2010-0108), as amended from time to time.



   (W)   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (“NPDES”)
PERMIT - A permit issued under the CWA, including a State general permit and
the municipal storm water permit issued by the regional board.



   (X)   NEW DEVELOPMENT - Land disturbing activities, structural
development, construction or installation of a building structure, creation
and replacement of impervious surfaces, and land subdivision.



   (Y)   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE - Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of storm water.



   (Z)   POINT SOURCE - Any discernible, confined, and discrete
conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel,
conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated
animal feeding operation, or vessel or other floating craft, from which
pollutants are or may be discharged.  This term does not include
agricultural storm water discharges and return flows from irrigated
agriculture.



   (AA)   POLLUTANT - As defined in CWA section 502(6), 33 U.S.C.
section 1362(6), and incorporated by reference into California Water Code
section 13373, or other applicable law, which is discharged into water.



   (BB)   POLLUTION - The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. 
Pollution also means an alteration of the quality of waters of the State by
waste to a degree that unreasonably affects, or has the potential to
unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities
which serve these beneficial uses.



   (CC)   POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (PCSMP) - A
plan that defines the strategy and describes the design, placement and
implementation of storm water retention and storm water treatment BMPs to
effectively prevent non-storm water discharges and reduce pollutants in storm
water discharges to the maximum extent practicable, for post-construction
urban runoff to the storm drain system.



   (DD)   POTABLE WATER SOURCES - The potable water system for the
treatment, distribution, and provision of water for residential, commercial,
industrial, or institutional use that meets all California safe drinking
water regulatory standards for human consumption.



   (EE)   RECEIVING WATERS - All surface water bodies identified in the
basin plan.



   (FF)   REDEVELOPMENT - Land-disturbing activity that results in the
creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious
surface area on an already developed site as defined in the municipal storm
water permit.  Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to: the expansion
of a building footprint; addition or replacement of a structure; replacement
of impervious surface area that is not part of a routine maintenance
activity; and land disturbing activities related to structural or impervious
surfaces.  For an existing single-family dwelling and accessory structures,
redevelopment means projects that create, add, or replace 10,000 square feet
of impervious area.  Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance to
maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of
the facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required
to immediately protect public health and safety.



   (GG)   REGIONAL BOARD - The California Regional Water Quality
Control Board, Los Angeles Region.



   (HH)   RESPONSIBLE PERSON - The person(s) identified in and
responsible for compliance with the provisions of a SWPPP, SWPCP, or PCSMP.



   (II)   SOURCE CONTROL BMP - Any schedule of activities, prohibitions
of practices, maintenance procedures, managerial practices or operational
practices that aim to prevent storm water pollution by reducing the potential
for contamination at the source of pollution.



   (JJ)   STATE BOARD - The California State Water Resources Control 
Board.



   (KK)   STATE GENERAL PERMIT - A permit issued by the State board or
the regional board pursuant to 40 CFR Sections 122 and 123 to regulate a
category of point sources.  The term State general permit includes, but is
not limited to, the general permit for storm water discharges associated with
construction activity and the general industrial activities storm water
permit and the terms and requirements of both.  In the event the EPA revokes
the in-lieu permitting, authority of the State board, then the term State
general permit will also refer to any EPA administered storm water control
program for industrial, construction, and any other category of activities.



   (LL)   STORM WATER - Any surface flow, runoff, and/or drainage
associated with rain storm events and/or snow melt, as defined in 40 CFR
Section 122.26(b)(13).



   (MM)   STORM WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN (SWPCP) - A plan or
equivalent form, as required by the municipal storm water permit or by the
director, identifying potential pollutant sources from a construction site
with less than one acre of soil disturbance and describing proposed design,
placement and implementation of BMPs, to effectively prevent non-storm water
discharges and reduce pollutants in storm water discharges to the storm drain
system, to the maximum extent practicable, during construction activities.



   (NN)   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) - A plan, as
required by a State general permit, identifying potential pollutant sources
and describing the design, placement and implementation of BMPs, to
effectively prevent non-storm water discharges and reduce pollutants in storm
water discharges during activities covered by the State general permit.



   (OO)   STRUCTURAL BMP - Any structural facility designed and
constructed to mitigate the adverse impacts of storm water runoff pollution.



   (PP)   TREATMENT - The application of engineered systems that use
physical, chemical, or biological processes to remove pollutants.



   (QQ)   TREATMENT CONTROL BMP - Any engineered system designed to
remove pollutants by simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants,
filtration, biological uptake, media absorption or any other physical,
biological, or chemical process.



   (RR)   VENTURA COUNTY TECHNICAL GUIDANCE MANUAL FOR STORM WATER
QUALITY CONTROL MEASURES or TECHNICAL GUIDANCE MANUAL - The county technical
guidance manual for storm water quality measures required by the municipal
storm water permit, as amended from time to time.



   (SS)   WASTE - Sewage and any and all other waste substances,
liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or
of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing, or
processing operation, including waste placed within containers of whatever
nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal.



   (TT)   WATERCOURSE - Any natural or artificial channel for passage
of water.



   (UU)   WATERS OF THE STATE - Any surface water or groundwater,
including saline waters, within the boundaries of the State of California.



   (VV)   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES - Bodies of water as defined in
40 CFR Section 122.2.



   (WW)   WET SEASON - The calendar period from October 1 through April
15.



(Ord. No. 2459, 2876)



SEC. 22-217.  PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS AND ILLICIT DISCHARGES.



   (A)   The discharge of pollutants into the storm drain system is
prohibited.



   (B)   All discharges of material other than storm water into the
storm drain system must be in compliance with the city’s NPDES permit and
any other NPDES permit applicable to the subject property.



   (C)   No person may do any of the following:



      (1)   Construct, use, maintain, operate or utilize an illicit
connection;



      (2)   Cause, permit, or allow any agent, employee, independent
contractor or other person, to construct, maintain, operate, or utilize an
illicit connection;



      (3)   Cause, allow or facilitate an illicit discharge;



      (4)   Cause, permit, or allow, any agent, employee, or
independent contractor, to cause, allow, or facilitate an illicit discharge.



   (D)   In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the director
may, by written notice, require persons responsible for an illicit discharge
or illicit connection to immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the
illicit discharge or illicit connection, and, if necessary, to take measures
to eliminate the source of the illicit discharge or illicit connection.  If
the illicit discharge or illicit connection is not discontinued in the time
specified, the city may take measures to eliminate the source of the illicit
discharge or illicit connection to prevent the occurrence of future illicit
discharges or illicit connections.



   (E)   Whenever the director finds that an illicit discharge or
illicit connection resulting in the release of pollutants is taking place or
has occurred which may result in or has resulted in the release of pollutants
is taking place or has occurred which may result in or has resulted in
pollutants entering the storm drain system, or watercourse, the director may
require by written notice to the responsible person that the pollution cease,
be remediated, and the affected property be restored to its pre-pollution
condition within a specified time, along with all other remedies available to
the city.



   (F)   The director may, by written notice, require a person
responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system to eliminate
or to secure approval for the connection within a specified time, regardless
of whether or not the connection or discharge to it has been established or
approved prior to the effective date of this article.



(Ord. No. 2459, 2876)



SEC. 22-218.  GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person may discharge any material, other than storm water
into the city storm drain system or receiving waters, unless a permit has
first been obtained.



   (B)   The following discharges are exempt from the general permit
requirement in subsection (A) of this section:



      (1)   Discharges originating from a state, federal, or other
source for which the city is preempted from regulating by State or federal
law;



      (2)   Discharges covered by a separate individual or general
NPDES permit, or conditional waiver for irrigated lands;



      (3)   Discharge flows from fire-fighting activities; or



      (4)   Discharges that fall within one of the categories below
that are not a source of pollutants that exceed water quality standards, and
where specified, meet all the conditions stated:



         (a)   Natural flows.



            1.   Stream diversions authorized by the State
board.



            2.   Natural springs and rising groundwater.



            3.   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration.



            4.   Flows from riparian habitats or wetlands,
provided all necessary permits or authorization are received prior to
diverting the stream flow.



         (b)   Flows incidental to urban activities.



            1.   Discharges from potable water sources
provided the flows are:



               (i)   Low volume, incidental, and infrequent
releases that are innocuous from a water quality perspective;



               (ii)   Dechlorinated, pH adjusted if
necessary, re-oxygenated, and both the volume and velocity are controlled to
prevent re-suspension of sediments; and



               (iii)   All sediments must be collected and
disposed of in a legal manner.



            2.   Gravity flow from foundation, footing, and
crawl space drains.



            3.   Discharges from air conditioning condensate
with flow segregated to prevent introduction of pollutants.



            4.   Reclaimed and potable irrigation water runoff
with flow segregated to prevent introduction of pollutants.



            5.   Dechlorinated/debrominated swimming pool
discharges that:



               (i)   Do not have chlorine or bromine
residuals that exceed 0.1 mg/L;



               (ii)   Do not contain any chemicals,
detergents, wastes, or algaecides;



               (iii)   Do not contain cyanuric acid in
excess of 50 ppm;



               (iv)   Do not contain salts or pH levels in
excess of the water quality standards set forth in the municipal storm water
permit;



               (v)   The volume and velocity is controlled
to prevent re-suspension of sediments; and



               (vi)   The cleaning waste water and filter
back wash is not discharged to storm drain system.



         (c)   Non-commercial car washing by residents or
non-profit organizations.



         (d)   Sidewalk rinsing using a high pressure-low volume
of water device with no additives.



         (e)   Pooled storm water from treatment BMPs provided
that:



            1.   The discharge is not a source of pollutants;
and



            2.   Sediments are to be disposed of properly in
compliance with all applicable laws.



(Ord. No. 2459, 2806, 2876)



SEC. 22-219.  SPECIFIC DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   The following discharges are prohibited from entering the storm drain
system:



   (A)   Discharges from the washing or cleaning of gas stations, auto
repair garages, or other types of automotive service facilities.



   (B)   Discharges from mobile auto washing, carpet cleaning, steam
cleaning, sandblasting, and other such mobile commercial and industrial
operations.



   (C)   Discharges from areas where repair of machinery and equipment,
which are visibly leaking oil, fluid or antifreeze, is performed.



   (D)   Discharges from storage areas for materials containing grease,
oil, or other hazardous substances, or uncovered receptacles containing
hazardous materials.



   (E)   Discharges from swimming pools that have a chlorine/bromine
concentration greater than 0.1 mg/L or a chloride concentration greater than
250 mg/L.



   (F)   Discharges from swimming pool filter backwash, decorative
fountains, and ponds.



   (G)   Discharges from industrial/commercial areas, including the
washing or cleaning of restaurant mats.



   (H)   Discharges from stationary or mobile pet grooming facilities.



   (I)   Trash container leachate.



   (J)   Spills, dumping or disposal of pesticide, fungicide,
herbicide, litter, landscape and construction debris, garbage, food, animal
waste, fuel or chemical wastes, batteries, and any other materials that have
the potential to adversely impact water quality.



(Ord. No. 2459, 2876)



SEC. 22-220.  REDUCTION OF POLLUTANTS IN STORM WATER.



   (A)   Discharges of storm water containing pollutants which have not
been reduced to the maximum extent practicable are prohibited.



   (B)   Any person engaged in activities that will or may result in
pollutants entering the storm drain system or watercourses must undertake all
practicable measures to reduce such pollutants.



   (C)   With written concurrence of the regional board, the city may
exempt in writing other non-storm water discharges which are not a source of
pollutants to the storm drain system or watercourses.



(Ord. No. 2459, 2876)



SEC. 22-221.  REDUCTION OF LITTER.



   (A)   Prohibition. No person may throw, deposit, leave, maintain,
keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, kept, or maintained, in or upon any
public or private driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, trail, or
component of the storm drain system or any receiving waters, any refuse,
rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles,
accumulations, or pollutant so that the same may cause or contribute to
pollution.



   (B)   Waste management on residential sites. Waste must be deposited
in a proper receptacle that must be covered to prevent scattering by wind or
animal. Spillage and overflow of wastes around containers must be promptly
cleaned and properly disposed of.



   (C)   Waste management on commercial, industrial sites and private
residential complexes. It is the responsibility of any person owning or
operating any commercial establishment, industrial park, or residential
complex with common areas to procure and place trash receptacles at their own
expense on the premises. Persons placing trash in receptacles must do so in
such manner as to prevent litter from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private
property. Persons owning or occupying a place of business, who sell or offer
for sale food or other goods for immediate consumption wrapped in paper,
plastic, cardboard or other similar disposable materials or containers, must
endeavor to implement a general litter removal program so as to remove litter
generated by such business at least each business day. No person owning or
occupying a place of business may sweep into or deposit in the storm drain
system the accumulation of litter from any building or lot from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
must keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter.



(Ord. No. 2459, 2876)



SEC. 22-222.  CONSTRUCTION DEVELOPMENT.



   Any construction activity that results in a land disturbance that
requires a grading, building, or discretionary permit must be undertaken in
accordance with:



   (A)   Any conditions and requirements established by the municipal
storm water permit or other applicable NPDES permits which are reasonably
related to the reduction or elimination of pollutants in storm water runoff
from the construction site.



   (B)   Any condition or requirement established by the director to
protect specific watersheds or drainage basins.



   (C)   Any construction activity requiring a grading, demolition, or
stockpile permit must include a plan identifying the structural and
non-structural BMPs to be implemented during the construction activity to
reduce pollutants in storm water runoff from the site and prevent
construction site discharges from causing or contributing to a violation of
water quality standards.



      (1)   The storm water runoff plan required for the
construction activity will be based on the area of land to be disturbed by
the construction activity as follows:



         (a)   Any construction activity requiring a grading,
demolition or stockpile permit that results in the disturbance of less than
one acre of land will require the applicant for such permit to submit and
obtain city approval a SWPCP, or equivalent, as required by the municipal
storm water permit.



         (b)   Any construction activity requiring a grading,
demolition or stockpile permit that results in the disturbance of one acre or
greater, will require the applicant for such permit to submit and obtain city
approval of a SWPPP in accordance with the municipal storm water permit and
state general permit.



      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a grading permit or any permit
authorizing construction activity including demolition, clearing, grading,
grubbing, excavation, construction, if required by the state board, or where
the director determines there is a substantial potential for discharge of
significant levels of a pollutant into the storm drain system or receiving
waters, the applicant for such permit must submit and obtain approval for the
required plan based on the area of land disturbed by the construction
activity.



      (3)   Each applicable SWPPP or SWPCP, must name a responsible
person for the project.



      (4)   The owners of a development project, and their
successors and assigns, and each named responsible person, must implement and
adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements of the approved SWPPP or
SWPCP. Any failure to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and
requirements of such plan will constitute a violation of this article.



      (5)   Compliance with the conditions and requirements of a
SWPPP or SWPCP will not exempt any responsible person from the requirement to
comply independently with each provision of this article.



      (6)   Any construction activity requiring a SWPPP or SWPCP
will be inspected a minimum of once during the wet season for the
implementation of storm water quality controls. If the city determines that
the SWPCP or SWPPP has been improperly implemented, a follow-up site
inspection will be conducted by the city within two weeks of the initial
inspection.



      (7)   The city's costs and expenses incurred in the review,
approval, or revision of any SWPPP or SWPCP, as well as for the construction
site inspection and reinspection will be included as part of the applicable
fee for such plans.



(Ord. No. 2459, 2876)



SEC. 22-223.  POST CONSTRUCTION DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   All new development and redevelopment within the city must be
undertaken in accordance with:



      (1)   Any conditions and requirements established by the
municipal storm water permit.



      (2)   Any condition or requirements established by the city to
protect specific watersheds or drainage basins.



   (B)   Applicability of this article to new development and
redevelopment projects will be determined in accordance with the municipal
storm water permit.



   (C)   The following requirements apply to new development and
redevelopment projects that are subject to post-construction storm water
controls:



      (1)   A PCSMP will be required to be submitted.



      (2)   Each PCSMP must:



         (a)   Include the name of the owner or other responsible
person for the project;



         (b)   Illustrate the location of proposed
post-construction storm water controls;



         (c)   Provide engineering calculations and analysis in
accordance with the technical guidance manual that demonstrate that the
post-construction storm water controls will function appropriately;



         (d)   Include an operation and maintenance plan in
accordance with the technical guidance manual. The operation and maintenance
plan must specify a required schedule and requirements for maintenance and
monitoring; and



         (e)   Include a storm water treatment device access and
maintenance agreement on the form provided by the city. The director may
require that the agreement be recorded with the County Recorder's office.



      (3)   The owner or responsible person must implement and
adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements of the approved PCSMP. Each
failure to implement and adhere to the PCSMP will constitute a separate
violation of this article.



      (4)   The city's costs and expenses incurred in the review,
approval or revision of any PCSMP or other related requirements will be
charged to the owner or responsible person of the applicable new development
or redevelopment project as a fee per the applicable city fee resolution.



      (5)   Compliance with the conditions and requirements of a
PCSMP and related maintenance agreement does not exempt any person or
development project from the requirement to comply independently with each
provision of this article.



   (D)   The owner or responsible person of a property with a
post-construction storm water control device must submit to the city an
annual statement on the form provided by the city that certifies that the
post-construction storm water device is being adequately maintained and
functions as designed. If the annual statement is not timely received by the
city, the city may inspect the post-construction storm water device and the
owner or responsible person will be charged a fee per the applicable city fee
resolution for such inspection and any necessary reinspections.



(Ord. No. 2459, 2876)



SEC. 22-224.  BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   (A)   Authorization to adopt and enforce best management
practices.  The director may adopted requirements establishing appropriate
BMPs for any activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of the storm drain system.  If relevant BMPs have
been promulgated by the city or any federal, state or county agency for an
activity, operation or facility that would otherwise cause the discharge of
pollutants to the storm drain system or watercourses, every person
undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility
must implement such BMPs.



   (B)   Responsibility to implement best management practices. Any
person engaged in activities or operations or owning facilities or property
that will or may result in pollutants entering the storm drain system, or
watercourses, as determined by the director, must implement applicable BMPs
to the extent they are technologically and economically achievable to prevent
or reduce such pollutants.



   (C)   Minimum BMPs for particular urban activities.



      (1)   Minimum BMPs for mobile car washes are full containment
under and around the vehicle being washed, capture of all water used in the
washing operation, and hauling of the captured wash water to a legal point of
disposal.



      (2)   Minimum BMPs for building or sidewalk pressure washing
are to use high pressure and low volume of water with no additives at an
average usage of 0.006 gallons per square foot of surface area to be rinsed,
capture all water used in the washing operation, and haul the captured wash
water to a legal point of disposal.



      (3)   Minimum BMPs for landscape irrigation are inspection of
irrigation systems to minimize contact with impervious surfaces, and
segregation of runoff from the irrigated area following treatment (pesticide
or fertilizer application) to prevent introduction of pollutants.



(Ord. No. 2459, 2876)



SEC. 22-225.  COMPLIANCE WITH NPDES PERMIT.



   Each industrial discharger associated with any construction activity,
or any other discharger described in any NPDES permit, must comply with and
undertake all other activities required by any applicable NPDES permit with
regard to such discharges.



(Ord. No. 2459, 2876)



SEC. 22-226.  WATERCOURSE AND STORM DRAIN SYSTEM PROTECTION.



   (A)   Every owner or responsible person for a property, through
which a watercourse or portion of the storm drain system passes, must keep
and maintain the property reasonably free of litter, debris, vegetation and
other obstacles which may contribute pollutants, contaminates or cause a
blockage of the flow of water through the watercourse or storm drain system.



   (B)   Every owner or responsible person for a property must maintain
all existing structures within or adjacent to the storm drain system so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical
integrity of the storm drain system; and, consistent with other laws
regarding riparian habitat protection, may not remove healthy bank vegetation
beyond that actually necessary for such maintenance, not remove any such
vegetation in a manner as to increase the vulnerability of a watercourse to
erosion.



(Ord. No. 2459, 2806, 2876)



SEC. 22-227.  PROHIBITED ACTS AFFECTING WATERCOURSES OR STORM DRAINS.



   No person may commit or cause to be committed any of the following
acts, unless an appropriate permit or approval from all agencies with
jurisdiction over the proposed act or project has first been obtained:



   (A)   The discharge of a pollutant into any pipe or channel to a
watercourse or storm drain system.



   (B)   Modify the natural flow of water in a watercourse or storm
drain system.



   (C)   Deposit in, plant in, or remove any material from a
watercourse or storm drain system including its banks, except as required for
maintenance.



   (D)   Construct, alter, enlarge, connect to, change or remove any
structure in a watercourse or storm drain system.



   (E)   Place any loose or unconsolidated material along the side of
or within a watercourse or storm drain system, or so close to the side as to
cause a diversion of the flow, or to cause a probability of such material
being transported by storm waters passing through a watercourse or storm
drain system.



(Ord. No. 2459, 2876)



SEC. 22-228.  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Right to inspect. Whenever it is necessary to make an
inspection to monitor or enforce any of the provisions of, or perform any
duty imposed by, this article, any permit, SWPCP, or other applicable law, or
whenever the director has reasonable cause to believe there exists upon any
premises, including any mobile or portable vehicles, any violation of the
provisions of this article, any permit, SWPCP, or other applicable law, or
any condition which makes such premises hazardous, unsafe or dangerous, the
director is authorized to enter such property at any reasonable time to
inspect the same and perform any duty imposed upon the director by this
article, or other applicable law.



   (B)   Entry. The director is authorized to enter public or private
property to investigate the source or potential source of a suspected illicit
discharge to a storm drain system or watercourses located within the city at
all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records
related to storm water compliance. Prior to commencing any inspection as
authorized by this article, the director will obtain the consent of the owner
or responsible person for the premises or will obtain an administrative
inspection warrant or criminal search warrant.



   (C)   Records review. The director may examine and copy such records
as is necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this article.



   (D)   Sample and test. The director may inspect, sample and test any
area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge,
materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents),
or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential
for contribution of pollutants to the storm drain system. The director may
investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems or
other pipelines on the property using appropriate tests, including but not
limited to smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The director may take
photographs or videotape, make measurements or drawings and create any other
record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the property.



   (E)   Monitoring. The director may undertake monitoring and analysis
including both the construction and maintenance of devices at the owners'
expense, or require the owner or responsible person to undertake construction
and maintenance of devices, at the owners' expense, for the purpose of
measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the storm drain
system.



   (F)   Test results. The owner or responsible person of property
subject to inspection must provide copies of test results to the city. On
submission of a written request to the director, such person will be entitled
to receive copies of any results of tests conducted by the city.



(Ord. No. 2459, 2876)



SEC. 22-229.  INSPECTIONS OF CRITICAL SOURCE FACILITIES.



   The city will conduct regular inspections of critical facilities in
accordance with the requirements of the municipal storm water permit.  In
order to defray the cost of these mandatory inspections, critical source
facilities are required to pay the applicable inspection fee established by
city council resolution.



(Ord. No. 2459, 2876)



SEC. 22-230.  REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Notice of violation.  The director will review each report of
illicit connection or illicit discharge, and, if appropriate, may serve a
notice of violation to the owner or responsible person of any public or
private property as to which an illicit connection or illicit discharge
exists.  The notice of violation shall:



      (1)   Identify the provision(s) of this article, the
applicable SWPPP, SWPCP, PCSMP, or permit alleged to have been violated;



      (2)   State the continued noncompliance may result in civil,
criminal or administrative enforcement actions;



      (3)   State a compliance date;



      (4)   Describe the manner of abatement required;



      (5)   Order any necessary remediation work; and



      (6)   State that the city may recover its costs of abating the
violation.



   (B)   The notice of violation may include where deemed applicable by
the director, the following:



      (1)   Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as
reasonably necessary to prevent threatened or future unauthorized illicit
discharges, including but not limited to, the threat of an illicit discharge
from any pond, pit, well, surface impoundment, holding or storage area;



      (2)   Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as
reasonably necessary to discontinue any illicit connection;



      (3)   Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal,
storage, installation of overhead covering or proper disposal of any
pollutant having the potential to contact storm water;



      (4)   Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to
prevent continued or threatened violations of this article including, but not
limited to, requirements for compliance with BMPs guidance documents
promulgated by any federal, State or local agency;



      (5)   Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to
achieve full compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of an
applicable SWPPP, SWPCP, PCSMP, or NPDES permit, or this article.



   (C)   Cease and desist orders.



      (1)   The director may issue a cease and desist order where
the public health, safety and/or welfare requires the same, directing the
owner or a responsible person to:



         (a)   Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or
illicit discharge to the storm drain system;



         (b)   Immediately contain or divert any flow of
non-storm water off the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of
this article;



         (c)   Immediately discontinue any other violation of
this article; and



         (d)   Clean up the area affected by the violation.



      (2)   The director may direct by cease and desist order that
the owner or responsible person immediately cease any activity not in
compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the applicable
plan, NPDES permit or this article.  For construction projects and
activities for which a grading or building permit is required a stop work
order may be issued by the director or building and safety official of the
city to ensure corrective actions are made to the satisfaction of the
director.  No construction work may proceed until corrective actions have
been completed to the satisfaction of the director.



      (3)   A cease and desist order will be considered a notice of
violation.



   (D)   Recovery of costs.  The director will serve an invoice for
costs upon the owner or other responsible person who is subject to a notice
of violation or a cease and desist order.  If any owner or other responsible
person fails to pay the invoice for costs, then the city may institute
collection proceedings.



   (E)   Service of notices.  Any notice of violation, cease and
desist order or invoice for costs (collectively, “order”) must be served
pursuant to the requirements of this article and will be subject to the
following:



      (1)   Each order must state that the recipient has a right to
appeal the matter as set forth in this article.



      (2)   The order must include the address of the affected
property and be addressed to the owner as shown on the most recently issued
equalized assessment roll or as may otherwise appear in the current records
of the city.



      (3)   If the owner or other responsible person cannot be
located after the reasonable efforts of the director, the order will be
deemed served ten business days after posting on the property.



   (F)   Emergency abatement. The director is authorized to take any
reasonably necessary precautions including, but not limited to,
decontamination, packaging, dyking and transportation of materials, in order
to protect life, protect property or prevent damage resulting from a
condition which is likely to result in a discharge presenting an imminent
hazard to the public health, safety or welfare; or which, either individually
or in conjunction with other discharges, is an imminent hazard to the city's
storm drain system, the environment or which places the city in violation of
its NPDES permit. In the furtherance of such an operation, city personnel,
any party contracting with the city or a duly authorized representative of
another government agency will have immediate access to the premises. The
director may prohibit access to the scene of such emergency by any person,
vehicle, vessel or thing, and all persons not actually employed in the
extinguishment of the condition or the preservation of lives and property in
the vicinity thereof. Any costs incurred by the city in performing emergency
abatement procedures may be recovered pursuant to subsection (D) of this
section.



   (G)   Consecutive violations. Each day in which a violation occurs
and each separate failure to comply with either a separate provision of this
article, a notice of violation, a cease and desist order, an applicable
SWPPP, SWPCP, PCSMP, or a condition or requirement of a NPDES permit,
constitutes a separate violation.



(Ord. No. 2876)



SEC. 22-231.  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the issuance of an order may appeal
from the issuance of such order in accordance with the following:



      (1)   Any such appeal must be filed in writing within 15 days
of the date of service of the order by the director upon the appealing party.



      (2)   No such appeal will be valid for any purpose unless it
is timely filed with the City Clerk and unless a filing and processing fee is
paid contemporaneously with the filing thereof in an amount as set by city
council resolution.



      (3)   Upon the timely filing of such an appeal, the hearing
officer will set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal as
expeditiously as is possible and notify the appellant in writing of the time
and place of the hearing.



      (4)   At the time of such hearing, the hearing officer will
permit any interested person to present any relevant evidence bearing on the
matters involved in the issuance of the order which is the subject of the
appeal. The hearing officer need not follow the strict provisions of the
rules of evidence as utilized in a judicial proceeding but will follow the
substance of such rule to the end that the decision rendered is based upon
reliable relevant evidentiary material. The hearing officer's decision will
be final and subject only to judicial review.



   (B)   The provisions of Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the California
Code of Civil Procedure set forth the procedure for judicial review of any
action taken by the city pursuant to this article.



(Ord. No. 2876)



ARTICLE XIII.  LANDSCAPE WATER CONSERVATION STANDARDS



SEC. 22-240.  INTRODUCTION.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city to promote water conservation. 
These landscape water conservation standards are intended to promote water
conservation while allowing the maximum possible flexibility in designing
attractive and cost effective water efficient landscapes.



   (B)   These landscape water conservation standards are to be used in
conjunction with the adopted City of Oxnard landscape standards.  Where
conflicts in language may exist between these landscape water conservation
standards and the city's landscape standards, the more restrictive language
shall prevail.



(Ord. No. 2822)



SEC. 22-241.  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Compliance with these landscape water conservation standards
is mandatory for all new or altered landscaping with commercial and
industrial construction projects and residential construction projects that
are subject to review by the planning division and or building and
engineering services. Any project deemed complete by the planning division
after the effective date of this article is subject to the requirements
herein.  Any project submitted to building and engineering services, which
was not deemed complete by the planning division prior to the adoption of
this article, after the adoption of this article is subject to the
requirements herein.



   (B)   Exceptions.



      (1)   These standards shall not be mandatory for individual
private rear yards, enclosed by a fence, of single-family residences, planned
residential groups, and/or other individual residences with a private fenced
back yard, unless required by a discretionary permit.



      (2)   These standards shall not be mandatory for new or
altered single-family residential projects with a total project landscape
area less than or equal to 5,000 square feet.



      (3)   These standards shall not be mandatory for new or
altered developer-installed single-family residential projects with a total
project landscape area less than or equal to 2,500 square feet.



(Ord. No. 2822)



SEC. 22-242.  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   EVAPOTRANSPIRATION (ET) - The approximate summation of water
losses through evaporation from soil and transpiration from the plants during
a specified period of time.



   (B)   EVAPOTRANSPIRATION (ET ) ADJUSTMENT FACTOR - A factor used to
set an efficiency goal, that when applied to ETo adjusts for plant factor and
irrigation efficiency, two of the major influences upon the amount of water
that needs to be applied to a landscape.



   (C)   LANDSCAPE AREA (LA) - All planting areas, turf areas, and
water features where new or altered landscaping is proposed as a part of a
development proposal. The landscape area does not include footprints of
buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios,
gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other
non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and
existing native vegetation).



   (D)   LANDSCAPE PLAN - Design plans with a planting plan, irrigation
plan, and plans with supporting detail sheets to include notes and/or
specifications.



   (E)   PLANT FACTOR - A factor that when multiplied by the ETo,
estimates the amount of water used by a given plant species.



   (F)   REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION (Eto) - The approximation of
water loss from a field of 4-to-7-inch-tall cool season grass that is not
water stressed.



   (G)   SPECIAL LANDSCAPE AREA (SLA) - An area of the landscape
dedicated permanently and solely to edible plants, such as orchards and
vegetable gardens and areas dedicated to active play where turf provides a
playing surface, such as parks, sport fields, golf courses are subject to the
MAWA with an ET adjustment factor not to exceed 1.0.



   (H)   TURF - A groundcover surface of mowed grass with an irrigation
water need of greater than 30% of the ETo.



   (I)   WATER BUDGET CALCULATION - The maximum applied water allowance
(MAWA) shall be calculated using this formula:



            MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [0.7 x LA + 0.3 x SLA]



            MAWA   =   Maximum applied water allowance
(maximum gallons per year available for the project)



            ETo      =   Reference evapotranspiration
(42.3) inches per year for Oxnard)



            0.7      =   ET adjustment factor (as
designated by the State of California)



            LA      =   Landscape area (square feet,
including SLA)



            0.62      =   Conversion factor (to gallons)



            SLA      =   Special landscape area (square
feet)



            0.3      =   The additional ET adjustment
factor for the special landscape area



   (J)   WATER WISE PLANTS - Those plants that are evaluated as needing
"moderate" (40-60% of ETo), "low" (10-30% of ETo) and "very low" (< 10% of
ETo) amounts of water as defined and listed by water use classifications of
landscape species (WUCOLS) available at:



   Department of Water Resources



   Bulletins and Reports



   P.O. Box 942836



   Sacramento, California 94236-0001



   (916) 653-1097



Other sources of water wise plant classifications may be used if approved by
the city.



   (K)   WEATHER BASED IRRIGATION CONTROLLER - An irrigation controller
that automatically adjusts the irrigation schedule based on changes in the
weather.



(Ord. No. 2822)



SEC. 22-243.  COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   Applicants proposing new or altered landscaping shall comply with each
of the following requirements in the design, installation, and maintenance of
the landscaped area unless an exception is granted pursuant to Section 22-244.



   (A)   Landscape plan.  Applicants shall submit a landscape plan
depicting the landscaped area and all existing landscaping to remain on the
lot as determined by the development services department. Landscaping shall
be designed to be irrigated at no more than 0.7 of the reference
evapotranspiration (ETo) and shall not exceed the MAWA.  The city reserves
the right to require modifications to plans in quantity and quality of the
landscape to meet the landscape water conservation standards requirements.



   (B)   Use of turf and water wise plants.



      (1)   The landscape area of projects proposing commercial or
industrial uses shall be designed without the use of turf and with 100% water
wise plants. The exception to this is where a turf type is specified for any
required bio-swale or bio-filter systems.



      (2)   Turf is the appropriate choice in parkways where vehicle
parking is permitted adjacent to the parkway curb. The parkways may include a
maximum of two non-permanent hardscape areas where space permits.  The
non-permanent hardscape area can be pervious pavers, decomposed granite,
brick on sand, concrete pavers or other materials approved by the development
services director or designee and may serve as a pedestrian landing between
the parkway curb and the sidewalk.  Each non-permanent hardscape area may be
no larger than 4'-0" in width and be installed and sized in such a manner
that it can be easily removed should the city or utility company need to do
work in the parkway in the future. The pedestrian landing area must be a
minimum of 5'-0" away from the street tree and 3'-0" away from any meter
boxes, cable boxes, transformers, street lights, or other objects that may be
in the parkway.



      (3)   Where parking is not permitted adjacent to the parkway
curb, the parkway shall be designed using 100% water wise plants.



      (4)   The landscape area of single-family residential,
multi-family residential, and institutional type of projects shall be
designed with no more than 40% of the landscaped area in turf or plants that
are not water wise plants.  In the case of single-family residences and
other residences with a rear yard that is enclosed by a fence separate from
any other residence's rear yard or common area, the area to be used in the
calculation of the "landscape area" shall only include the front yards and
any side yard outside the individual dwelling unit's private area (typically,
a rear yard). Approved turf parkways are not a part of the 40% turf
limitation.



      (5)   Turf is not permitted in medians or parking lot
landscape finger planters.



      (6)   Turf shall not be used on slopes of 20% (5:1) or greater
within the landscape area.



      (7)   Notwithstanding requirements (1) and (2) above,
additional turf areas may be approved by the development services director or
designee for areas designed and used for outdoor sporting and recreational
activities or for an approved functional use.  Approved turf areas may be
watered at 1.0 of the reference evapotranspiration (ETo).



   (C)   Mulch.  The landscape area, except those portions of the
landscaped area planted in turf shall be covered with mulch material to an
average thickness of at least three inches throughout.  In areas with
groundcovers planted from flats, mulch shall be installed to an average
thickness of one and one-half inches.  Additional mulch material shall be
added from time to time as necessary in order to maintain the required depth
of mulch.



   (D)   Irrigation.  All new or altered irrigation systems which
require a planning or building permit, whether or not new or altered
landscaping is proposed, shall incorporate the following requirements in
their design, installation and maintenance:



      (1)   Irrigation systems shall be designed and installed to
avoid overspray and runoff.



      (2)   Valves shall be separated for individual hydrozones
based on plant water needs and sun/shade requirements.



      (3)   Water budget calculations (Sec. 22-242(J)) shall be
shown on irrigation plans.



      (4)   An automatic irrigation system is required and shall
include a weather based irrigation controller with a rain shut-off sensor.



      (5)   Areas less than eight feet wide are a particular
challenge and shall be irrigated with appropriately selected equipment that
provides the proper amount of water coverage without causing overspray onto
paved surfaces.



      (6)   All sprinklers shall have matched precipitation rates
within each valve and circuit. All irrigation systems shall be designed to
include optimum distribution uniformity, head to head spacing and setbacks
from walkways and pavement.



      (7)   All irrigation systems shall provide check valves at the
low end of irrigation lines to prevent unwanted draining of irrigation lines.



      (8)   Pressure regulators may be required on the irrigation
system as determined by the development services director or designee.



      (9)   Irrigation systems shall be installed and irrigation
controllers shall be programmed to comply with current city code regarding
water conservation and/or water waste.



      (10)   All landscaping serviced by a dedicated landscape
irrigation account shall be enrolled in the city's landscape water budget
program. This program promotes ongoing effective management of irrigation
water in new and existing landscapes by providing a periodic comparison of
actual water used to a designated water budget.



(Ord. No. 2822)



SEC. 22-244.  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Adopted and implemented specific plans including Mandalay Bay,
McInnes Ranch, Northwest Community, Northfield Seagate, Northeast Community,
Northwest Golf Course, RiverPark, and Rose-Santa Clara need not comply with
these standards. However, if the properties within the specific plan area
would like to voluntarily comply with the standards they may do so as long as
the streetscape section maintains a cohesive, harmonious appearance (i.e. if
all parkways currently have turf, one property may not elect to put
groundcover in the parkway adjacent to their property), as determined by the
development services director or designee.



   (B)   Exceptions to these landscape water conservation standards may
be granted by the city upon finding that the exceptions will promote
equivalent or greater water conservation than is provided for in these
standards.  Requests for exceptions shall be in writing and shall be
submitted to the development services director or designee at the time the
application is submitted to either the planning division or building and
engineering department.  Requests for exceptions must be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the finding of equivalent or greater water
conservation can be made.



(Ord. No. 2822)



SEC. 22-245.  BUILDING AND ENGINEERING PLAN CHECK SUBMITTALS.



   (A)   Applicants shall provide all relevant information on the
landscape plan, including botanical names for plants and turf species,
percentage calculations of allowable areas of turf, low, medium or high water
use plants, and water-wise plants, water budget calculations, monthly
irrigation schedule and specific requests for any exceptions to the
requirements of these landscape water conservation standards.  Areas of
existing landscaping to remain unaltered shall be indicated on the landscape
plan.



   (B)   The landscape plan shall be prepared in accordance with the
provisions of the Cal. Business and Professions Code relating to the practice
of landscape architecture (Cal. Business and Professional Code, Section 5641
et seq.)



   (C)   The landscape plan shall include a "statement of compliance"
in a form approved by the city certifying that the landscape design complies
with the mandatory elements of these landscape water conservation standards.
The statement of compliance shall be signed by the state licensed landscape
architect or the state licensed architect who prepared the plans.



(Ord. No. 2822)



SEC. 22-246.  DETERMINATION OF CONFORMING INSTALLATION.



   (A)   The state licensed landscape architect or the state licensed
architect who prepared the landscape plan shall inspect the installation of
the landscaping and any irrigation system included in the plan and shall
certify in writing that the installation substantially conforms to the
approved landscape plan and that the irrigation controller is programmed
appropriately. This shall be done prior to a permanent certificate of
occupancy being issued.



   (B)   At the discretion of the city, an irrigation audit shall be
performed to verify that the irrigation system is performing at an efficient
level consistent with the approved plans.



(Ord. No. 2822)



SEC. 22-247.  COMPLIANCE VERIFICATION.



   Verification of compliance with the landscape water conservation
standards, as applicable, shall be made by the development services
department in accordance with the following requirements:



   (A)   No building permit shall be issued unless the statement of
compliance required by Sec. 22-245(C) has been included on the final
landscape plan submitted to building and engineering services for plan check
approval.



   (B)   No building permit shall be given a final landscape inspection
or issued a permanent certificate of occupancy until the development services
inspector or designee receives a written certification of conforming
installation as required by Sec. 22-246.



(Ord. No. 2822)



CHAPTER 23:  CABLE, VIDEO, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   23-1.   Title



   23-2.   Purpose and intent



ARTICLE II.  CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS



   23-10.   Authority and findings



   23-11.   Cable franchise terms and conditions



   23-12.   Franchise applications and renewal



   23-13.   Contents of cable television franchise agreements



   23-14.   Consumer protection and service standards



ARTICLE III.  OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS



   23-25.   Applicability



   23-26.   Application required



   23-27.   Review of the application



   23-28.   Agreement required



ARTICLE IV.  OTHER VIDEO AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES AND SYSTEMS



   23-40.   Other multichannel video programming distributors



   23-41.   Video providers - registration; customer service standards



   23-42.   Antennas for communications services



   23-43.   Telecommunications service provided by telephone
corporations



   23-44.   State video franchisees



ARTICLE V.  DEFINITIONS



   23-55.   Defined terms and phrases



ARTICLE VI.  VIOLATIONS; SEVERABILITY



   23-65.   Violations; enforcement



   23-66.   Severability



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SEC. 23-1.  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be cited as the "Cable, Video, and
Telecommunications Service Providers Ordinance."



(Ord. No. 2650)



SEC. 23-2.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The city council finds and determines as follows:



      (1)   The development of cable, video, and telecommunications
services and systems may provide significant benefits for, and have
substantial impacts upon, the residents of the city.



      (2)   Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology
associated with cable, video, and telecommunications services and systems,
the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by the
city's exercise of its regulatory powers over such services and systems.



      (3)   This chapter adopts provisions that authorize the city
to regulate cable, video, and telecommunications service providers to the
extent authorized by federal and State law, including but not limited to the
federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the federal Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, applicable regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), and applicable State statutes and
regulations.



      (4)   The cable, video, and telecommunications services that
are addressed in this chapter include services provided by cable television
systems, open video systems, master antenna television systems, satellite
master antenna television systems, direct broadcast satellite systems,
multichannel multipoint distribution systems, local multipoint distribution
systems, and other providers of video programming, whatever the technology,
as well as voice and data services provided by telephone corporations.



   (B)   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to attain the
following objectives:



      (1)   To enable the city to discharge its public trust in a
manner consistent with rapidly evolving federal and State regulatory
policies, industry competition, and technological development.



      (2)   To authorize and to manage reasonable access to the
city's public rights-of-way and public property for cable, video, and
telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory
basis.



      (3)   To obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the city
and its residents for authorizing the private use of the public rights-of-way
and public property.



      (4)   To promote competition in cable, video, and
telecommunications services, minimize unnecessary local regulation of cable,
video, and telecommunications service providers, and encourage the delivery
of advanced and competitive cable, video, and telecommunications services on
the broadest possible basis to local government and to the businesses,
institutions, and residents of the city.



      (5)   To establish clear local guidelines, standards, and time
frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of
cable, video, and telecommunications service providers.



      (6)   To encourage the deployment of advanced cable, video,
and telecommunications infrastructure that satisfies local needs, delivers
enhanced government services, and provides informed consumer choices in an
evolving cable, video, and telecommunications marketplace.



      (7)   To maintain and to enhance public, educational, and
governmental programming opportunities that will enable local government to
communicate with its residents and to provide its residents with alternate
means of disseminating information.



(Ord. No. 2650)



ARTICLE II.  CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS



SEC. 23-10.  AUTHORITY AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   In accordance with federal and State law, the city is
authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct,
reconstruct, operate, and maintain cable television systems within the city
limits.



   (B)   The city council finds that the development of cable
television and related telecommunications services may provide significant
benefits for, and substantial impacts upon, the residents of the city.
Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable
television, the city council further finds that the public convenience,
safety, and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory
powers to be exercised by the city.



   (C)   This article is intended to specify the means for providing to
the public the best possible cable television services, and every franchise
issued in accordance with this article II is intended to achieve this primary
objective. The further intent of this article is to adopt regulatory
provisions that will enable the city to regulate cable television services to
the maximum extent authorized by federal and State law.



(Ord. No. 2650)



SEC. 23-11.  CABLE FRANCHISE TERMS AND CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Franchise purposes.  A franchise granted by the city under
the provisions of this article may authorize the grantee to do the following:



      (1)   To engage in the business of providing cable television
services that are authorized and/or required by law and that the grantee
elects to provide to its subscribers within the designated franchise service
area.



      (2)   To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild,
reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic
equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in
connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon,
along and across streets and public rights-of-way within the designated
franchise service area.



      (3)   To maintain and operate the franchise properties for the
origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of
television and radio signals, and for the delivery of cable services and such
other services as may be authorized by law.



   (B)   Franchise required.  No person shall construct, install, or
operate a cable television system within any street or public way in the city
without first obtaining a franchise under the provisions of this article.



   (C)   Term of the franchise.



      (1)   A franchise granted under this article will be for the
term specified in the franchise agreement, commencing upon the effective date
of the resolution adopted by the city council that authorizes the franchise.



      (2)   A franchise granted under this article may be renewed
upon application by the grantee in accordance with the then applicable
provisions of the agreement, State and federal law and this article.



   (D)   Franchise service area.  A franchise is effective within the
territorial limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during
the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the resolution
granting the franchise or in the franchise agreement.



   (E)   Federal or State jurisdiction.  This article will be
construed in a manner consistent with all federal and State laws, and this
article applies to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date
of this chapter, to the extent authorized by law.



   (F)   Franchise non-transferable.



      (1)   The grantee may not sell, transfer, lease, assign,
sublet, or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary
sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation, or otherwise, the
franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the
prior written consent of the city council.



      (2)   Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign, or
otherwise dispose of the franchise without the written consent of the city
council is null and void. The granting of a security interest in any assets
of the grantee, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, will not be deemed a
transfer for the purposes of this subsection.



      (3)   The requirements of subsections (1) and (2) apply to any
change in control of the grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not
limited to the ownership of major stockholder or partnership interests, but
includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised.



      (4)   If the grantee is a partnership or a corporation, prior
authorization of the city council is required where ownership or control of
25% or more of the partnership interests or of the voting stock of the
grantee, or any company in the tier of companies controlling the grantee,
whether directly or indirectly, is acquired by a person or a group of persons
acting in concert, none of whom, singularly or collectively, owns or controls
those partnership interests or that voting stock of the grantee, or of the
grantee's upper tier of controlling companies, as of the effective date of
the franchise.



      (5)   The grantee must give prior written notice to the city
manager of any proposed transfer, including a foreclosure or judicial sale,
of all or a substantial part of the grantee's franchise property, physical
plant or equipment. That notification will be considered by the city as
notice that a change in control of ownership of the franchise will take
place, and the provisions of this section that require the prior written
consent of the city council to a change in control of ownership shall apply
to the transfer of property, physical plant or equipment.



      (6)   For the purpose of determining whether to consent to an
acquisition, transfer, or change in control, the city council may inquire
about the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party,
and the grantee must assist the city in that inquiry.



      (7)   In seeking the city council's consent to any change of
ownership or control, the grantee or the proposed transferee, or both, must
complete FCC Form 394 or its equivalent. This application must be submitted
to the city manager not less than 120 days prior to the proposed date of
transfer.



      (8)   The transferee must establish to the reasonable
satisfaction of the city council that the transferee possesses the legal,
financial, and technical capability to operate and maintain the cable system
and to comply with all franchise requirements during the remaining term of
the franchise.



      (9)   Any financial institution holding a pledge of the
grantee's assets to secure the advance of money for the construction or
operation of the franchise property has the right to and shall notify the
city that the financial institution, or a designee satisfactory to the city,
will take control of and operate the cable television system upon the
grantee's default in its financial obligations. Further, that financial
institution must also submit to the city a plan for such operation within 90
days after assuming control.



      (10)   The plan must insure continued service and compliance
with all franchise requirements during the period that the financial
institution will exercise control over the system. The financial institution
may not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year
unless authorized by the city council, in its sole discretion, and during
that period of time the financial institution will have the right to petition
the city council to transfer the franchise to another grantee.



      (11)   Unless prohibited by law, the grantee must reimburse
the city for the city's reasonable review and processing expenses incurred in
connection with any transfer or change in control of the franchise. These
expenses may include, without limitation, costs of administrative review,
financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee,
consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by
these experts), notice and publication costs, and document preparation
expenses. The total amount of these reimbursable expenses may be subject to
maximum limits that are specified in the franchise agreement between the city
and the grantee. No reimbursement may be offset against any franchise fee
payable to the city during the term of the franchise.



   (G)   Geographical coverage.



      (1)   Unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement,
the grantee must design, construct, and maintain the cable television system
to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit and commercial building in
the franchise service area, subject to any service-area line extension
provisions or territorial restrictions which are negotiated and set forth in
the franchise agreement.



      (2)   After service has been established by activating trunk
or distribution cables for any service area, the grantee must provide service
to any requesting subscriber within that activated part of the service area
within seven days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able
to secure on reasonable terms and conditions all rights-of-way and permits
necessary to extend service to that subscriber within that seven-day period.



   (H)   Nonexclusive franchise.  Every franchise granted is
nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time,
such additional franchises for a cable television system that the city
council deems appropriate, subject to State and federal law. If an additional
franchise is proposed to be granted to a subsequent grantee, a noticed public
hearing shall first be held if required by the provisions of Cal. Gov’t
Code, Section 53066.3.



   (I)   Multiple franchises.



      (1)   The city council may grant any number of franchises,
subject to State and federal law. The city council may limit the number of
franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the
requirements of law and the following specific local considerations:



         (a)   The capacity of the public rights-of-way to
accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits, and pipes of
the existing utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, and
wastewater.



         (b)   The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a
result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service.



         (c)   The disadvantages that may result from cable
system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on
residents' property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations
within the public rights-of-way.



      (2)   Any new grantee shall be responsible for its own
underground trenching and the associated costs. If in the city manager's
opinion, the rights-of-way in any particular area cannot reasonably
accommodate additional cables, the grantee must obtain an alternate route or
right of way from the city manager.



(Ord. No. 2650)



SEC. 23-12.  FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS AND RENEWAL.



   (A)   Filing of applications.



      (1)   Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable
television system must file an application with the city manager. An
application fee deposit in an amount of $50,000 must accompany the
application. That application fee deposit will cover all reasonably
anticipated costs associated with reviewing and processing the application,
including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial,
legal, and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including
technical and legal experts and all costs reasonably incurred by those
experts), notice and publication requirements, and document preparation
expenses.



      (2)   If actual costs exceed the application fee deposit, the
applicant must pay the difference to the city within 30 days following
receipt of an itemized statement of those costs. If actual costs are less
than the application fee deposit, the remaining balance will be refunded to
the applicant.



      (3)   The fee does not include permit, plan check, inspection
and other fees associated with performance of construction work in the city.



   (B)   Applications; contents.  An application for an initial
franchise for a cable television system must contain, as applicable:



      (1)   A statement describing the proposed franchise service
area and an explanation whether this proposed service area is, or will be, a
part of a larger regional cluster of franchise service areas.



      (2)   A resume of the applicant's prior history, including the
experience and expertise of the applicant in the cable television industry.



      (3)   (a)   A list of the partners, general and limited, of
the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or
controlled by each stockholder, if a closely held corporation.



         (b)   If the applicant is a publicly owned partnership
or corporation, each owner of 10% or more of the partnership interests, or of
the issued and outstanding capital stock, must be identified.



         (c)   If the applicant is a limited liability company,
the following information must be provided: the address of its principal
executive office; the name and business or residence address of each member
and of each holder of an economic interest in the limited liability company,
together with the contribution and the share in profits and losses of each
member and holder of an economic interest; the name and business or residence
address of any manager or managers and the chief executive officer, if any,
appointed or elected in accordance with the articles of organization or
operating agreement.



      (4)   A list of officers and directors of the applicant,
together with a description of the background and qualifications of each such
person.



      (5)   A statement specifying the number of people employed by
the applicant, whether on a full- time or part-time basis.



      (6)   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of
the applicant, or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant
in whole or in part, or that is owned or controlled in whole or in part by
the applicant.



      (7)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant's
financial ability to:



         (a)   Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new
physical plant that is proposed to be constructed in the city.



         (b)   Comply with the city's public, educational, and
governmental access requirements.



         (c)   Comply with the city's requirement that franchise
fees be paid on the applicant's gross revenues derived from the operation of
the cable system.



      (8)   An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the city that the applicant intends to use,
to purchase, or to lease.



      (9)   A description of the cable services and any other
services that will be offered by the applicant using existing or proposed
facilities.



      (10)   The proposed construction and service schedule, the
proposed rate structure for cable services, and the proposed commitment to
provide public, educational, and governmental access capacity, services,
facilities, and equipment.



      (11)   Any additional information that the city manager deems
to be reasonably necessary to evaluate the applicant's qualifications.



   (C)   Consideration of initial applications.



      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise,
the city manager must prepare a report and make recommendations to the city
council concerning that application.



      (2)   A public hearing will be noticed prior to any initial
franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the city council. Within 30
days after the close of the hearing, the city council will make a decision,
based upon the documents and testimony received at the hearing, whether the
franchise should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The
city council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any
franchise.



   (D)   Franchise renewal.



      (1)   Franchise renewals will be processed in accordance with
then-applicable law and with the renewal terms, if any, of the franchise
agreement. The city manager and the grantee, by mutual consent, may enter
into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise.



      (2)   Unless prohibited by law, a renewal application fee
deposit in an amount of $15,000 must accompany the renewal application or the
renewal request. That renewal application fee deposit will cover all
anticipated costs associated with reviewing and processing the renewal
application, including the review of the grantee's prior compliance with the
franchise, the ascertainment of the community's cable related needs and
interests, the engagement of technical and legal consultants, and expenses
related to negotiations and document preparation.



      (3)   If actual costs exceed the renewal application fee
deposit, the grantee must pay the difference to the city within 30 days
following receipt of an itemized statement of those costs. If actual costs
are less than the renewal application fee deposit, the remaining balance will
be refunded to the grantee.



      (4)   No renewal application fee may be offset against any
franchise fee payable to the city during the term of the franchise.



      (5)   The city council may authorize the renewal of a cable
television franchise agreement by resolution.



(Ord. No. 2650)



SEC. 23-13.  CONTENTS OF CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   The provisions of a franchise agreement for the operation of a
cable television system may relate to or include, without limitation, the
following subject matters:



      (1)   The geographical area, duration and nonexclusive nature
of the franchise.



      (2)   The applicable franchise fee to be paid to the city,
including the percentage amount, the method of computation, and the time for
payment.



      (3)   Requirements relating to compliance with and
implementation of State and federal laws and regulations pertaining to the
operation of the cable television system.



      (4)   Requirements relating to the construction, upgrade, or
rebuild of the cable television system, as well as the provision of special
services, such as outlets for public buildings, emergency alert capability,
and parental control devices.



      (5)   Requirements relating to the maintenance of a
performance bond, a security fund, a letter of credit, or similar assurances
to secure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise
agreement.



      (6)   Requirements relating to comprehensive liability
insurance, workers' compensation insurance, and indemnification.



      (7)   Requirements relating to consumer protection and
customer service standards, which requirements may include, without
limitation, compliance with the statutes, rules and regulations set forth in
this article.



      (8)   Requirements relating to the grantee's support of local
cable usage, including the provision of public, educational, and governmental
access channels, the coverage of public meetings and special events, and
financial support for public, educational, and governmental access channels.



      (9)   Requirements relating to the grantee's obligation to
provide an institutional network, and channel capacity on that institutional
network for educational or governmental use, subject to the city's rules and
procedures for the use of such channel capacity and for compatibility with
any telecommunications network that has been or may be developed by the city.



      (10)   Requirements relating to construction, operation, and
maintenance of the cable television system within the city's streets and
public rights-of-way, including compliance with all building codes and permit
requirements of the city, the abandonment, removal, or relocation of
facilities, and compliance with FCC technical standards.



      (11)   Requirements relating to record keeping, accounting
procedures, reporting, periodic audits, and performance reviews, and the
inspection of the grantee's books and records.



      (12)   Acts or omissions constituting material breaches of or
defaults under the franchise agreement, and the applicable penalties or
remedies for those breaches or defaults, including fines, penalties,
liquidated damages, suspension, revocation, and termination.



      (13)   Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or other
transfer or change in control of the franchise.



      (14)   The grantee's obligation to maintain continuity of
service and to authorize, under certain specified circumstances, the city's
operation and management of the cable system.



      (15)   Provisions relating to the ownership, disposition, or
removal of the cable television system upon termination or expiration of the
franchise.



      (16)   Such additional requirements, conditions, policies, and
procedures that may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the franchise
agreement and that will, in the judgment of the city council, best serve the
public interest and protect the public health, welfare, and safety.



   (B)   If there is any conflict or inconsistency between the
provisions of a franchise agreement authorized by the city council and
provisions of this article, the provisions of the franchise agreement will
control.



(Ord. No. 2650)



SEC. 23-14.  CONSUMER PROTECTION AND SERVICE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Operational standards.



      (1)   The grantee shall maintain the necessary facilities,
equipment, and personnel to comply with, at a minimum, the following consumer
protection and service standards under normal operating conditions.



         (a)   Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity
during normal business hours to ensure that telephone calls are answered
before the fourth ring. Telephone answer time by a customer service
representative, including wait time, may not exceed 30 seconds when the
connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time must
not exceed 30 seconds.



         (b)   A caller must receive a busy signal less than 3%
of the time.



         (c)   Emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a
24-hour basis, including weekends and holidays. After normal business hours,
the telephone calls may be answered by a service or an automated response
system, including an answering machine. Calls received after normal business
hours must be responded to by a trained representative on the next business
day.



         (d)   A conveniently located local business and service
or payment office open during normal business hours at least eight hours
daily on weekdays, and at least four hours weekly on evenings or weekends,
and adequately staffed with trained customer service representatives to
accept subscriber payments and to respond to service requests, inquiries, and
complaints.



         (e)   An emergency system maintenance and repair staff,
capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunctions on a 24-hour
per day basis.



         (f)   A trained installation staff must provide service
to any subscriber requiring a standard installation within seven business
days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable
have been activated.



         (g)   The grantee must schedule, within a specified
four-hour time period Monday through Saturday (legal holidays excluded), all
appointments with subscribers for installation of service, service calls, and
other activities at the subscriber's location. The grantee may schedule
installation and service calls outside of normal business hours for the
convenience of the subscriber.



         (h)   The grantee may not cancel an appointment with a
subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the
scheduled appointment. If a grantee representative is delayed in keeping an
appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to honor the scheduled
appointment, the subscriber must be contacted prior to the time of the
scheduled appointment, and the appointment must be rescheduled, as necessary,
at a time that is convenient for the subscriber.



         (i)   The grantee must undertake appropriate quality
control measures to ensure that the customer is satisfied with the work.



         (j)   Subscribers who have experienced one missed
appointment due to the fault of the grantee will receive an installation free
of charge if the appointment was for an installation. If an installation was
to have been provided free of charge, and for all other appointments, the
subscriber will receive a credit of $20 or one month basic service level
charge, whichever is more.



         (k)   Subscribers also will be entitled to receive a
credit of $20 or one month basic service level charge, whichever is more, as
provided above, if the grantee fails to complete a standard installation
within seven days of receiving an installation request due to its fault, its
failure to schedule an appointment within a specified four-hour time period,
or its failure to notify the subscriber that the grantee's representative
will be late for an appointment.



         (l)   Subscribers who have experienced two missed
appointments due to the fault of the grantee will receive two months of the
subscribed-to service tier, free of charge, in addition to the free
installation or free month of service provided for the first missed
appointment.



         (m)   Upon a subscriber's request, the grantee will
arrange for pickup or replacement of converters or other equipment provided
by the grantee at the subscriber's address within 14 days after the request
is made if the subscriber is mobility-limited.



      (2)   Under normal operating conditions, the standards of
subparagraphs (a), (c), (f), (g), (h) and (i) above must be met not less than
90% of the time, measured on a quarterly basis.



   (B)   Service standards.



      (1)   The grantee will render efficient service, make repairs
promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time
possible. Except in emergency situations, scheduled interruptions will occur
during a period of minimum use of the cable system, preferably between
midnight and 6:00 a.m. Unless the scheduled interruption lasts for no more
than two hours and occurs between midnight and 6:00 a.m. (in which event 24
hours' prior notice must be given to the city), 48 hours' prior notice must
be given to subscribers.



      (2)   The grantee will maintain a repair force of technicians
who will respond to subscriber requests for service within the following time
frames:



         (a)   For a system outage: Within two hours, including
weekends, after receiving subscriber calls or requests for service that by
number identify a system outage of sound or picture on one or more channels,
affecting five or more subscribers to the system.



         (b)   For an isolated outage: Within 24 hours, including
weekends, after receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage
of sound or picture on one or more channels.



         (c)   For inferior signal quality: No later than the
following business day, excluding Sundays and holidays, after a request for
service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality.



      (3)   The grantee will be deemed to have responded to a
request for service under the provisions of this paragraph (B) when a
technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. If
a subscriber is not home when the technician arrives, the technician must
leave written notification of arrival, if the problem cannot be solved from a
remote location.



      (4)   The grantee may not charge for the repair or replacement
of defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by the grantee to
subscribers, unless the defect or malfunction was caused by the subscriber.



      (5)   The grantee must determine the nature of the problem
within 24 hours after commencing work and resolve all cable system related
problems within three business days, unless technically infeasible.



   (C)   Billing and information standards.



      (1)   Subscriber bills must be clear, concise, and
understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including,
but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges.
Bills also must clearly delineate all activity during the billing period,
including optional charges, rebates, and credits.



      (2)   The first billing to a subscriber after a new
installation or service change must be prorated based upon when the new or
changed service commenced. Subscribers must not be charged a late fee or
otherwise penalized for any failure attributable to the grantee, including
the failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber.



      (3)   In case of a billing dispute, the grantee must respond
in writing to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days after
receiving the complaint at the office specified on the billing statement for
receiving that complaint.



      (4)   Upon request by a subscriber, credits or refunds must be
provided by the grantee to subscribers who experience an outage,
interruption, or disconnection of service of four or more consecutive hours,
provided that such loss of service is neither caused by the subscriber nor
attributable to scheduled repairs, maintenance, or construction in
circumstances where the grantee has provided advance written notice to
subscriber, and the loss of service does not exceed the time period specified
by the grantee.



      (5)   For subscribers terminating service, credits or refunds
must be issued promptly, but no later than 30 days after the return of any
grantee-supplied equipment.



      (6)   The grantee must provide written information on each of
the following matters at the time of the installation of service, at least
annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:



         (a)   Products and services offered.



         (b)   Prices and options for programming services and
conditions of subscription to programming and other services.



         (c)   Installation and service maintenance policies.



         (d)   Instructions on the use of the cable service.



         (e)   Channel positions of programming carried on the
system.



         (f)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the
address and telephone number of the city's office designated for dealing with
cable-related issues.



         (g)   Consumer protection and service standards and
penalties for noncompliance.



      (7)   Subscribers must be notified in writing of any changes
in rates, programming services, or channel positions as soon as possible.
Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of those
changes if the change is within the control of the grantee. In addition, the
grantee will notify the grantor in writing at least five working days before
subscribers are notified in advance of any significant changes in the
information required above in subsection (6).



      (8)   The grantee must maintain a public file containing all
written notices provided to subscribers under these consumer protection and
service standards and all published promotional offers made by the grantee to
subscribers. These documents must be maintained for a minimum period of two
years.



   (D)   Verification of compliance with standards.



      (1)   Upon 30 days prior written notice, the city manager may
require the grantee to provide a written report demonstrating its compliance
with any of the consumer service standards specified in this section. The
grantee must provide sufficient documentation to enable the city to verify
compliance.



      (2)   A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with
the consumer protection and service standards of this section, after the
grantee's receipt of written notice and an opportunity to cure, may be deemed
a material breach of the franchise agreement.



   (E)   Subscriber complaints and disputes.



      (1)   The grantee must establish written procedures for
receiving, acting upon, and resolving subscriber complaints without
intervention by the city. The written procedures must prescribe the manner in
which a subscriber may submit a complaint, either orally or in writing,
specifying the subscriber's grounds for dissatisfaction. The grantee must
file a copy of these procedures with the city manager. These procedures must
include a requirement consistent with section 23-14(C)(3).



      (2)   Upon request, and subject to law protecting subscriber
privacy rights, the city manager has the right to review the grantee's
response to subscriber complaints.



      (3)   All subscribers have the right to continue receiving
service so long as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are
honored. If the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or if
the city gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise,
the grantee must act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive service
while the franchise remains in force.



      (4)   Upon a change of control of the grantee, or if a new
operator acquires the cable system, the original grantee must cooperate with
the city, the new grantee, or the new operator in maintaining continuity of
service to all subscribers.



   (F)   Disconnection and downgrades.



      (1)   A subscriber may terminate or downgrade service at any
time, and the grantee must promptly comply with the subscriber's request
within five days or at any later time requested by the subscriber. No period
of notice prior to voluntary termination or downgrade of service may be
required of subscribers. Grantee will impose no charges for the voluntary
termination of service unless a visit to the subscriber's premises is
required to remove a converter box or other equipment or property owned by
the grantee.



      (2)   The grantee may disconnect a subscriber's service in
compliance with paragraphs (i), (j), and (k) of Section 53088.2 of the Cal.
Gov’t Code. If service is disconnected for nonpayment of past due fees or
charges, the grantee must promptly reinstate service upon payment in full by
the subscriber of all such fees and charges, including late charges.



      (3)   Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (2)
above, the grantee may immediately disconnect service to a subscriber if the
subscriber is damaging or destroying the grantee's cable system or equipment.



      (4)   The grantee may also disconnect service to a subscriber
when service causes signal leakage exceeding federal limits. If service is
disconnected, and the leakage is not caused by the subscriber, the grantee
will immediately resume service without charge upon the satisfactory
correction of the signal leakage problem.



      (5)   Upon termination of service to a subscriber, the grantee
will remove its equipment, not to include converter boxes, from the
subscriber's premises within 30 days if the subscriber so requests. The
customer will in no event be charged for a converter box upon termination of
service. The equipment will be deemed abandoned if it is not removed within
such time period unless the grantee has been denied access to the
subscriber's premises.



   (G)   Changes in service.  Except as otherwise provided by law,
subscribers must not be required to pay any additional fee or charge, other
than the regular service fee, in order to receive the services selected. No
charge may be imposed for any service or equipment that the subscriber has
not affirmatively selected. Payment of the regular monthly bill will not by
itself constitute an affirmative selection.



   (H)   Deposits.  The grantee may require a reasonable,
nondiscriminatory deposit on equipment provided to subscribers. The grantee
shall place such deposits in an interest-bearing account. The deposit must be
returned, with interest earned to the date of repayment, within 30 days after
the equipment is returned to the grantee.



   (I)   Parental control option.  The grantee must provide parental
control devices at no charge to all subscribers who desire to block the video
or audio portion of any pay channels that the subscriber finds objectionable.
For other programming, such devices will be provided at no charge to the
subscriber, unless otherwise required by law, or unless a converter box is
required to be installed for the purpose of providing the parental control
device.



   (J)   Additional requirements.



      (1)   All officers, agents, and employees of the grantee, or
of its contractors or subcontractors, who, in the normal course of work, come
into contact with members of the public, or who require entry onto
subscribers' premises, must carry a photo-identification card in a form
approved by the city manager. The grantee must account for all identification
cards at all times.



      (2)   All vehicles of the grantee or its subcontractors must
be clearly identified as vehicles engaged in providing services for the
grantee.



      (3)   In addition to the consumer protection and service
standards specified in this section, the grantee must comply with all
applicable consumer protection and service standards that are imposed upon
cable operators by the following:



         (a)   Federal statutes, and the rules, regulations, and
orders of the FCC, including the following:



            1.   The provisions of Section 76.630 of Title 47
of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), as it now exists or may later be
amended, which relate to compatibility with consumer electronics equipment.



            2.   The provisions of Section 551 of Title 47,
United States Code, as it now exists or may later be amended, which relate to
the protection of subscriber privacy.



         (b)   The provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code, Sections
53054 et seq., entitled the "Cable Television and Video Provider Customer
Service and Information Act."



         (c)   The provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 53088
et seq., entitled the "Video Customer Service Act."



         (d)   The provisions of Cal. Civil Code, Section
1722(b)(1)-(6), which relate to service or repair transactions between cable
television companies and their subscribers.



         (e)   The provisions of Cal. Penal Code, Section 637.5,
which relate to subscribers' rights to privacy protection.



         (f)   All other applicable provisions of State law.



      (4)   If there is any conflict or inconsistency between a
consumer protection and service standard specified in this section, and a
standard set forth in the statutes, rules, regulations, and orders that are
referenced above in subsection (3), then the standard that is specified in
this section will apply to the extent authorized by law.



   (K)   Penalties for noncompliance.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to authorize
monetary penalties for the violation of the customer service standards
established by this section in a manner consistent with the Video Customer
Service Act (Cal. Gov’t Code, Sections 53088 et seq.) and pursuant to the
city's inherent police powers. The imposition of penalties authorized by this
section will and does not prevent the city or any other affected party from
exercising any other remedy to the extent permitted by law.



      (2)   Administration and appeals.



         (a)   The city manager is authorized to administer this
paragraph. Decisions by the city manager to assess monetary penalties against
the grantee must be in writing and must contain findings supporting the
decisions. Decisions by the city manager are final.



         (b)   If the grantee or any interested person is
aggrieved by a decision of the city manager, the aggrieved party may appeal
that decision in writing to the city council. The appeal letter must be
accompanied by a fee of $1,500 for processing the appeal, unless prohibited
by applicable law.



         (c)   The city council may affirm, modify, or reverse
the decision of the city manager. The procedures governing the appeal shall
be those pertaining to appeal of decisions of the Planning Commission.



      (3)   Schedule of penalties.  The following schedule of
monetary penalties may be assessed against the grantee for the material
breach of the provisions of the customer service standards set forth in this
section, provided that the breach is within the reasonable control of the
grantee:



         (a)   For a first material breach: The maximum penalty
is $200 for each day of material breach, but not to exceed a cumulative total
of $600 for each occurrence of the material breach.



         (b)   For a second material breach of the same nature
within a 12-month period for which the city has provided notice and a penalty
has been assessed: The maximum penalty is $400 for each day of the material
breach, but not to exceed a cumulative total of $1,200 for each occurrence of
the material breach.



         (c)   For a third or further material breach of the same
nature within a 12-month period for which the city has provided notice and a
penalty has been assessed: The maximum penalty is $1,000 for each day of the
material breach, but not to exceed a cumulative total of $3,000 for each
occurrence of the material breach.



         (d)   The maximum penalties referenced above may be
increased by any additional amount authorized by State law.



      (4)   Judicial remedy.  This section does not preclude any
affected party from pursuing any judicial remedy available to that party
without regard to this section.



      (5)   Notification of breach.  The city must give the grantee
written notice of any alleged breach of the consumer service standards and
allow the grantee at least 30 days, or such longer time as may be reasonably
necessary to cure, upon receipt of the notice to remedy the specified breach.
For the purpose of assessing penalties, a material breach is deemed to have
occurred for each day, following the expiration of the period for cure
specified herein, that any breach has not been remedied by the grantee,
irrespective of the number of subscribers affected.



      (6)   Limitations.  With respect to any grantee that operates
under a franchise or license agreement with the city, any monetary penalties
assessed under this section will be reduced dollar for dollar to the extent
that any liquidated damage or penalty provision of the franchise or license
agreement imposes a monetary obligation on the grantee for the same customer
service failure, and the grantee pays such monetary obligations.



(Ord. No. 2650)



ARTICLE III.  OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS



SEC. 23-25.  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this article apply to an open video system operator,
as defined below, that intends to deliver video programming to consumers in
the city over an open video system.



(Ord. No. 2650)



SEC. 23-26.  APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Before commencing the delivery of video programming services
to consumers in the city over an open video system, the open video system
operator must file an application with the city. That application must
include or be accompanied by the following, as applicable:



      (1)   The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates
of the applicant.



      (2)   Copies of FCC Form 1275, all "Notices of Intent" filed
under 47 CFR 76.1503(b)(1), and the Order of the FCC, all of which relate to
certification of the applicant to operate an open video system in the city in
accordance with Section 653(a)(1) of the Communications Act and the FCC's
rules.



      (3)   The area or areas of the city that the applicant desires
to serve.



      (4)   A description of the open video system services that
will be offered by the applicant over its existing or proposed facilities.



      (5)   A description of the transmission medium that will be
used by the applicant to deliver the open video system services.



      (6)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the
applicant's technical qualifications, experience, and expertise regarding the
ownership and operation of the open video system described in the application.



      (7)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant's
financial ability to:



         (a)   Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new
physical plant that is proposed to be constructed in the city.



         (b)   Comply with the city's public, educational, and
governmental access requirements, as specified below.



         (c)   Comply with the city's requirement that gross
revenue fees be paid in the maximum amount authorized under federal law, as
specified below.



      (8)   An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the city that the applicant intends to use,
to purchase, or to lease.



      (9)   If the applicant's operation of the open video system
will require the construction of new physical plant and facilities in the
city, the following additional information must be provided:



         (a)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion
dates.



         (b)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications, and
a network map of any new facilities to be constructed in the city, in
sufficient detail to identify:



            1.   The location and route requested for the
applicant's proposed facilities.



            2.   The locations, if any, for interconnection
with the facilities of other telecommunications service providers.



            3.   The specific structures, improvements,
facilities, and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to add,
remove, or relocate on a temporary or permanent basis.



         (c)   The applicant's statement that, in constructing
any new physical plant, the applicant will comply with all ordinances, rules,
and regulations of the city, including the payment of all required permit and
processing fees.



      (10)   The information and documentation that is required to
be submitted to the city by a video provider, as specified below.



      (11)   Such additional information as may be requested by the
city manager.



      (12)   A deposit in an amount of $50,000.



   (B)   If any item of information specified above in subsection (A)
is determined under law to be unlawful, the city manager is authorized to
waive the requirement that such information be included in the application.



(Ord. No. 2650)



SEC. 23-27.  REVIEW OF THE APPLICATION.



   Within 30 days after receipt of an application filed under section
23-26 that is deemed to be complete, the city manager will give written
notice to the applicant of the city manager's intent to negotiate an
agreement setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of
the proposed open video system will be authorized by the city council. The
commencement of those negotiations will be on a date that is mutually
acceptable to the city manager and to the applicant.



(Ord. No. 2650)



SEC. 23-28.  AGREEMENT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No video programming services may be provided in the city by
an open video system operator unless the operator and the city have executed
a written agreement, which may be designated as a franchise, setting forth
the terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open video
system will be authorized and approved by resolution of the city council.



   (B)   The agreement between the city and the open video system
operator may contain terms and conditions that relate to the following
subject matters, to the extent that such terms, conditions, and subject
matters are not preempted by federal law or regulations:



      (1)   The nature, scope, and duration of the agreement,
including provisions for its renewal or extension.



      (2)   The obligation of the open video system operator to pay
to the city, at specified times and in lieu of the franchise fees permitted
under Section 622 of the Communications Act, fees on the gross revenue
received by the operator, as authorized by 47 CFR 76.1511, in accordance with
the following standards and procedures:



         (a)   The amount of the fees on the gross revenue will
be the maximum amount authorized by Section 653(c)(2)(B) of the
Communications Act, which is the rate imposed by the city on the existing
franchised cable operator.



         (b)   The term "gross revenue" has the meaning set forth
in 47 CFR 76.1511, and includes:



            1.   All gross revenue received by an open video
system operator or its affiliates, including all revenue received from
subscribers and all carriage revenue received from unaffiliated video
programming providers; and



            2.   All advertising revenue received by the
operator or its affiliates in connection with the provision of video
programming, where such revenue is included in the calculation of the cable
franchise fee paid to the city by the franchised cable operator. The term
"gross revenue" does not include revenue, such as subscriber or advertising
revenue, collected by unaffiliated video programming providers.



      (3)   The obligation of the open video system operator to
comply with requirements relating to information collection and record
keeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits, and inspection of
records in order to ensure the accuracy of the fees on the gross revenue that
are required to be paid as specified above in subsection (2).



      (4)   The obligation of the open video system operator to meet
the city's requirements with respect to public, educational, and governmental
access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment, as provided for
in 47 CFR 76.1505. In this regard, the following standards and procedures are
applicable:



         (a)   The open video system operator is subject to the
same public, educational, and governmental access requirements that apply
within the cable television franchise service area with which its system
overlaps.



         (b)   The open video system operator must ensure that
all subscribers receive all public, educational, and governmental access
channels within the franchise service area in which the city's subscribers
are located.



         (c)   The open video system operator may negotiate with
the city to establish the operator's obligations with respect to public,
educational, and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities,
and equipment. These negotiations may include the city's franchised cable
operator if the city, the open video system operator, and the franchised
cable operator so desire.



         (d)   If the open video system operator and the city are
unable to reach an agreement regarding the operator's obligations with
respect to public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity,
services, facilities, and equipment within the city's jurisdiction, then the
following obligations will be imposed:



            1.   The open video system operator must satisfy
the same public, educational, and governmental access obligations as the
city's franchised cable operator by providing the same amount of channel
capacity for public, educational, and governmental access and by matching the
city's franchised cable operator's annual financial contributions in support
of public, educational, and governmental access services, facilities, and
equipment that are actually used by the city or other users.



            2.   For in-kind contributions, such as cameras or
production studios, the open video system operator may satisfy its statutory
obligation by negotiating mutually agreeable terms with the city's franchised
cable operator, so that public, educational, and governmental access services
to the city are improved or increased. If such terms cannot be agreed upon,
the open video system operator must pay to the city the monetary equivalent
of the franchised cable operator's depreciated in-kind contribution, or, in
the case of facilities, the annual amortization value. Any matching
contributions provided by the open video system operator must be used to fund
activities arising under Section 611 of the Communications Act.



            3.   The city will impose upon the open video
system operator the same rules and procedures that the city imposes upon the
franchised cable operator with regard to the open video system operator's use
of channel capacity designated for public, educational, and governmental
access use when that capacity is not being used for such purposes.



         (e)   The city's franchised cable operator is required
under federal law to permit the open video system operator to connect with
its public, educational, and governmental access channel feeds. The open
video system operator and the franchised cable operator may decide how to
accomplish this connection, taking into consideration the physical and
technical characteristics of the cable and the open video systems involved.



         (f)   If the franchised cable operator and the open
video system operator cannot agree on how to accomplish the connection, the
city has the right to decide. The city may require that the connection occur
on city-owned property or on public rights-of-way.



         (g)   All costs of connection to the franchised cable
operator's public, educational, and governmental access channel feed must be
borne by the open video system operator. These costs will be counted towards
the open video system operator's matching financial contributions set forth
above.



         (h)   The city will not impose upon the open video
system operator any public, educational, or governmental access obligations
that are greater than those imposed upon the franchised cable operator.



         (i)   If there is no existing franchised cable operator,
the provisions of 47 CFR 76.1505(d)(6) will be applicable in determining the
obligations of the open video system operator.



         (j)   The open video system operator must adjust its
system to comply with new public, educational, and access obligations imposed
on the city's franchised cable operator following a renewal of the cable
television franchise; provided, however, that the open video system operator
will not be required to displace other programmers using its open video
system to accommodate public, educational, and governmental access channels.
The open video system operator must comply with such new public, educational,
and governmental access obligations whenever additional capacity is or
becomes available, whether additional capacity is due to increased channel
capacity or to decreased demand for channel capacity.



      (5)   If the city and the open video system operator cannot
agree on the application of the FCC's rules regarding the open video system
operator's obligations to provide public, educational, and governmental
access under the provisions of subsection (4) set forth above, then either
party may file a complaint with the FCC in accordance with the dispute
resolution procedures set forth in 47 CFR 76.1514. No agreement will be
executed by the city until the dispute has been finally resolved.



      (6)   If the open video system operator intends to maintain an
institutional network, as defined in Section 611 (f) of the Communications
Act, the city will require that educational and governmental access channels
be designated on that institutional network to the same extent that those
channels are designated on the institutional network of the city's franchised
cable operator.



      (7)   The authority of an open video system operator to
exercise editorial control over any public, educational, or governmental use
of channel capacity will be restricted in accordance with the provisions of
47 CFR 76.1505(f).



      (8)   The obligation of the open video system operator to
comply with all federal, State, and local statutes, ordinances, and
regulations relating to customer service standards, including those specified
in article II of this chapter.



      (9)   If a new physical plant is proposed to be constructed
within the city, the open video system operator shall comply with the
following rights-of-way use and management responsibilities that are also
imposed by the city upon other cable television and telecommunications
service providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner:



         (a)   Compliance with the City Code, regulations and
standards including all ordinances relating to street excavations, including
making applications for excavation, encroachment, and construction permits,
and the payment of all required permit and inspection fees.



         (b)   The coordination of construction activities.



         (c)   Compliance with established standards and
procedures for constructing lines across private property.



         (d)   Compliance with all insurance and indemnification
requirements.



         (e)   Compliance with all public safety requirements
that are applicable to cable television and telecommunications service
providers and others using public property or public rights-of-way.



      (10)   Acts or omissions constituting breaches or defaults of
the agreement, and the applicable penalties, liquidated damages, and other
remedies, including fines or the suspension, revocation, or termination of
the agreement.



      (11)   Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or
transfer of the open video system.



      (12)   Requirements relating to the open video system
operator's compliance with and implementation of State and federal laws,
rules, and regulations pertaining to the operation of the open video system.



      (13)   Such additional requirements, conditions, terms,
policies, and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the city and the
open video system operator and that will, in the judgment of the city
council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health,
welfare, and safety.



(Ord. No. 2650)



ARTICLE IV.  OTHER VIDEO AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES AND SYSTEMS



SEC. 23-40.  OTHER MULTICHANNEL VIDEO PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTORS.



   (A)   The term "cable system," as defined in federal law and as set
forth in section 23-55 below, does not include a facility that serves
subscribers without using any public rights-of-way.



   (B)   The categories of multichannel video programming distributors
identified below are not deemed to be "cable systems" and are therefore not
subject to the city's franchise requirements of certain other local
regulatory provisions authorized by federal law, provided that the video
programming distributor's distribution or transmission facilities do not
involve the use of the city's public rights-of-way:



      (1)   Multichannel multipoint distribution service ("MMDS"),
also known as "wireless cable," which typically involves the transmission by
an FCC-licensed operator of numerous broadcast stations from a central
location using line-of-sight technology.



      (2)   Local multipoint distribution service ("LMDS"), another
form of over-the-air wireless video service for which licenses are auctioned
by the FCC, and which offers video programming, telephony, and data
networking services.



      (3)   Direct broadcast satellite ("DBS"), also referred to as
"direct-to-home satellite services," which involves the distribution or
broadcasting of programming or services by satellite directly to the
subscriber's premises without the use of ground receiving or distribution
equipment, except at the subscriber's premises or in the uplink process to
the satellite.



      (4)   Local regulation of direct-to-home satellite services is
further proscribed by the following federal statutory provisions:



         (a)   47 U.S.C. section 303(v) confers upon the FCC
exclusive jurisdiction to regulate the provision of direct-to-home satellite
services.



         (b)   Section 602 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996
states that a provider of direct-to- home satellite service is exempt from
the collection or remittance, or both, of any tax or fee imposed by any local
taxing jurisdiction on direct-to-home satellite service.



         (c)   The terms "tax" and "fee" are defined by federal
statute to mean any local sales tax, local use tax, local intangible tax,
local income tax, business license tax, utility tax, privilege tax, gross
receipts tax, excise tax, franchise fees, local telecommunications tax, or
any other tax, license, or fee that is imposed for the privilege of doing
business, regulating, or raising revenue for a local taxing jurisdiction.



(Ord. No. 2650)



SEC. 23-41.  VIDEO PROVIDERS - REGISTRATION; CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Unless the customer protection and service obligations of a
video provider, as that term is defined in section 23-55, are specified in a
franchise, license, lease, or similar written agreement with the city, a
video provider must comply with these State statutes:



      (1)   The Cable Television and Video Customer Service and
Information Act (Cal. Gov’t Code, Sections 53054 et seq.)



      (2)   The Video Customer Service Act (Cal. Gov’t Code,
Sections 53088 et seq.)



   (B)   All video providers that are operating in the city on the
effective date of this chapter, or that intend to operate in the city after
the effective date of this chapter, must register with the city manager;
provided, however, that this registration requirement is not applicable to
any video provider that has executed a franchise, license or lease or similar
written agreement with the city. The registration form must include or be
accompanied by the following:



      (1)   The video provider's name, address, and local telephone
numbers.



      (2)   The names of the officers of the video provider.



      (3)   A copy of the video provider's written policies and
procedures relating to customer service standards and the handling of
customer complaints, as required by Cal. Gov’t Code, Sections 53054 et seq.
These customer service standards must include, without limitation, standards
regarding the following:



         (a)   Installation, disconnection, service and repair
obligations, employee identification, and service call response time and
scheduling.



         (b)   Customer telephone and office hours.



         (c)   Procedures for billing, charges, refunds, and
credits.



         (d)   Procedures for termination of service.



         (e)   Notice of the deletion of a programming service,
the changing of channel assignments, or an increase in rates.



         (f)   Complaint procedures and procedures for bill
dispute resolution.



         (g)   The video provider's written acknowledgment of its
obligation under Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 53055.1 to provide to new
customers a notice describing the customer service standards specified above
in subsections (a) through (f) at the time of installation or when service is
initiated. The notice must also include, in addition to all of the
information described above in subsections (a) through (f), all of the
following:



            1.   A listing of the services offered by the
video provider that clearly describes all levels of service and the rates for
each level of service.



            2.   The telephone number or numbers through which
customers may subscribe to, change, or terminate service, request customer
service, or seek general or billing information.



            3.   A description of the rights and remedies that
the video provider may make available to its customers if the video provider
does not materially meet its customer service standards.



         (h)   The video provider's written commitment to
distribute annually to its employees and customers, and to the city, a notice
describing the customer service standards specified above in subsections (a)
through (f). This annual notice must include the report of the video provider
on its performance in meeting its customer service standards, as required by
Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 53055.2.



         (i)   Subject to the written notice and cure provisions
of Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 53056(b), a video provider that fails to
distribute the annual notice required by Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 53055.1
will be assessed a monetary penalty in the sum of $500 for each year in which
the annual notice is not distributed to all of its customers.



      (4)   Unless a video provider is exempt under federal law from
its payment, a registration fee in an amount established by resolution of the
city council to cover the reasonable costs incurred by the city in reviewing
and processing the registration form.



      (5)   In addition to the registration fee specified above in
subsection (4), the written commitment of the video provider to pay to the
city, when due, all costs and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in
resolving any disputes between the video provider and its subscribers, which
dispute resolution is mandated by Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 53088.2(o).



   (C)   The customer service obligations imposed upon video providers
by the Video Customer Service Act (Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 53088 et seq.)
consist of the following:



      (1)   Every video provider must render reasonably efficient
service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only as necessary.



      (2)   All video provider personnel contacting subscribers or
potential subscribers outside the office of the provider must be clearly
identified as associated with the video provider.



      (3)   At the time of installation, and annually thereafter,
all video providers must provide to all customers a written notice of the
programming offered, the prices for that programming, the provider's
installation and customer service policies, and the name, address, and
telephone number of the city's office that is designated for receiving
complaints.



      (4)   All video providers must have knowledgeable, qualified
company representatives available to respond to customer telephone inquiries
Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, during normal business hours.



      (5)   All video providers must provide to customers a
toll-free or local telephone number for installation, service, and complaint
calls. These calls must be answered promptly by the video providers.



      (6)   All video providers must render bills that are accurate
and understandable.



      (7)   All video providers must respond promptly to a complete
outage in a customer's service. The response must occur within 24 hours of
the reporting of that outage to the provider, except in those situations
beyond the reasonable control of the video provider. A video provider will be
deemed to respond to a complete outage when a company representative arrives
at the outage location within 24 hours and begins to resolve the problem.



      (8)   All video providers must provide a minimum of 30 days'
written notice before increasing rates or deleting channels. All video
providers must make every reasonable effort to submit the notice to the city
manager in advance of its distribution to customers.



      (9)   The 30-day notice is waived if the increases in rates or
deletion of channels are outside the control of the video provider. In those
cases, the video provider must make reasonable efforts to provide customers
with as much notice as possible.



      (10)   All video providers must allow every residential
customer who pays his/her bill directly to the video provider at least 15
days from the date the bill for services is mailed to the customer, to pay
the listed charges unless otherwise agreed to pursuant to a residential
rental agreement establishing tenancy. Customer payments must be posted
promptly.



      (11)   No video provider may terminate residential service for
nonpayment of a delinquent account unless the video provider furnishes notice
of the delinquency and impending termination at least 15 days prior to the
proposed termination. The notice must be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
customer to whom the service is billed. The notice must not be mailed until
the 16th day after the date the bill for services was mailed to the customer.
The notice of delinquency and impending termination may be part of a billing
statement. No video provider may assess a late fee any earlier than the
twenty-second day after the bill for service has been mailed.



      (12)   Every notice of termination of service pursuant to
subsections (10) and (11) must include all of the following information:



         (a)   The name and address of the customer whose account
is delinquent.



         (b)   The amount of the delinquency.



         (c)   The date by which payment is required in order to
avoid termination of service.



         (d)   The telephone number of a representative of the
video provider who can provide additional information and handle complaints
or initiate an investigation concerning the service and charges in question.



         (e)   Service may only be terminated on days in which
the customer can reach a representative of the video provider either in
person or by telephone.



      (13)   Any service terminated without good cause must be
restored without charge for the service restoration. Good cause includes, but
is not limited to, failure to pay, payment by check for which there are
insufficient funds, theft of service, abuse of equipment or system personnel,
or other similar subscriber actions.



      (14)   All video providers must issue requested refund checks
promptly, but no later than 45 days following the resolution of any dispute,
and if service is terminated, following the return of the equipment supplied
by the video provider.



      (15)   All video providers must issue security or customer
deposit refund checks promptly, but no later than 45 days following the
termination of service, less any deductions permitted by law.



      (16)   Video providers must not disclose the name and address
of a subscriber for commercial gain to be used in mailing lists or for other
commercial purposes not reasonably related to the conduct of the businesses
of the video providers or its affiliates, unless the video providers have
provided to the subscriber a notice, separate or included in any other
customer notice, that clearly and conspicuously describes the subscriber's
ability to prohibit that disclosure. Video providers must provide an address
and telephone number for a local subscriber to use without toll charge to
prevent disclosure of the subscriber's name and address.



   (D)   As authorized by Cal. Gov’t Code, Section 53088(q), the
following schedule of penalties is adopted. These penalties may be imposed
for the material breach by a video provider of the consumer protection and
service standards that are set forth above, provided that the breach is
within the reasonable control of the video provider. These penalties are in
addition to any other remedies authorized by this chapter or by any other
law, and the city manager has discretion to elect the remedy that applies.
The imposition of penalties authorized by this section (D) will not prevent
the city or any other affected party from exercising any other remedy to the
extent permitted by law, including but not limited to any judicial remedy.



      (1)   The following is the schedule of penalties for material
breach of the consumer protection and service standards.



         (a)   For a first material breach: The maximum penalty
is $200 for each day of material breach, but not to exceed a cumulative total
of $600 for each occurrence of material breach, irrespective of the number of
customers affected.



         (b)   For a second material breach of the same nature
for which a monetary penalty was previously assessed within the preceding
12-month period: The maximum penalty is $400 per day, not to exceed a
cumulative total of $1,200 for each occurrence of the material breach,
irrespective of the number of customers affected.



         (c)   For a third or further material breach of the same
nature for which a monetary penalty was previously assessed within the
preceding 12-month period: The maximum penalty is $1,000 per day, not to
exceed a cumulative total of $3,000 for each occurrence of the material
breach, irrespective of the number of customers affected.



         (d)   The maximum penalties referenced above may be
increased by any additional amount authorized by State law.



      (2)   The imposition of penalties in accordance with the
provisions of subsection (1) above does not preclude any affected party from
pursuing any judicial remedy that is available to that party.



      (3)   (a)   The city manager is authorized to administer
section 23-41(D). Decisions by the city manager to assess penalties against a
video provider must be in writing and must contain findings supporting the
decisions. Decisions by the city manager are final.



         (b)   If the video provider or any interested person is
aggrieved by a decision of the city manager, the aggrieved party may appeal
that decision in writing to the city council. The appeal letter must be
accompanied by a fee of $1,500 for processing the appeal. The city council
may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the city manager. The
procedures governing the appeal shall be those pertaining to appeal of
decisions of the Planning Commission.



         (c)   The imposition of monetary penalties under
subsection (1) above is subject to the following requirements and limitations:



            1.   The City must give the video provider written
notice of any alleged material breach and must allow the video provider at
least 30 days from receipt of that notice to remedy the breach.



            2.   For the purpose of assessing monetary
penalties, a material breach will be deemed to have occurred for each day
following the expiration of the period for cure specified in subsection 1.
above that the material breach has not been remedied by the video provider,
irrespective of the number of customers affected.



(Ord. No. 2650)



SEC. 23-42.  ANTENNAS FOR COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.



   Article V of Chapter 16 (section 16-485et seq.) of the Oxnard City Code
sets forth the regulatory requirements that apply to telephone corporations
and other utility service providers with regard to the placement and
construction of various categories of antennas, including wireless
communications antenna facilities, that are commonly used in transmitting or
receiving communications services.



(Ord. No. 2650)



SEC. 23-43.  TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDED BY TELEPHONE CORPORATIONS.



   (A)   The city council finds and determines as follows:



      (1)   The federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 preempts and
declares invalid all State rules that restrict entry or limit competition in
both local and long-distance telephone service.



      (2)   The California Public Utilities Commission ("CPUC") is
primarily responsible for the implementation of local telephone competition.
The CPUC issues certificates of public convenience and necessity to new
entrants that are qualified to provide competitive local telephone exchange
services and related telecommunications service, whether using their own
facilities or the facilities or services provided by other authorized
telephone corporations.



      (3)   Section 234(a) of the Cal. Pub. Util. Code defines a
"telephone corporation" as "every corporation or person owning, controlling,
operating, or managing any telephone line for compensation within this state."



      (4)   Section 616 of the Cal. Pub. Util. Code provides that a
telephone corporation "may condemn any property necessary for the
construction and maintenance of its telephone line."



      (5)   Section 2902 of the Cal. Pub. Util. Code authorizes
municipal corporations to retain their powers of control to supervise and
regulate the relationships between a public utility and the general public in
matters affecting the health, convenience, and safety of the general public,
including matters such as the use and repair of public streets by any public
utility and the location of the poles, wires, mains, or conduits of any
public utility on, under, or above any public streets.



      (6)   Section 7901 of the Cal. Pub. Util. Code authorizes
telephone and telegraph corporations to construct telephone or telegraph
lines along and upon any public road or highway, along or across any of the
waters or lands within this State, and to erect poles, posts, piers, or
abutments for supporting the insulators, wires, and other necessary fixtures
of their lines, in such manner and at such points as not to incommode the
public use of the road or highway or interrupt the navigation of the waters.



      (7)   Section 7901.1 of the Cal. Pub. Util. Code confirms the
right of municipalities to exercise reasonable control as to the time, place,
and manner in which roads, highways, and waterways are accessed, which
control must be applied to all entities in an equivalent manner. Nothing in
Section 7901.1 adds to or subtracts from any existing authority that
municipalities have with respect to the imposition of fees.



      (8)   Section 50030 of the Cal. Gov’t Code provides that any
permit fee imposed by a city for the placement, installation, repair, or
upgrading of telecommunications facilities, such as lines, poles, or
antennas, by a telephone corporation that has obtained all required
authorizations from the CPUC and the FCC to provide telecommunications
services, must not exceed the reasonable costs of providing the service for
which the fee is charged, and must not be levied for general revenue purposes.



   (B)   In recognition of and in compliance with the statutory
authorizations and requirements set forth above in subsection (A), the
following regulatory provisions are applicable to a telephone corporation
that desires to provide telecommunications service by means of facilities
that are proposed to be constructed within the city's public rights-of-way:



      (1)   The telephone corporation must apply for and obtain, as
may be applicable, an excavation permit, an encroachment permit, building
permit or other permit required by this Code ("construction permit"), and
comply with all city ordinances, resolutions, and construction standards in
connection with construction or repair in the public right of way.



      (2)   In addition to any other information required by this
Code in connection with an application for a construction permit, a telephone
corporation must submit to the city manager, upon request, the following
supplemental information:



         (a)   A copy of the certificate of public convenience
and necessity issued by the CPUC to the applicant, and a copy of the CPUC
decision that authorizes the applicant to provide the telecommunications
service for which the facilities are proposed to be constructed in the city's
public rights-of-way. Any applicant that, prior to 1996, provided
telecommunications service under administratively equivalent documentation
issued by the CPUC may submit copies of that documentation in lieu of a
certificate of public convenience and necessity.



         (b)   If the applicant has obtained from the CPUC a
certificate of public convenience and necessity to operate as a "competitive
local carrier," the following additional requirements are applicable:



            1.   As required by Decision No. 95-12-057 of the
CPUC, the applicant must establish that it has timely filed with the city a
quarterly report that describes the type of construction and the location of
each construction project proposed to be undertaken in the city during the
calendar quarter in which the application is filed, so that the city can
coordinate multiple projects, as may be necessary.



            2.   If the applicant's proposed construction
project will extend beyond the utility rights-of-way into undisturbed areas
or other rights-of-way, the applicant must establish that it has filed a
petition with the CPUC to amend its certificate of public convenience and
necessity and that the proposed construction project has been subjected to a
full-scale environmental analysis by the CPUC, as required by Decision No.
95-12-057 of the CPUC.



            3.   The applicant must inform the city whether
its proposed construction project will be subject to any of the mitigation
measures specified in the Negative Declaration ["Competitive Local Carriers
(CLCs) Projects for Local Exchange Communication Service throughout
California"] or to the Mitigation Monitoring Plan adopted in connection with
Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC.



            4.   The city's issuance of a construction permit
will be conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with all applicable
mitigation measures and monitoring requirements imposed by the CPUC upon
telephone corporations that are designated as "competitive local carriers."



   (C)   The city reserves all rights that it now possesses or may
later acquire with respect to the regulation of any cable or
telecommunications service that is provided, or proposed to be provided, by a
telephone corporation. These reserved rights may relate, without limitation,
to the imposition of reasonable conditions in addition to or different from
those set forth in this section, the exaction of a fee or other form of
consideration or compensation for use of public rights-of-way, and related
matters; provided, however, that such regulatory rights and authority must be
consistent with federal and State law that is applicable to cable or
telecommunications services provided by telephone corporations.



   (D)   The city council finds and determines that numerous and
repetitive excavations in the public rights-of-way diminish the useful life
of the surface pavement and generally cause adverse negative impacts for
local residents, local businesses, and vehicular and pedestrian traffic. The
city council further finds and determines that the utility substructure in
the public rights-of-way is subject to potential adverse negative impacts as
a consequence of new economic and regulatory policies that foster increased
competition between various utility service providers, including telephone
corporations.



   (E)   In order to mitigate these potential adverse negative impacts,
all utility service providers, including telephone corporations, and any
other person or entity desiring to make an excavation in the public right of
way shall comply with all city ordinances, resolutions, and construction
standards governing excavations in the public right-of-way.



   (F)   The city council further finds and determines that the
installation in the public rights-of-way of numerous aboveground facilities
by utility service providers, including telephone corporations, may create
safety hazards and adverse visual impacts. All such providers are subject to
all city ordinances, resolutions and construction standards pertaining to any
such installation.



(Ord. No. 2650)



SEC. 23-44.  STATE VIDEO FRANCHISEES.



   (A)   PEG fee established.



      (1)   In accord with Cal. Pub. Util. Code Section 5870(n), any
grantee of a franchise, or state franchisee, must pay to the city a fee for
the support of PEG channel facilities. 



      (2)   The amount of the PEG Fee established by this section is
1% of gross revenues, as defined in this code, the applicable city-issued
franchise, or Cal. Pub. Util. Code Section 5860(d).



      (3)   Commencing from and after April 10, 2018, the city’s
PEG fee set forth in this section shall continue to apply to any new or
existing franchisee operating in the city and shall automatically be
reauthorized upon the expiration of any existing or future state video
franchise(s) held by any state- franchised video service provider operating
within the city. This fee shall so renew until such time that the city
council takes formal affirmative action to cease the renewals.



   (B)   Franchise fee established. 



      (1)   For any state franchisee, the amount of the franchise
fee imposed by Cal. Pub. Util. Code Section 5840(q) shall be 5% of gross
revenues, as defined in Cal. Pub. Util. Code Section 5860(d).



      (2)   In accordance with Cal. Pub. Util. Code Section 5860(a),
the City Manager will prepare and provide to state franchisees all necessary
documentation supporting the percentage franchise fee paid by the incumbent
cable operator serving the city.



   (C)   Notices from state franchisees. Any notice a state franchisee
is required to deliver to the city by Cal. Pub. Util. Code Section 5840(m)
must be delivered to the City Manager.



   (D)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit or restrict in
any way the imposition of any existing or future generally applicable,
nondiscriminatory, competitively neutral tax, fee, or charge to a state
franchisee, city franchisee or the services the franchisees provide.



   (E)   Customer service provisions for state franchisees.



      (1)   All state franchisees must comply with all applicable
state and federal laws and regulations regarding customer service and
customer protection.



      (2)   The City Manager may review the performance of state
franchisees for compliance with the customer service requirements specified
in Cal. Pub. Util. Code Section 5900 (the “Customer Service Standards”).



      (3)   If the city believes a material breach of the customer
service standards has occurred, the City Manager must give the state
franchisee written notice of any alleged material breach(es). The state
franchisee must remedy the specified material breach(es) no later than 30
days from receipt of the notice.



      (4)   If the state franchisee fails to remedy the specified
material breach(es) within 30 days. the City Manager may impose monetary
penalties on the following schedule:



         (a)   Up to $500 for each day of each material breach,
not to exceed $1,500 for each occurrence of a material breach.



         (b)   For a second material breach of the same nature
within 12 months, up to $1,000 for each day of each material breach, not to
exceed $3,000 for each occurrence of the material breach.



         (c)   For a third or further material breach of the same
nature within 12 months, up to $1,000 for each day of each material breach,
not to exceed $3,000 for each occurrence of the material breach.



      (5)   Any monetary penalty imposed under this section may be
appealed by the state franchisee to the City Council. Appeals must be
received in writing by the City Clerk within  60 days of imposition of the
penalty. The state franchisee may present any relevant written or oral
evidence of its choice. The City Council may uphold or reverse, in whole or
in part, the imposition of the monetary penalties.



   (F)   The City Manager shall ensure PEG transmissions, content, and
programming provided by the city to a state franchisee is in a format
compatible with the state franchisee's system. In the alternative, the
transmissions, content, and programming may be provided in a industry
standard format, in accord with Cal. Pub. Util. Code Section 5870(g)(1).



   (G)   For the duration of any city-issued franchise, if that
franchisee has existing unsatisfied obligations under the franchise to pay to
the city any cash payments for the ongoing costs of public, educational, and
government access channel facilities or institutional networks, the fee
payable by each city and state franchisee shall be the franchisee's pro rata
per subscriber share of the cash payment required to be paid by the city
franchisee to the city for the costs of PEG channel facilities.



      (1)   Within 45 days of receipt of the notice required by Cal.
Pub. Util. Code Section 5840(n), each city and state franchisee must provide
to the City Manager a written statement of the number of its subscribers
within the franchisee's service area in the city.



      (2)   Within 45 days of receipt all franchisee subscriber
number statements, the City Manager must calculate the division of the cash
payments among all city and state franchisees, and provide written notice to
each franchisee of the franchisee's share of the cash payment. This amount
may expressed as a percentage of gross revenue or as an amount per
subscriber, per month, or otherwise.



   (H)   Interconnection. To properly serve the city's interest in PEG
programming, each state franchisee and city franchisee must comply with the
PEG system interconnection requirements of Cal. Pub. Util. Code Section 5870.
The City Manager, or his or her designee, may make any interconnection
determinations of the city under Cal. Pub. Util. Code Section 5870, including
requiring interconnection where the city franchisee and state franchisee fail
to reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement.



(Ord. No. 2782, 2939, 2940)



ARTICLE V.  DEFINITIONS



SEC. 23-55.  DEFINED TERMS AND PHRASES.



   (A)   For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have
the following meanings.



      (1)   "Cable Service" means the one-way transmission to
subscribers of video programming, or other programming services, and
subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of
that video programming or other programming service. For the purposes of this
definition, "video programming" means programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast
station; and "other programming service" means information that a cable
system operator makes available to all subscribers generally.



      (2)   "Cable System," or "Cable Communications System" or
"Cable Television System" means a facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
The term "cable system" does not include:



         (a)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the
television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;



         (b)   A facility that serves subscribers without using
any public right-of-way;



         (c)   A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in
whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act,
except that such facility will be considered a cable system (other than for
purposes specified in Section 621(c) of the Communications Act) to the extent
such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to
subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive
on-demand services;



         (d)   An open video system that complies with Section
653 of the Communications Act; or



         (e)   Any facilities of an electric utility that are
used solely for operating its electric utility system.



      (3)   "Cable System Operator" means any person or group of
persons:



         (a)   Who provides cable service over a cable system and
directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in
that cable system; or



         (b)   Who otherwise controls or is responsible for,
through any arrangement, the management and operation of that cable system.



      (4)   "Communications Act" means the Communications Act of
1934 (47 U.S.C. section 153 et seq.), as amended by the Cable Communications
Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996.



      (5)   "Federal Communications Commission" means the federal
administrative agency, or any lawful successor, that is authorized to
regulate telecommunications services and telecommunications service providers
on a national level.



      (6)   "Franchise" means an initial authorization, or the
renewal of an initial authorization, granted by the city council, whether
such authorization is designated as a franchise, agreement, permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate, or otherwise, that authorizes the
construction or operation of a cable system or an open video system.



      (7)   "Franchise Fee" means any fee or assessment of any kind
that is authorized by State or federal law to be imposed by the city on a
grantee as compensation in the nature of rent for the grantee's use of the
public rights-of-way. The term "franchise fee" does not include:



         (a)   Any tax, fee, or assessment of general
applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both
utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax,
fee, or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or
cable subscribers);



         (b)   Capital costs that are required by the franchise
to be incurred by a grantee for public, educational, or governmental access.



         (c)   Requirements or charges that are incidental to the
award or enforcement of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security
funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or
liquidated damages; or



         (d)   Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code.



      (8)   "Franchise Service Area" or "Service Area" means the
entire geographic area of the city as it is now constituted, or may in the
future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance or
resolution granting a franchise, or in a franchise agreement.



      (9)   "Grantee" means any person that is awarded a franchise
in accordance with this chapter, and that person's lawful successor,
transferee, or assignee.



      (10)   "Multichannel Video Programming Distributor" or "Video
Programming Distributor" means a person such as, but not limited to, a cable
system operator, an open video system operator, a multichannel multipoint
distribution service, a direct broadcast satellite service, or a television
receive- only satellite program distributor, that makes available multiple
channels of video programming for purchase by subscribers or customers.



      (11)   "Open Video System" means a facility consisting of a
set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and
control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, including video
programming, and that is provided to multiple subscribers within the city,
provided that the FCC has certified that such system is authorized to operate
in the city and complies with 47 CFR 1500 et seq., entitled "Open Video
Systems."



      (12)   "Open Video System Operator" means any person or group
of persons who provides cable service over an open video system and directly
or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that open
video system, or otherwise controls or is responsible for the management and
operation of that open video system.



      (13)   "Public, Educational Or Government Access Facilities"
or "PEG Access Facilities," means the total of the following:



         (a)   Channel capacity designated for noncommercial
public, educational, or government use; and



         (b)   Facilities and equipment for the use of that
channel capacity.



      (14)   "Subscriber" or "Customer" or "Consumer" means any
person who, for any purpose, subscribes to the services provided by a
multichannel video programming distributor and who pays the charges for those
services.



      (15)   “State Franchisee” means any holder of a
state-issued video franchise operating in the city, as defined in Cal. Pub.
Util. Code Section 5830(p).



      (16)   "Street" or "Public Right-of-Way" means any public
property, including each of the following that has been dedicated to the
public or to public use and maintained under public authority or by others
and is located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues,
lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way, and similar public
property that the city from time to time authorizes to be included within the
definition of a street.



      (17)   "Telecommunications" means the transmission, between or
among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing,
without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.



      (18)   "Telecommunications Equipment" means equipment, other
than customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications service
provider to provide telecommunications service, including software that is
integral to that equipment.



      (19)   "Telecommunications Service" means the offering of
telecommunications directly to the public for a fee, or to such classes of
users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of
the equipment or facilities that are used.



      (20)   "Telecommunications Service Provider" means any
provider of telecommunications service.



      (21)   "Video Programming Provider" means any person or group
of persons who has the right under the federal copyright laws to select and
to contract for the carriage of specific video programming on a cable system
or an open video system.



      (22)   "Video Provider" means any person, company, or service
that provides one or more channels of video programming to a residence,
including a home, multi-family dwelling complex, congregate-living complex,
condominium, apartment, or mobile home, where some fee is paid for that
service, whether directly or as included in dues or rental charges, and
whether or not public rights-of- way are used in the delivery of that video
programming and includes, without limitation, providers of cable television
service, open video system service, master antenna television, satellite
master antenna television, direct broadcast satellite, multipoint
distribution services, and other providers of video programming, whatever
their technology.



   (B)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, words, terms, and phrases
not defined in this chapter will be given the meaning as used in Title 47 of
the United States Code, as amended, and, if not defined in that code, the
meaning as used in Title 47 of the CFR.



(Ord. No. 2650, 2782)



ARTICLE VI.  VIOLATIONS; SEVERABILITY



SEC. 23-65.  VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is
guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided for in this Code.



   (B)   The misdemeanor penalty specified above in subsection (A) is
not applicable to a violation of any provision of this chapter for which
another sanction or penalty may be imposed under any franchise, license,
lease, or similar written agreement between the city and a multichannel video
programming distributor or telecommunications service provider.



   (C)   The city may initiate a civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 2650)



SEC. 23-66.  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this chapter is determined by any court of
competent jurisdiction, or by any federal or State agency having jurisdiction
over its subject matter, to be invalid and in conflict with any paramount
federal or State law or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is
determined by that court or agency to require modification in order to
conform to the requirements of that paramount law or regulation, then that
provision will be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent part of this
chapter, and such determination will not affect the validity and
enforceability of any other provisions. If that paramount federal or State
law or regulation is subsequently repealed or amended so that the provision
of this chapter determined to be invalid or subject to modification is no
longer in conflict with that law or regulation, then that provision will
again become effective and will thereafter be binding on the city and any
affected video or telecommunications service provider; provided, however,
that the city must give the affected video or telecommunications service
provider 30 days written notice of that change before requiring compliance
with that provision, or such longer period of time as may be reasonably
required for the video or telecommunications service provider to comply with
that provision.



(Ord. No. 2650)



CHAPTER 24:  MOBILE HOME PARKS



ARTICLE I.  MOBILE HOME PARK RENT STABILIZATION SYSTEM



   24-1.   Purpose and intent



   24-2.   Definitions



   24-3.   Scope of coverage



   24-4.   Exemptions



   24-5.   Mobile home park rent review board



   24-6.   Powers and duties of the board



   24-7.   Application disclosure provisions



   24-8.   Nonapplicability to leased spaces



   24-9.   CPI formula adjustment



   24-10.   Discretionary rent increases



   24-11.   Change of occupancy adjustment



   24-12.   Pass-through items



   24-13.   Maintenance of services



   24-14.   Governing rules and errors



   24-15.   Appeals from hearing officer decisions



   24-16.   Resident's right of refusal



   24-17.   Retaliatory eviction



   24-18.   Enforcement



   24-19.   Notice to new and prospective residents



   24-20.   Guidelines



   24-21.   Administrative fees



ARTICLE II.  MOBILE HOME PARK CLOSURES



   24-30.   Mobile home park closure permit



   24-31.   Notice to residents



   24-32.   Mobile home park closure permit application requirements



   24-33.   Service of impact report and relocation assistance plan



   24-34.   Hearing on mobile home park closure permit



   24-35.   Notice of approval of mobile home park closure permit



   24-36.   Denial of permit for coercion



   24-37.   Duration of permit



   24-38.   Appeals



   24-39.   Termination of tenancy



   24-40.   Effect on existing permits



   24-41.   Affidavit of compliance



   24-42.   Public policy



   24-43.   Exemption of public agencies



ARTICLE I.  MOBILE HOME PARK RENT STABILIZATION SYSTEM



SEC. 24-1.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   In 1982, the city council found that rapidly rising rents had
occurred in the mobile home parks in the city due to a shortage of mobile
home spaces and the high cost of relocating a mobile home.  The city council
also found that the mobile home owners who rented spaces for the mobile homes
they owned made a substantial investment in the homes and their spaces.  For
these reasons, the city council adopted Ordinance Nos. 1940 and 1946 in 1982
to protect the mobile home owners in the city from excessive rents and to
protect their investment in their homes while at the same time providing for
a fair return for park owners.  Ordinance Nos. 1940 and 1946 were codified
as chapter 24 (this “chapter”) of the code.



   (B)   This chapter was revised in 1986, 1988, 1990 and 1991.



   (C)   In January of 1998, the city council established a mobile home
rent stabilization ordinance review task force to review the need for mobile
home rent stabilization in the city and consider possible amendments to
improve the administration of the mobile home park rent stabilization system
(“system”) provided by this chapter.  The task force consisted of nine
members and five alternates.  Three members and two alternates were selected
by the mobile home owners who rent spaces in mobile home parks in the city,
three members and two alternates were selected by the owners of mobile home
parks in the city, one member and one alternate were selected by the mobile
home park rent review board and two members were appointed by the mayor with
the approval of the city council.  The task force held 11 meetings to
consider proposed changes to this chapter and receive public comment
concerning rent stabilization.  At its last meeting in September of 1998,
the task force adopted a report recommending modifications to various time
limits, clarification in the definition of certain terms, streamlining of the
hearing and protest procedures and the appeal process and modifications to
the formulas for calculating annual space rent increases based on the
consumer price index and change of occupancy increases.  Twelve of the 14
recommendations made by the task force, received either a unanimous vote or
majority vote from the members representing both the mobile home owners and
the mobile home park owners.



   (D)   The city council held hearings to consider the recommendations
of the task force and the mobile home park rent review board, and to receive
public testimony, testimony from park owners and their representatives, and
testimony from mobile home owners who rent spaces for their homes in mobile
home parks in the city.  The city council also considered the information in
various reports provided by staff concerning the administration of this
chapter, the circumstances in the mobile home parks in the city, the
circumstances of the mobile home owners who rent spaces for their homes in
those mobile home parks, the interests of the owners of the mobile home parks
in the city and the impact of mobile home rent stabilization on the city.



   (E)   The city council hereby finds that there continues to be a
shortage of mobile home spaces in the city, particularly of spaces that are
available to owners of homes already in a park who want to move those
homes.  In addition, it is expensive to move a mobile home, requires a
special moving permit and involves tearing down the home, having it moved by
specialized movers and setting the home up at the new location, including
complying with new code requirements and upgrading the home as required by
the park owner at the new location.  There is a risk of damage to the home
when a mobile home is moved and exterior improvements, such as porches,
patios and carports must often be replaced.  These facts make it almost
impossible for mobile home owners to move their homes.  The term
“mobile” home is therefore misleading.  These facts give rise to a
market imbalance in which excessive rents can be, and often are, charged
absent regulation.  Further, the homeowners make significant investments in
their homes and in improving the spaces they rent.  They are often long-term
residents of the city who have strong ties to the community and would prefer
to remain in their homes in the city.  However, if the mobile home owners
cannot afford to pay rent increases, they must attempt to sell their homes
and move elsewhere.  Excessive rents can severely impair or destroy the
ability to sell a mobile home at a price sufficient to recover the investment
in the home.  Further, excessive rent increases and lost investment fall
with particular harshness on the significant segment of the mobile home
owners in the city who are seniors on fixed incomes and the segment of mobile
home owners in the city who have low to moderate incomes.



   (F)   Based upon the foregoing findings, the city council hereby
finds that it is necessary to continue rent stabilization in the mobile home
parks in the city; that the amendments to this article are consistent with
the purposes of this chapter and the recommendations of the task force; and
that the recommendations will improve the administration of this chapter by
clarifying some of its terms and streamlining its procedures.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-1)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-2.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:



   (A)   CPI - The consumer price index prepared by the bureau of labor
statistics for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside area relating to all urban
consumers as further set forth in section 24-9.



   (B)   HEARING OFFICER - The person designated by the city council to
conduct evidentiary hearings on the various matters assigned to the hearing
officer by this chapter.



   (C)   MOBILE HOME - A structure designed for human habitation and
for being moved on a street or highway under a permit issued pursuant to
state law.  Mobile home shall include a “manufactured home” and a mobile
home, as defined in state law, but does not include a recreational vehicle or
commercial coach as defined in state law.



   (D)   MOBILE HOME PARK or PARK - An area of land in the city where
two or more mobile home spaces are rented or leased out for mobile homes used
as residences.



   (E)   MOBILE HOME PARK OWNER or OWNER - The owner, lessor, operator,
or manager of a mobile home park.



   (F)   MOBILE HOME PARK RENT REVIEW BOARD or BOARD - The Mobile Home
Park Rent Review Board established by this chapter.



   (G)   PROTEST - A written statement signed by residents representing
25 percent or more of the spaces in a park specifically setting forth the
grounds for disputing an owner's decision or application for a space rent
increase and containing a suggested resolution of the dispute.



   (H)   RENT STABILIZATION DIRECTOR or DIRECTOR - The person
designated by the city manager to carry out the functions of the director.



   (I)   RESIDENT - Any person who occupies a mobile home or
recreational vehicle which is located within a mobile home park and governed
by this chapter.



   (J)   SPACE RENT - The consideration charged in connection with the
occupancy of a space in a mobile home park including the use of common areas,
not otherwise separately itemized in accordance with this chapter.  Space
rent shall not include:



      (1)   Amounts paid for the use of a mobile home dwelling unit;



      (2)   Security deposits;



      (3)   User fees for services or facilities which may be
utilized at the option of residents;



      (4)   Utility charges in those mobile home parks which the
owner bills residents separately whether or not the mobile homes are
individually metered; or



      (5)   Pass-through items including utility charges.



   (K)   UTILITY - The services provided to a resident, such as water,
solid waste collection, wastewater, cable television, gas and electricity.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-2)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-3.  SCOPE OF COVERAGE.



   Unless otherwise stated herein, the operations of all mobile home parks
in the city shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-3)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-4.  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:



   (A)   A mobile home park space rented for nonresidential purposes;



   (B)   All mobile home parks constructed after January 1, 1986, which
on the date of adoption of this chapter have a vacancy rate of over 10
percent, until such time as 90 percent of the total park spaces are filled. 
When 90 percent of the spaces are filled, the mobile home park shall be
governed by this chapter.



   (C)   Mobile home parks managed or operated by the United States
Government, the State, or the county;



   (D)   Mobile home park tenancies which do not exceed an occupancy of
20 days;



   (E)   Mobile home park tenancies for which any federal or State law
or regulation specifically prohibits rent regulations;



   (F)   Mobile home park tenancies established by leases which provide
for a term of more than a year, but only for the duration of such lease. 
Upon the expiration of any such lease, this chapter shall immediately be
applicable to the tenancy.



   (G)   Mobile home parks which sell lots for factory-built or
manufactured housing, or which provide condominium ownership of such lots,
even if one or more mobile homes in the mobile home park are rented out.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-4)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-5.  MOBILE HOME PARK RENT REVIEW BOARD.



   (A)   Board established - There is hereby established a Mobile Home
Park Rent Review Board consisting of five members.  The board members and
alternates shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city
council.  A quorum shall consist of three members present and voting.



   (B)   Alternates - For each regular board member, the city council
may appoint an alternate member to serve in the absence of the regular member.



   (C)   No financial interest -



      (1)   The five members of the board and their alternates shall
be persons who are not connected with the real estate or rental housing
industry for their personal financial gain.



      (2)   Neither board members nor their alternates shall be
residents of or have any financial interest in any mobile home or mobile home
park.  Board members and their alternates shall file a declaration to this
effect with the city clerk, under penalty of perjury.



   (D)   Compensation - The city council may, by resolution, establish
compensation for board members and their alternates.  Board members and
their alternates may also receive reimbursement as provided by the city
council for traveling and other expenses incurred while performing official
duties.



   (E)   Term -



      (1)   Board members shall be appointed for a term of three
years and shall serve no more than two terms.  In order to stagger the
terms, the city council shall appoint members so that no more than two terms
expire each year.



      (2)   A term of less than one year shall not be considered a
full term.  Terms shall expire on November 30 of the applicable years.  A
member shall continue in office for the term for which he/she was appointed
or until his/her successor is appointed.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-5)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-6.  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD.



   Within the limitations provided by state law, the board shall have the
following powers and duties:



   (A)   Reasons for meetings - To meet from time-to-time to the
discharge the board's duties as set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   Powers - To collect evidence and information to implement this
chapter, initiate investigations, schedule and conduct, hearings or appeals,
and issue written findings and decisions regarding the implementation of this
chapter.



   (C)   Annual report - To prepare, at least annually, a comprehensive
written report to the city council concerning board activities, decisions,
findings, and actions, and all other matters governed by this chapter.



   (D)   Administrative rules - Within the limitations provided by law
or by rules adopted by the city council, and after a public hearing, with due
notice to owners and residents and/or their representatives, associations and
councils, to adopt, amend and rescind administrative rules to effectuate the
purposes and policies of this chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-6)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-7.  APPLICATION DISCLOSURE PROVISIONS.



   Every application shall disclose the existing space rent, all other
park charges, the date on which any listed charges shall terminate, the
published utility rates, and a list of current services provided to the park
by the owner.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-7)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-8.  NONAPPLICABILITY TO LEASED SPACES.



   (A)   In any application, the owner shall indicate which if any of
the spaces are governed by leases which provide for a term, of more than a
year, together with the expiration date of each such lease.  If a space
previously exempted from coverage by this chapter pursuant to section 24-4(F)
becomes governed by this chapter, the space rent existing for the month prior
to the time of governance shall not be increased until the time the next
space rent increase is approved for the park.



   (B)   No owner may require, directly or indirectly, that any mobile
home owner or prospective mobile home owner sign a lease or rental agreement
that provides that it shall be exempt from local rent stabilization, or
provides for space rent increases in excess of those permitted by this
chapter as a condition of tenancy to a prospective purchaser of a mobile home
in the park on the grounds that the prospective purchaser will not sign such
a lease or rental agreement.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-8)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-9.  CPI FORMULA ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Procedure -



      (1)   A CPI formula adjustment is a space rent adjustment
granted to an owner in accordance with procedures established by resolution
adopted by the city council.  A CPI formula adjustment shall be based upon
the percentage change in the CPI for the year ending in August.  The
resulting adjustment shall be for rent increases taking effect in the
following calendar year.  The CPI formula adjustment shall be calculated as
follows:



         (a)   If the percentage change in the CPI is 4 percent
or less, the permissible CPI formula adjustment shall be equal to 100 percent
of the change in the CPI.



         (b)   If the percentage change in the CPI is greater
than 4 percent but less than or equal to 9 percent, the permissible CPI
formula adjustment shall be equal to 75 percent of the change in the CPI, or
a 4 percent adjustment, whichever is greater.



         (c)   If the percentage change in the CPI is greater
than 9 percent, the permissible CPI formula adjustment shall be equal to 67
percent of the change in the CPI, or a 6.75 percent adjustment, whichever is
greater.



      (2)   CPI formula adjustment applications may be submitted no
more than once a year.  Any space rental increase as provided herein shall
be effective on the date specified in the application or as otherwise
approved by the hearing officer.



   (B)   Review - The hearing officer shall conduct a hearing to review
a CPI formula adjustment application only on receipt of a protest.  The
hearing officer shall decide the issues in dispute.  The hearing officer
shall issue a written decision on the application and protest no later than
35 days following the completion of the hearing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-9)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-10.  DISCRETIONARY RENT INCREASES.



   (A)   Procedure - An owner may submit to the director a
discretionary rent increase application in accordance with procedures
established by resolution adopted by the city council.



   (B)   Standards of review - In evaluating any discretionary rent
increase application, the hearing officer shall consider the gross total
income of the park, changes in operating expenses to the owner attributable
to increases and decreases in the listed operating expenses, net operating
income, and the level of space rent necessary to permit a just and reasonable
return on the owner's investment.



   (C)   Fair return to owner - The discretionary rent increase
application procedure and the hearing officer's review shall be structured to
permit a continuation of the net operating income to the owner and a just and
reasonable return on the owner's investment at the same level (adjusted for
the effect of inflation) experienced by the park in the year immediately
preceding the first impact of rent stabilization on the park.



   (D)   Decision of the hearing officer - The hearing officer shall
issue a written decision on the application no later than 35 days after the
completion of any hearing.  The hearing officer's decision shall be based on
substantial evidence submitted at the hearing.  All parties to the hearing
shall be advised of the hearing officer's decision and given a copy of the
findings.  Consistent with the findings, the hearing officer may:



      (1)   Authorize the requested increase to become effective, in
whole or in part;



      (2)   Deny the discretionary increase;



      (3)   Order a reduction in space rent to a rate determined by
the hearing officer;



      (4)   Find that an increase that went into effect, or any
portion thereof, is not justified and order the owner to refund the amount
found to be unjustified to the residents within 30 days after the decision of
the hearing officer is final;



      (5)   Find that a proposed increase, or any portion thereof
that was previously unjustified, is justified and order the residents to pay
the amount found justified to the owner within 90 days after the decision of
the hearing officer is final; and



      (6)   Deny a retroactive increase based upon unreasonable
delay in the provision of information required for the hearing process.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-10)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-11.  CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Change of occupancy.



      (1)   Upon a change of occupancy of a space, the owner may
increase the rent for such space up to an amount equivalent to 15 percent of
the average space rent for those spaces within the park with rents regulated
by this chapter and not exempted from the provisions of this chapter, or $80
whichever is less.  Such a change of occupancy increase may be applied to a
specific space no more than once every five years.  The calculation shall be
made by the director once a year for each mobile home park, based upon such
space rents in effect on the thirtieth day following the most recent rental
adjustment application by the owner.  The director shall notify each park
owner in writing of the resultant calculation of the change of occupancy
increase adjustment upon the initial calculation, and upon each recalculation
thereof.



      (2)   Any transfer of rights to a space by a resident to any
joint tenant or blood relation by gift, devise or operation of law shall not
constitute a change of occupancy.



      (3)   On or before January first of each year, the owner shall
post a written notice stating the maximum amount of rent to be charged for
each space upon change of occupancy.  This notice may be revised and posted
no more than three times in the next 12 months with at least four months
between each revision.



      (4)   Upon a written request, the owner shall provide to a
resident, within 15 days of the request, a written commitment for the space
stating the exact amount of the rent for the resident's space to be effective
upon a change of occupancy.  This commitment shall be effective for six
months from the date of receipt by the resident.



   (B)   Written complaint - A change of occupancy adjustment may be
reviewed by the hearing officer upon the filing of a written complaint with
the director specifically setting forth the grounds for the complaint and
containing a suggested resolution of the complaint.  The director shall
review the complaint and determine whether to schedule a hearing to resolve
the matter.



   (C)   Review - At a hearing, the hearing officer shall determine if
the adjustment conforms to the requirements of this chapter.  If a resident
claims discrimination in the owner's establishment of the rent for the
particular resident's space, the resident shall have the initial burden of
presenting evidence to show the existence of such discrimination.  If the
hearing officer finds by a preponderance of the evidence, that such
discrimination has occurred, the hearing officer shall have the authority to
reduce the proposed rent by the amount the hearing officer finds is based on
the discrimination.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-11)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-12.  PASS-THROUGH ITEMS.



   (A)   Procedure - The granting of a pass-through item by the hearing
officer to the owner shall be in accordance with application procedures
established by resolution adopted by the city council.



   (B)   Eligible items - Subject to the requirements of State law,
guidelines adopted by city council resolution and disclosure to residents of
total billing and method of allocation, an owner may remove from the monthly
space rent and separately itemize on the monthly rental statement the cost
for any utilities not metered to the resident's mobile home.  The owner may
pass on to the residents any increase or decrease in utilities as they occur.



   (C)   Protest - Residents shall have 15 days from the date that a
notice of pass-through item application is mailed to file with the director a
protest to the application objecting to the accuracy of the calculations used
by the owner to determine the pass-through item.  Within ten days of the
filing of a protest, the director shall notify the owner in writing of the
protest and schedule a hearing by the hearing officer.



   (D)   Review - The hearing officer shall review the application and
shall allow only testimony that relates to those disputed issues listed in
the protest.  The hearing officer shall decide the issues in dispute. 
Within 35 days after the completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall
issue a written decision on the application and protest.



   (E)   Termination - Parks with existing authorized pass-through
items may modify or terminate such items in accordance with procedures
established by resolution adopted by city council.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-12)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-13.  MAINTENANCE OF SERVICES.



   (A)   Determination of services - On October 1, 1991, or on such
later date as is allowed by the director, the owner shall file with the
director a notice of services provided which shall list all the services that
the owner then provides to the residents of the park.  Any reduction or
deletion in services or utilities (or conversion of such service or utility
to a separately billed item) by the owner shall be permitted only in
accordance with the procedures established by resolution adopted by the city
council.



   (B)   Effect of reduction in service - The owner shall deduct the
monthly cost for a reduced or deleted or separately billed service or utility
from the monthly space rental effective the month that the reduction,
deletion, or separate billing occurs.



   (C)   Hearing officer review of services -



      (1)   Residents shall have 35 days from the date that a notice
of an owner's application for a space rental adjustment or notice to reduce
or delete services is mailed to file a protest with the director to the
adjustment based on the owner's reduction or deletion of services within the
park since the last adjustment.



      (2)   The hearing officer shall review the services which the
owner provided at the time of the last space rent adjustment and determine if
those services are continuing.  If an owner deleted or reduced a service
after the last adjustment, the hearing officer shall have the power to reduce
the pending adjustment by the amount saved by the owner due to the deletion
or reduction.  The hearing officer shall decide the issues in dispute. 
Within 35 days from the completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall
issue a written decision on the space rent adjustment and protest.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-13)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-14.  GOVERNING RULES AND ERRORS.



   (A)   Rules of evidence - The formal rules of evidence or procedure
shall not apply to hearing officer proceedings, except to the extent required
by the hearing officer.



   (B)   Errors - No action of the hearing officer shall be held void
or invalid or be set aside on the grounds of the improper admission or
rejection of evidence, or by reason of any error, irregularity, informality,
neglect or omission (“error”) as to any matter pertaining to
applications, notices, findings, records, hearings, reports, recommendations,
or any matters of procedure whatever, including, but not limited to, those
included in this section, unless after an examination of the entire case,
including the evidence, the reviewing body shall be of the opinion that the
error complained of was prejudicial, and that by reason of such error the
party complaining or appealing sustained and suffered substantial injury, and
that a different result would have been probable if such error had not
occurred or existed.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-14)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-15.  APPEALS FROM HEARING OFFICER DECISIONS.



   (A)   Institution of appeal process.



      (1)   Any written decision of the hearing officer may be
appealed to the board by either the owner or by residents representing 25
percent or more of the spaces in the park affected by the hearing officer's
decision.  An appeal shall be requested by the filing of a notice of appeal
signed by either the owner or such residents.



      (2)   The notice shall be filed with the city clerk within 15
days after the date the hearing officer's written decision is mailed to the
owner and the residents' representative by the city.



      (3)   A copy of the notice filed by an owner shall be mailed
by the owner to each affected space in the park and a proof of service of
mailing shall be filed with the city clerk.



      (4)   A copy of the notice filed by the residents shall be
mailed by the appealing residents to the owner and a proof of service of
mailing shall be filed with the city clerk.  A notice filed by residents
shall include sufficient information, including, but not limited to, the
residents' names and addresses, to enable the city clerk to verify the
required number of signatures on the basis of one resident per occupied space.



      (5)   The notice of appeal shall contain the name, mailing
address, and telephone number of an individual who shall be designated as the
representative of the appealing residents.  Official notices to the
protesting residents may be served upon this representative.  This
representative shall also organize the presentation to the board on behalf of
the residents.



      (6)   Except for protests of CPI formula adjustment
applications, the execution of any hearing officer decision shall be stayed
for 90 days from the date of filing of a notice of appeal.



   (B)   Transcript and exhibits -



      (1)   All testimony presented to the hearing officer during a
hearing shall be stenographically recorded by a certified shorthand
reporter.  The city shall be responsible for the certified shorthand
reporter's appearance fee.



      (2)   Upon the filing of an appeal from a hearing officer
decision, the appealing party shall order and pay for the original certified
shorthand reporter's transcript.  Copies of the certified shorthand
reporter's transcript shall be paid for by the parties ordering them.  The
original certified shorthand reporter's transcript and all original exhibits
shall be provided within 30 days of the filing of the notice of appeal and
thereafter be forwarded to the board.



   (C)   Effect of decision - The decision of the board shall be final
and constitute the exhaustion of available administrative remedies to review
hearing officer decisions.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-15)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-16.  RESIDENT'S RIGHT OF REFUSAL.



   (A)   A resident may refuse to pay any increase in space rent which
violates the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Such refusal to pay shall be a defense in any action brought
by the owner to recover possession of a space for nonpayment of the amount of
the space rent increase or to collect the increase.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-16)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-17.  RETALIATORY EVICTION.



   In any action brought by the owner to recover possession of a space,
the court may consider as grounds for dismissal of the action any violation
of this chapter.  Any eviction action brought within six months of a protest
or complaint filed with the director by the subject resident shall be
presumed to be retaliatory.  This presumption affects the burden of proof
and is rebuttable by the owner.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-17)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-18.  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Treble damages - Any owner who intentionally demands, accepts
or retains any payment in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be liable in a civil action to the resident from whom such payment is
demanded, accepted or retained for damages in the sum of three times the
amount by which the payment demanded, accepted, or retained exceeds the
maximum amount which could be lawfully demanded, accepted, or retained
together with reasonably attorneys' fees and costs as determined by the court.



   (B)   Criminal penalties - Any owner willfully violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable in the manner provided by section 1-10 of the code. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the penalty assessed against an owner for
conviction of a violation of this chapter shall be limited to the owner's
payment of an appropriate fine and shall not expose the owner to
incarceration.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-18)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-19.  NOTICE TO NEW AND PROSPECTIVE RESIDENTS.



   (A)   Prior to or at the time of agreeing to rent space to a new
resident in a park, the owner shall provide each prospective resident with a
copy of this chapter as currently in effect and a copy of any resolutions of
the city council implementing the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   Before any prospective purchaser of a mobile home in
the park signs a rental agreement, a lease for 12 months or less, or a long
term lease exempt from the provisions of this chapter, the park owner shall
give the prospective purchaser a copy of this chapter as currently in effect
and any resolution of the city council adopting implementing regulations and
shall have the prospective purchaser sign a statement acknowledging that the
prospective purchaser has received a copy of this chapter and is aware that
this chapter regulates space rent increases for all spaces not subject to
long term leases exempt from local rent stabilization.



      (2)   For all long-term leases, the signed statement shall be
remitted to the director by the park no later than 30 days after signing and
maintained by the city and be available for inspection.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-19)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-20.  GUIDELINES.



   After a noticed public hearing, the city council shall adopt, by
resolution, guidelines and/or procedures to aid in the implementation of this
chapter.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-20)  (Ord. No. 2475)



SEC. 24-21.  ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.



   (A)   Adoption of fee - The city may incur certain annual costs in
administering the mobile home park rent stabilization system.  After a
noticed public hearing, the city council may adopt by resolution an annual
administrative fee.  For the first year of the administrative fee following
the adoption of this ordinance (i.e., city fiscal year 1998-99), the city
council estimates that such cost will equal or exceed $69,350, or no more
than $2.34 per space per month for all spaces subject to the jurisdiction of
the system.  Along with the administrative fee, a park's monthly report
regarding the calculation of the administrative fee for each month shall be
filed with the city's treasurer on or before the tenth day of that month. 
Such administrative fee shall reimburse the projected costs of such
administration, based upon previous actual costs, to the city.  Such
resolution and projected costs may be updated on an annual basis after a
noticed public hearing, but in no event shall the annual administrative fee
be increased by more than 75 percent of the consumer price index for all
urban consumers for the Los Angeles- Anaheim-Riverside area or eight percent
per year, whichever is less.



   (B)   Payment by park owners - One-half of any administrative fee
shall be paid to the city by the owners of the parks within the city.  Such
fee shall be allocated to each owner based upon the number of spaces in each
park which were subject to the system in the city's previous fiscal year
period.



   (C)   Payment by residents - One-half of any administrative fee
shall be paid to the city by the residents of the parks within the city,
based upon the number of months each resident's rent was subject to the
system in the city's previous fiscal year period.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-21)  (Ord. No. 2475)



ARTICLE II.  MOBILE HOME PARK CLOSURES



SEC. 24-30.  MOBILE HOME PARK CLOSURE PERMIT.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, prior to the conversion of a
mobile home park to another use, or prior to the closure of a mobile home
park or the cessation of the use of land as a mobile home park, in whole or
in part, a mobile home park closure permit must be obtained pursuant to
provisions of this code.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-50)  (Ord. No. 2097)



SEC. 24-31.  NOTICE TO RESIDENTS.



   The park owner shall give at least 90 days' written advance notice
prior to the filing of an application for a mobile home park closure permit
regarding the proposed closure of the park to all residents and coach owners
in the affected park, and shall continue to give such notice to all new
potential residents.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-51)  (Ord. No. 2097)



SEC. 24-32.  MOBILE HOME PARK CLOSURE PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A person or entity seeking to convert a mobile home park to
another use, or to close a mobile home park or to cease a use of land as a
mobile home park, in whole or in part, shall apply for a mobile home park
closure permit on forms provided by the development services department. 
The application shall be accompanied by payment of a filing fee in an amount
as prescribed by city council resolution and shall include a report on the
impact of the proposed conversion, closure, or cessation of use upon the
residents of the mobile home park who would be displaced and a proposed
relocation assistance plan, each of which shall be prepared in accordance
with the requirements hereinafter set forth.  The application will not be
accepted for filing unless accompanied by the required impact report and
relocation assistance plan.



   (B)   The application shall include each of the following:



      (1)   Concept plan - A written statement and concept plan
indicating the use the park site is intended to accommodate, including the
approximate number of proposed residential units, if any; approximate square
footage and use of any buildings proposed; and the probable impacts/benefits
to the community created by the proposed project.



      (2)   Site plan - A site plan of the existing mobile home park
showing the existing layout, with all existing mobile home spaces identified
by number and indicating whether the space is currently occupied, and other
site features.



      (3)   Residents list - A list of the names and address of all
current residents of the mobile home park.



      (4)   Impact report - A report on the housing and financial
impacts of the removal of the mobile homes upon all displaced residents. 
The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following items, except
where the applicant can demonstrate that the necessary information is not
available:



         (a)   Rental rate history for each space for the
previous five years;



         (b)   Monthly vacancy rate for each month during the
preceding two years;



         (c)   Makeup of existing resident households, including
family size, length of residence, age of residents, estimated household
income, and whether receiving federal or State rent subsidies;



         (d)   The date of manufacture and size of each mobile
home in the park;



         (e)   An analysis of moving existing mobile homes which
shall include, but not be limited to, the availability of other sites; the
total costs of relocating mobile homes to a new location; and the feasibility
of existing mobile homes being accepted at other locations.



      (5)   Relocation assistance plan -



         (a)   A proposed relocation assistance plan shall be
prepared by or on behalf of the applicant which states all measures proposed
by the applicant to mitigate any identifiable adverse impacts of the proposed
closure or conversion of use on the residents of the mobile home park who
would be displaced thereby.  Every proposed relocation assistance plan shall
provide that displaced residents will be provided relocation benefits that
relate to the identified impacts.  Relocation benefits must bear a
relationship to the cost of displaced residents' finding alternative housing
and will be determined on a case-by-case basis.  With regard to mobile homes
which cannot be moved to another mobile home park, consideration shall be
given to the purchase of such mobile homes by the applicant at their
appraised fair market value as determined by a qualified, independent
appraiser, as approved by the city, utilizing principles applicable in
relocation matters.  The foregoing applies whether or not the mobile home
owner resides in the unit.



         (b)   Persons who own mobile homes or who are tenants in
the mobile home park at the time notice is given pursuant to section 24-31
will be eligible for relocation assistance as determined in the fully
approved relocation assistance plan.  Persons who become mobile home owners
or tenants after the time notice is provided pursuant to section 24-31 may be
eligible for relocation assistance as determined in the fully approved
relocation assistance plan.



      (6)   Proof of service of notice - The applicant shall provide
evidence, by proof of service, that he/she has given the notice required by
section 24-31 to all applicable residents and coach owners, and continues to
give such notice to all new potential residents.



      (7)   Other information -



         (a)   The applicant shall provide any other information
which the development services director reasonably believes is necessary for
the purpose of properly evaluating the mobile home park closure permit
request.



         (b)   The application will not be accepted as complete
until and unless all materials required hereby have been submitted.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-52)  (Ord. No. 2097)



SEC. 24-33.  SERVICE OF IMPACT REPORT AND RELOCATION ASSISTANCE PLAN.



   The development services department shall provide a notice of the
hearing date and location, along with a copy of the impact report and
relocation assistance plan to each resident of the mobile home park 30 days
prior to the commission hearing on the mobile home park closure permit
application.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-53)  (Ord. No. 2097)



SEC. 24-34.  HEARING ON MOBILE HOME PARK CLOSURE PERMIT.



   (A)   A hearing shall be held on the mobile home park closure permit
application before the commission.  The commission shall approve the mobile
home park closure permit if it finds that:



      (1)   The conversion, closure, or cessation of use of the land
as a mobile home park will not be materially detrimental to the housing needs
and public interest of the affected neighborhood and of the city as a whole;
and



      (2)   The measures to reasonably and adequately mitigate any
adverse impact of the proposed conversion, closure, or cessation of use on
the mobile home park residents who will be displaced will be incorporated as
conditions of permit approval.



   (B)   If either the impact report or relocation assistance plan are
found to be inadequate, insufficient, or incomplete, the mobile home park
closure permit may be denied without prejudice.  If the applicant thereafter
cures the deficiencies, the applicant may reapply without payment of a new
filing fee.



   (C)   In passing on and approving any mobile home park closure
permit, reasonable conditions may be imposed by the commission to mitigate
adverse impacts on mobile home park residents who will be displaced,
including but not limited to relocation assistance requirements, phasing of
the conversion, closure or cessation of use, bonding requirements, and any
other reasonable requirements in the facts and circumstances of the
particular permit request.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-54)  (Ord. No. 2097)



SEC. 24-35.  NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF MOBILE HOME PARK CLOSURE PERMIT.



   (A)   Written notices will be mailed to all residents residing in
the mobile home park by city staff within ten days after the approval of a
mobile home park closure permit.  Such notice will state all of the
conditions of approval of the mobile home park closure permit.



   (B)   The mobile home park owner shall pay the city's costs of doing
said mailing.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-55)  (Ord. No. 2097)



SEC. 24-36.  DENIAL OF PERMIT FOR COERCION.



   A permit may be denied where there is substantial evidence that mobile
home park residents have been coerced to publicly support or approve closure,
proposed conversion of a mobile home park to another use, or cessation of the
use of land as a mobile home park, or to refrain from publicly opposing the
same, or to forego any assistance to which they might be entitled.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-56)  (Ord. No. 2097)



SEC. 24-37.  DURATION OF PERMIT.



   The mobile home park closure permit granted pursuant to this article
shall be valid for a period of two years after approval by the commission or
city council on appeal.  Any and all rights to close a park pursuant to such
a permit shall lapse at the expiration of the permit.  The commission may,
for good cause shown, grant an extension to the permit.  Unless an extension
is granted by the commission to delay the closure, the permit shall lapse.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-57)  (Ord. No. 2097)



SEC. 24-38.  APPEALS.



   Any interested or aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal the
decision of the commission on a mobile home park closure permit request or
extension to the city council by paying the appeal fee established by city
council resolution and filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within
21 days of the date of the commission's action.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-58)  (Ord. No. 2097)



SEC. 24-39.  TERMINATION OF TENANCY.



   Upon the approval of the mobile home park closure permit, the mobile
home park owner shall serve a notice of termination of tenancy, in accordance
with the provisions of Cal. Civil Code, Section 798.56, to each park resident
informing them that they will be given two years from the date of the
commission's approval of the mobile home park closure permit to terminate
their tenancy in the park.  The two-year termination period may be reduced
to no less than six months or extended beyond two years upon the written
agreement of the park owner and residents.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-59)  (Ord. No. 2097)



SEC. 24-40.  EFFECT ON EXISTING PERMITS.



   The requirements of this article shall apply to all existing mobile
home parks within the city, regardless of any time limitations that may exist
with respect to the term of any conditional use permit issued for any mobile
home park.  The use of any property covered by such a conditional use permit
may lawfully continue and the conditional use permit shall be deemed to
remain in full force and effect until such time as a mobile home park closure
permit for conversion, closure, or cessation of use is granted.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-60)  (Ord. No. 2097)



SEC. 24-41.  AFFIDAVIT OF COMPLIANCE.



   Prior to the commencement of any construction on the property vacated
as a result of the approval of a mobile home park closure permit for the
conversion, closure or cessation of use of a mobile home park, the owner or
developer of the property shall provide the city with an affidavit stating
that the conditions imposed on the approval for the mobile home park closure
permit have been satisfied, and that all tenancies on the property have been
terminated.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-61)  (Ord. No. 2097)



SEC. 24-42.  PUBLIC POLICY.



   No person shall subvert any provisions of this article by coercing the
waiver of any rights or privileges created or protected thereby.  Any
provisions of a lease or agreement which purports directly or indirectly to
waive or require waiver of a resident's rights under said sections or which
requires prior consent to the conversion, closure, or cessation of use of
land as a mobile home park shall be null, void and unenforceable.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-62)  (Ord. No. 2097)



SEC. 24-43.  EXEMPTION OF PUBLIC AGENCIES.



   The requirements of this article shall not apply to any public agency
which is required to comply with the relocation requirements of Cal. Gov't
Code, Sections 7260 et seq. due to any displacement of a person or persons
from a mobile home.



(`64 Code, Sec. 17.1-63)  (Ord. No. 2492)



CHAPTER 25:  SURFACE MINING



ARTICLE I.  SURFACE MINING



   25-1.   Title



   25-2.   Purpose



   25-3.   Incorporation by reference



   25-4.   Requirements for surface mining operations



   25-5.   Exemptions



   25-6.   Vested rights



ARTICLE II.  DEFINITIONS



   25-10.   CEQA



   25-11.   Commission



   25-12.   Department



   25-13.   Director



   25-14.   Financial assurances



   25-15.   Interim management plan



   25-16.   Operator



   25-17.   SMARA



   25-18.   SMARA regulations



ARTICLE III.  SURFACE MINING PERMITS



   25-25.   Application



   25-26.   Notification of filing



   25-27.   Approval or denial of surface mining permit



   25-28.   Expansion of surface mining operation



ARTICLE IV.  RECLAMATION PLANS



   25-35.   General requirements



   25-36.   Application



   25-37.   Notification of filing



   25-38.   Evaluation of comments



   25-39.   Approval or denial or reclamation plan



   25-40.   Performance of reclamation



ARTICLE V.  FINANCIAL ASSURANCES



   25-50.   General requirements



   25-51.   Application



   25-52.   Transmittal of copies



   25-53.   Evaluation of comments



   25-54.   Approval or denial of financial assurances proposal



   25-55.   Securing and maintenance of financial assurances



   25-56.   Revision



   25-57.   Annual adjustment



   25-58.   New ownership



   25-59.   Forfeiture and release



ARTICLE VI.  INTERIM MANAGEMENT PLANS



   25-65.   Application



   25-66.   Transmittal of copies



   25-67.   Approval or denial of interim management plan



   25-68.   Duration



   25-69.   Expiration



   25-70.   Maintenance of financial assurances



ARTICLE VII.  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



   25-80.   Appeals



   25-81.   Annual operations report



   25-82.   Inspection



   25-83.   Abandonment



   25-84.   Notice of change of address



   25-85.   Notice of change of ownership of property



   25-86.   Annual update report



   25-87.   Regulations nonexclusive



   25-88.   Failure to comply



ARTICLE I.  SURFACE MINING



SEC. 25-1.  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the “Surface Mining Ordinance of the
City of Oxnard.”



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-2.  PURPOSE.



   This chapter establishes regulations for surface mining operations in
accordance with the requirements of the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of
1975 (“SMARA”), the regulations adopted thereunder, and Cal. Pub. Res.
Code, Section 2207.  These regulations shall secure the continued
availability of important mineral resources while also ensuring that adverse
environmental effects are prevented or mitigated and mined lands are
reclaimed to a usable condition readily adaptable for alternative land uses.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-3.  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   The provisions of the SMARA, the regulations adopted thereunder, and
Cal. Pub. Res. Code, Section 2207, as those provisions and regulations may be
amended from time to time, are made a part of this chapter by reference with
the same force and effect as if they were specifically and fully set out
herein.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-4.  REQUIREMENTS FOR SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS.



   Except as provided in section 25-5, no person shall conduct a surface
mining operation on public or private property without first obtaining city
approval of all of the following:



   (A)   A surface mining permit;



   (B)   A reclamation plan; and



   (C)   Financial assurances.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-5.  EXEMPTIONS.



   This chapter shall not apply to the following activities:



   (A)   Excavations or grading conducted for farming or on-site
construction or for the purpose of restoring land following a flood or
natural disaster.



   (B)   On-site excavation and on-site earthmoving activities that are
both an integral and necessary part of a construction project and undertaken
to prepare a site for construction of structures, landscaping, or other land
improvements, including the related excavation, grading, compaction, or the
creation of fills, road cuts, and embankments, whether or not surplus
materials are exported from the site.  This exemption shall not be
applicable unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:



      (1)   All required permits for the construction, landscaping,
or related land improvements have been approved by a public agency in
accordance with applicable provisions of State law and locally adopted plans
and ordinances, including, but not limited to, CEQA.



      (2)   Approval of the construction project included
consideration of the on-site excavation and on-site earthmoving activities
pursuant to CEQA.



      (3)   The approved construction project is consistent with the
general plan designation and zoning of the site.



      (4)   Surplus materials shall not be exported from the site
unless and until actual construction work has commenced and shall cease if it
is determined that construction activities have terminated, have been
indefinitely suspended, or are no longer being actively pursued.



   (C)   Operation of a plant site used for mineral processing,
including associated on-site structures, equipment, machines, tools, or other
materials.  This exemption is an exemption from the provisions of this
chapter and not from other requirements of this code and shall include the
on-site stockpiling and on-site recovery of mined materials.  This exemption
shall not be applicable unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:



      (1)   The plant site is located on lands designated for
industrial or commercial uses in the general plan.



      (2)   The plant site is located on lands zoned for industrial
or commercial use.



      (3)   None of the minerals being processed are being extracted
on the plant site.



      (4)   All reclamation work has been completed pursuant to the
approved reclamation plan for any mineral extraction activities that occurred
on the plant site after January 1, 1976.



   (D)   Prospecting for, or the extraction of, minerals for commercial
purposes and the removal of overburden in total amounts of less than 1,000
cubic yards in any one location of one acre or less.



   (E)   Surface mining operations that are required by federal law in
order to protect a mining claim, if those operations are conducted solely for
that purpose.



   (F)   Any other surface mining operations that the State Mining and
Geology Board determines to be of an infrequent nature and which involve only
minor surface disturbances.



   (G)   The solar evaporation of seawater or bay water for the
production of salt and related minerals.



   (H)   Emergency excavation or grading conducted by the State
Department of Water Resources or the State Reclamation Board for the purpose
of averting, alleviating, repairing, or restoring damage to property due to
imminent or recent floods, disasters, or other emergencies.



   (I)   Excavations or grading for the exclusive purpose of obtaining
materials for roadbed construction and maintenance conducted in connection
with timber operations or forest management on land owned by the same person
or entity.  This exemption is limited to excavation and grading that is
conducted adjacent to timber operation or forest management roads.  This
exemption is available only if slope stability and erosion are controlled in
accordance with State regulations and upon closure of the site, where
necessary, revegetation measures and post-closure uses are implemented in
consultation with the State Department of Forestry and Fire Protection. 
This exemption does not apply to on-site excavation or grading that occurs
within 100 feet of a Class One watercourse or within 75 feet of a Class Two
watercourse.  This exemption also does not apply to excavations for
materials that are, or have been, sold for commercial purposes.



   (J)   Excavations, grading or other earthmoving activities in an oil
or gas field that are integral to, and necessary for, ongoing operations for
the extraction of oil or gas. This exemption shall not be applicable unless
all of the following conditions are satisfied:



      (1)   The operations are being conducted in accordance with
Cal. Pub. Res. Code, Division 3,  commencing with Section 3000.



      (2)   The operations are consistent with the general plan
designation and zoning for the site.



      (3)   The earthmoving activities are within oil or gas field
properties under a common owner or operator.



      (4)   No excavated materials are sold for commercial purposes.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-6.  VESTED RIGHTS.



   No person with a vested right to conduct surface mining operations
obtained prior to January 1, 1976, shall be required to secure a surface
mining permit pursuant to this chapter as long as the vested right continues
and as long as no substantial changes have been made in the operation except
in accordance with the SMARA, the regulations promulgated thereunder, and
this chapter.  A person shall be deemed to have vested rights if, prior to
January 1, 1976, the person has, in good faith and in reliance upon a permit
or other authorization, if the permit or other authorization was required,
diligently commenced surface mining operations and incurred substantial
liabilities for work and materials necessary therefore.  The reclamation
plan and the financial assurances requirements of this chapter shall apply to
operations conducted after January 1, 1976.  In those cases where an overlap
exists between pre- and post-SMARA mining, the reclamation plan shall call
for reclamation proportional to that disturbance caused after January 1, 1976.



(Ord. No. 2579)



ARTICLE II.  DEFINITIONS



SEC. 25-10.  CEQA.



   “CEQA” means the California Environmental Quality Act, codified at
Cal. Pub. Res. Code, Section 21000 et seq. (as amended).



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-11.  COMMISSION.



   “Commission” means the planning commission of the city.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-12.  DEPARTMENT.



   “Department” means the development services department of the city.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-13.  DIRECTOR.



   “Director” means the development services director of the city or
designee.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-14.  FINANCIAL ASSURANCES.



   “Financial assurances” means security posted by the owner or
operator of a surface mining operation to guarantee satisfactory performance
of a reclamation plan.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-15.  INTERIM MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   “Interim management plan” means a report setting forth the measures
that will be implemented to maintain the site of an idle surface mining
operation in compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-16.  OPERATOR.



   “Operator” means a person to whom a surface mining permit has been
issued by the city other than a person whose activities in the city are
entirely subject to section 25-6 of this chapter regarding vested rights.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-17.  SMARA.



   “SMARA” means the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975,
codified at Cal. Pub. Res. Code, Sections 2710 et seq. (as amended).



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-18.  SMARA REGULATIONS.



   “SMARA Regulations” means the State regulations implementing SMARA,
codified at 14 Cal. Code of Regulations, Sections 3500 et seq. (as amended).



(Ord. No. 2579)



ARTICLE III.  SURFACE MINING PERMITS



SEC. 25-25.  APPLICATION.



   Applications for surface mining permits shall be filed with the
department on a form provided by the director.  The application shall
include all environmental review forms and information required by the
director, and shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by
resolution of the city council.  The application shall be consistent with
the requirements of SMARA and the regulations of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-26.  NOTIFICATION OF FILING.



   (A)   No later than 30 days after acceptance of a surface mining
permit application as complete, the director shall notify the State
Department of Conservation of the filing of the application.



   (B)   No later than 30 days after acceptance of a surface mining
permit application as complete, the director shall notify the State
Department of Transportation of the filing of the application if both of the
following conditions are satisfied:



      (1)   The proposed mining operations are in the 100-year flood
plain of any stream, as shown in Zone A of the Flood Insurance Rate Maps
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and



      (2)   The proposed mining operations are within one mile,
upstream or downstream, of any State highway bridge.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-27.  APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF SURFACE MINING PERMIT.



   (A)   The commission shall approve or deny an application for a
surface mining permit after conducting a public hearing.  If notification of
the filing of the application has been given pursuant to section 25-26(B),
such hearing shall not be held until the State Department of Transportation
submits its comments or until 45 days from the date the application was
accepted as complete, whichever occurs first.



   (B)   The commission may approve a surface mining permit application
upon making the following findings:



      (1)   The proposed surface mining operation will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.



      (2)   The proposed surface mining operation is consistent with
the requirements of the SMARA, the SMARA Regulations and this chapter.



      (3)   The mining plan has been reviewed if and as required by
CEQA and any significant, adverse impacts of the proposed mining operation
are mitigated to the extent feasible by conditions imposed pursuant to
subsection (C) of this section or otherwise.



   (C)   The commission may impose such conditions as deemed reasonably
necessary when approving a surface mining permit.



   (D)   The director shall send a copy of each approved surface mining
permit, any conditions imposed on such permit, and relevant supporting
documents to the State Department of Conservation.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-28.  EXPANSION OF SURFACE MINING OPERATION.



   (A)   No expansion or minor expansion of a surface mining operation
for which a surface mining permit has been issued shall occur without the
prior approval of a modification of such permit.  For purpose of this
section, the following definitions shall apply:



      (1)   “Expansion” shall mean an increase in the land area
on which a surface mining operation is conducted, or an increase in the depth
to which a surface mining operation is conducted, beyond that authorized by
an existing surface mining permit.



      (2)   “Minor expansion” shall mean:



         (a)   An increase in the land area on which a surface
mining operation is conducted by an amount that does not result in the total
land area of such operation exceeding the land area originally approved for
such operation by more than the lesser of one acre or 25 percent; or



         (b)   An increase in the depth to which a surface mining
operation is conducted by not more than ten feet, provided that such depth
does not reach within ten feet of the average level of ground water.



   (B)   Applications for modification of a surface mining permit shall
be processed in the same manner as applications for a surface mining permit;
provided, however, that applications related to minor expansions may be
approved or denied by the director without a public hearing.



   (C)   The commission or the director may approve an application for
modification of a surface mining permit upon making the following findings:



      (1)   The proposed modification will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare.



      (2)   The proposed modification is consistent with the
requirements of the SMARA, the SMARA Regulations and this chapter.



      (3)   The proposed modification has been reviewed if and as
required by CEQA and any significant, adverse impacts of the proposed
modification are mitigated to the extent feasible by conditions imposed
pursuant to subsection (D) of this section or otherwise.



   (D)   The commission or the director may impose such conditions as
deemed reasonably necessary when approving a modification of a surface mining
permit.



   (E)   The director shall send a copy of each approved modification
of a surface mining permit, any conditions imposed in conjunction with such
approval, and relevant supporting documents to the State Department of
Conservation.



(Ord. No. 2579)



ARTICLE VI.  RECLAMATION PLANS



SEC. 25-35.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Reclamation plans shall contain all of the information and
elements required by the SMARA (Cal. Pub. Res. Code, Sections 2772 and 2773),
the SMARA Regulations, and any other requirements reasonably established by
the director.



   (B)   An item of information or document required pursuant to
subsection (A) of this section that has already been prepared as part of the
application for a surface mining permit, or as part of an environmental
document prepared pursuant to CEQA, may be included in the reclamation plan
by reference, if that item of information is attached to the reclamation plan.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-36.  APPLICATION.



   A proposed reclamation plan shall be filed with the department.  An
applicant shall sign a statement in a form acceptable to the city attorney
accepting responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with
the reclamation plan.  An application for reclamation plan approval shall
include all environmental review forms and information required by the
director.  All documentation for the reclamation plan shall be submitted at
one time.  The proposed reclamation plan shall be accompanied by a fee in an
amount established by resolution of the city council.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-37.  NOTIFICATION OF FILING.



   (A)   Within 30 days of receipt of a complete application for
approval of a reclamation plan, the director shall submit copies of all of
the following to the State Department of Conservation:



      (1)   The reclamation plan;



      (2)   Information from any related document prepared, adopted
or certified pursuant to CEQA; and



      (3)   Any other pertinent information.



   (B)   In conjunction with such submission, the director shall
certify to the State Department of Conservation that the reclamation plan is
in compliance with the applicable requirements of Cal. Pub. Res. Code,
Sections 2772 and 2773 and the SMARA Regulations in effect at the time.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-38.  EVALUATION OF COMMENTS.



   (A)   The State Department of Conservation shall have 30 days from
its receipt of a reclamation plan to prepare comments.  The director shall
prepare a written response to any comments received from the State Department
of Conservation.  Such written response shall describe the disposition of
the major issues raised by the State Department of Conservation.
Additionally, if the director's position is at variance with any of the
recommendations made or objections raised in the State Department of
Conservation's comments, the written response shall address, in detail, why
specific comments and suggestions were not accepted.



   (B)   The director shall forward to the applicant copies of any
written responses received from the State Department of Conservation, as well
as the responses prepared by the director.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-39.  APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF RECLAMATION PLAN.



   (A)   The commission shall approve or deny an application for a
proposed reclamation plan after conducting a public hearing.  At the public
hearing, the commission shall consider any comments received from the State
Department of Conservation.



   (B)   The commission may approve a reclamation plan upon making the
following findings:



      (1)   The reclamation plan complies with the SMARA, the SMARA
Regulations and this chapter.



      (2)   The mining plan, the reclamation plan and the potential
uses of reclaimed land pursuant to such plan are consistent with this
chapter, the general plan and any applicable resource plan or element.



      (3)   The reclamation plan has been reviewed if and as
required by CEQA and the city's environmental review guidelines, and all
significant adverse impacts from reclamation of the mined lands are mitigated
to the maximum extent feasible.



      (4)   The land and resources to be reclaimed (e.g., water
bodies) will be restored to a condition that is compatible with, and blends
in with, the surrounding natural environment, topography and other resources.



      (5)   The reclamation plan will ensure that the mined lands
are restored to a useable condition that is readily adaptable for alternative
land uses consistent with the general plan and any applicable resource plan
or element.



      (6)   Sections 25-26 and 25-37 have been satisfied.



   (C)   If the commission does not approve a reclamation plan, the
director shall return the plan to the applicant within 60 days.  The
applicant shall have 60 days from the date on which the reclamation plan is
returned to revise the plan to address identified deficiencies.



   (D)   The director shall send a copy of each approved reclamation
plan to the State Department of Conservation together with any relevant
supporting documents.



   (E)   The commission may approve a reclamation plan that authorizes
one or more land use proposals for renewed use of a site provided that the
reclamation plan complies with the requirements of this chapter and other
applicable law with respect to each land use proposal stated in the plan and
that the proposed uses are sufficiently similar that similar excavation and
engineering strategies will suffice to reclaim the land for the proposed uses.



   (F)   All reclamation plans shall comply with the provisions of the
SMARA (Cal. Pub. Res. Code, Sections 2772 and 2773) and State regulations
(Cal. Code of Regulations, Sections 3500–3505).  Reclamation plans
approved after January 15, 1993, reclamation plans for proposed new mining
operations, and pre-January 15, 1993 reclamation plans for which substantial
amendments are approved, shall also comply with the requirements for
reclamation performance standards (Cal. Code of Regulations, Sections
3700–3713).



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-40.  PERFORMANCE OF RECLAMATION.



   Reclamation activities shall be initiated at the earliest possible time
on those portions of the mined lands that will not be subject to further
disturbance from mining activity.  Reclamation may be performed on an annual
basis, in stages compatible with continuing operations, or on completion of
all excavation, removal, or fill, as approved by the director.



(Ord. No. 2579)



ARTICLE V.  FINANCIAL ASSURANCES



SEC. 25-50.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Financial assurances may take the form of surety bonds,
irrevocable letters of credit, trust funds, or other forms specified by the
State Mining and Geology Board, which the director reasonably determines are
adequate to perform reclamation in accordance with the applicant's approved
reclamation plan.  The financial assurances shall be made payable to the
city and the State Department of Conservation.



   (B)   The amount of required financial assurances shall be based
upon the following criteria:



      (1)   The estimated costs of reclamation for the years or
phases stipulated in the approved reclamation plan, including any maintenance
of reclaimed areas as may be required, subject to adjustment for the actual
amount required to reclaim lands disturbed by surface mining activities since
January 1, 1976, and new lands to be disturbed by surface mining activities
in the upcoming year;



      (2)   An analysis of physical activities necessary to
implement the approved reclamation plan, the unit costs for these activities,
the number of units of each of these activities, and the actual
administrative costs of the city and of a third-party contractor retained by
the city to implement the reclamation plan;



      (3)   Financial assurances to ensure compliance with
revegetation, restoration of water bodies, restoration of aquatic or wildlife
habitat, and any other applicable element of the approved reclamation plan
shall be based on cost estimates that include, but are not limited to, labor,
equipment, materials, mobilization of equipment, administration, and
reasonable profit by a third-party contractor retained by the city to
implement the reclamation plan; and



      (4)   A contingency factor of ten percent.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-51.  APPLICATION.



   A financial assurances proposal shall be filed with the department
prior to the securing of financial assurances.  Such proposal shall be
prepared by a State registered professional engineer approved by the
director.  The financial assurances proposal shall be accompanied by a fee
in an amount established by resolution of the city council.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-52.  TRANSMITTAL OF COPIES.



   Within 30 days of receipt of a complete financial assurances proposal,
the director shall forward a copy of the proposal, together with any
documentation supporting the proposal, to the State Department of
Conservation for review.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-53.  EVALUATION OF COMMENTS.



   (A)   The State Department of Conservation shall have 45 days from
its receipt of a financial assurances proposal to prepare comments.  The
director shall prepare a written response to any comments received from the
State Department of Conservation.  Such written response shall describe the
disposition of the major issues raised by the State Department of
Conservation.  Additionally, if the director's position is at variance with
any of the recommendations made or objections raised in the State Department
of Conservation's comments, the written response shall address, in detail,
why specific comments and suggestions were not accepted.



   (B)   The director shall forward to the applicant copies of any
written responses received from the State Department of Conservation, as well
as the responses prepared by the director.



   (C)   If the State Department of Conservation does not comment
within 45 days of receipt of the financial assurances proposal, the director
shall assume that the cost estimates contained within the proposal are
adequate unless there is reason to determine that additional costs may be
incurred.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-54.  APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF FINANCIAL ASSURANCES PROPOSAL.



   (A)   The commission shall approve or deny a financial assurances
proposal after conducting a public hearing.  At the public hearing, the
commission shall consider any comments received from the State Department of
Conservation.



   (B)   The commission may approve a financial assurances proposal
upon making the following findings:



      (1)   The financial assurances proposal complies with the
SMARA, the SMARA Regulations and this chapter.



      (2)   The financial assurances proposal is sufficient to fund
the amount required by section 25-50(B) of this chapter.



   (C)   If the commission does not approve a financial assurances
proposal, the director shall return the proposal to the applicant within 60
days.  The applicant shall have 60 days from the date on which the financial
assurances proposal is returned to revise the proposal to address identified
deficiencies.



   (D)   The director shall send a copy of each approved financial
assurances proposal to the Department of Conservation, together with any
relevant supporting documents.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-55.  SECURING AND MAINTENANCE OF FINANCIAL ASSURANCES.



   The applicant shall secure financial assurances in accordance with the
approved financial assurances proposal prior to conducting surface mining
operations.  The financial assurances shall remain in effect for the
duration of the surface mining operation and any additional period until
reclamation is completed.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-56.  REVISION.



   Each year, no later than 45 days prior to the anniversary date of the
approval of the financial assurances proposal, the operator shall submit any
revisions to the financial assurances to the director.  If revisions to the
financial assurances are not required, the operator shall explain, in
writing, why revisions are not required.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-57.  ANNUAL ADJUSTMENT.



   The director shall annually adjust the amount of financial assurances
required for a surface mining operation for any one year to account for new
lands disturbed by surface mining operations, inflation, and reclamation of
lands accomplished in accordance with the approved reclamation plan.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-58.  NEW OWNERSHIP.



   If a mining operation is sold or ownership is transferred to another
person, the existing financial assurances shall remain in force until new
financial assurances are secured from the new owner and have been approved in
accordance with this chapter.  Within 30 days of the transfer of ownership,
each new owner shall provide the director a statement in a form acceptable to
the city attorney accepting responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in
accordance with the reclamation plan.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-59.  FORFEITURE AND RELEASE.



   (A)   If the director determines that an operator is financially
incapable of performing reclamation in accordance with the approved
reclamation plan, or has abandoned its surface mining operation without
commencing reclamation, the director shall do the following:



      (1)   Notify the operator by personal service or certified
mail that the city intends to take appropriate action to forfeit the
financial assurances.  Such notification shall specify the reasons for
forfeiting the financial assurances.



      (2)   Allow the operator 60 days to commence or cause the
commencement of reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation
plan.  Reclamation shall be completed within the time limits specified in
the approved reclamation plan or such other time period as is mutually agreed
by the director and the operator.



      (3)   Take appropriate action to require forfeiture of the
financial assurances if the operator does not substantially comply with
subdivision (2) of this section.



      (4)   Use the proceeds from the forfeited financial assurances
to conduct and complete reclamation in accordance with the approved
reclamation plan.  In no event shall the financial assurances be used for
any other purpose.  The operator shall be responsible for the costs of
conducting and completing reclamation in accordance with the approved
reclamation plan that are in excess of the proceeds from the forfeited
financial assurances.



   (B)   Upon determining that reclamation has been completed in
accordance with the approved reclamation plan, the director shall release
financial assurances for that surface mining operation.  The director shall
give written notice of the release of the financial assurances to the
operator and to the State Department of Conservation.



(Ord. No. 2579)



ARTICLE VI.  INTERIM MANAGEMENT PLANS



SEC. 25-65.  APPLICATION.



   Within 90 days of a surface mining operation becoming idle, the
operator shall file with the department an interim management plan for review
and approval.  The interim management plan shall provide measures the
operator will implement to maintain the surface mining operation site in
compliance with this chapter including, but not limited to, all permit
conditions.  The interim management plan shall be accompanied by a fee in an
amount established by resolution of the city council.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-66.  TRANSMITTAL OF COPIES.



   Within 30 days of acceptance of an interim management plan for filing,
the director shall forward a copy of the interim management plan to the State
Department of Conservation for review.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-67.  APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF INTERIM MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   (A)   The commission shall approve or deny a proposed interim
management plan within 60 days of the acceptance of a proposed plan for
filing, unless the operator consents to a longer period.  Such decision
shall not be made before the State Department of Conservation has had 30 days
to review the proposed interim management plan.  The commission shall
approve a proposed interim management plan upon making a finding, based on
substantial evidence, that the interim management plan is consistent with the
requirements of the SMARA, the SMARA Regulations and this chapter.



   (B)   If the commission denies a proposed interim management plan,
the director shall notify the operator in writing of any deficiencies in the
plan.  The operator shall have 30 days from such notice, or any longer
period mutually agreed upon by the director and the operator, to submit a
revised plan.



   (C)   The commission shall approve or deny approval of a revised
interim management plan within 60 days of receipt.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-68.  DURATION.



   The interim management plan shall remain in effect for a period not to
exceed five years.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-69.  EXPIRATION.



   Upon expiration of an interim management plan, the director shall take
one of the following actions:



   (A)   Renew the interim management plan for another period not to
exceed five years.  An interim management plan shall not be renewed if the
operator has not fully complied with the plan.



   (B)   Require the operator to commence reclamation in accordance
with the approved reclamation plan.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-70.  MAINTENANCE OF FINANCIAL ASSURANCES.



   Financial assurances required by this chapter shall remain in effect
during the period that a surface mining operation is idle.



(Ord. No. 2579)



ARTICLE VII.  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



SEC. 25-80.  APPEALS.



   (A)   The applicant, city staff, or any interested party may appeal
to the city council any decision approving or denying a surface mining
permit, modification of a surface mining permit, a reclamation plan,
financial assurances or an interim management plan.  No appeal shall be
processed unless filed in accordance with this section.



   (B)   An appeal shall be made by filing a notice of appeal with the
director within the time permitted by section 16-455 of the code.  The
notice shall state all of the grounds for the appeal. Upon receipt of a
timely appeal, the director shall transmit to the city clerk the notice of
appeal and all other documents constituting the record upon which the
decision was made.



   (C)   An appeal shall be accompanied by a fee established by
resolution of the city council to cover the cost of processing the appeal.



   (D)   The effectiveness of any decision approving or denying a
surface mining permit, modification of a surface mining permit, a reclamation
plan, financial assurances or an interim management plan shall be stayed
during the appeal period set forth in this section and the pendency of any
appeal.



   (E)   Within the time permitted by section 16-456(A), the city
council shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal.  The city council
shall adopt a resolution affirming, reversing or modifying the decision being
appealed.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-81.  ANNUAL OPERATIONS REPORT.



   The owner or operator shall file with the department an annual
operations report as required by Cal. Pub. Res. Code, Section 2207(b).



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-82.  INSPECTION.



   (A)   The director shall arrange for inspection of a surface mining
operation within six months of receipt of the annual operations report
required by this chapter in order to determine whether the surface mining
operation is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and State
regulations.  In no event shall less than one inspection be conducted in any
calendar year.  The director may cause such inspections to be conducted by a
State-registered geologist, State-registered civil engineer, State-licensed
landscape architect, or State-registered forester, who is experienced in land
reclamation and who has not been employed by the mining operation in any
capacity during the previous 12 months.



   (B)   All inspections shall be conducted using the form provided by
the State.



   (C)   The operator shall be solely responsible for the reasonable
cost of the inspection.



   (D)   The director shall notify the State Department of Conservation
within 30 days of completion of the inspection that the inspection has been
conducted.  The notice shall contain a statement regarding the surface
mining operation's compliance with the SMARA, shall include a copy of the
completed inspection form, and shall specify which aspects of the surface
mining operation, if any, are inconsistent with that statute.  If the
operator has a review of its reclamation plan, financial assurances, or an
interim management plan pending before the State Department of Conservation
or the commission, the notice shall so indicate.  The director shall forward
to the operator a copy of the notice, a copy of the completed inspection
form, and any supporting documentation, including, but not limited to, any
inspection report prepared by the geologist, civil engineer, landscape
architect, or forester.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-83.  ABANDONMENT.



   Unless review of an interim management plan is pending before the
commission, or an appeal is pending before the city council, a surface mining
operation that remains idle for over one year after becoming idle without the
approval of an interim management plan shall be deemed abandoned.  The owner
of a surface mining operation that has been deemed abandoned pursuant to this
section shall commence and complete reclamation in accordance with the
approved reclamation plan.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-84.  NOTICE OF CHANGE OF ADDRESS.



   Every operator shall notify the director of each change of address. 
Notice shall be given no more than seven days after the change is effective
and shall be given on a form provided by the director.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-85.  NOTICE OF CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OF PROPERTY.



   Any person who owns real property on which a surface mining operation
is being conducted or for which a surface mining permit has been issued shall
file a certified report with the department within 30 days of encumbering,
selling, transferring or conveying the property or part thereof or permitting
the property or part thereof to be encumbered, sold, transferred or
conveyed.  The report shall be made on a form provided by the director. 
Within five business days of its receipt, the director shall transmit a copy
of the report to the State Department of Conservation and shall file a copy
with the county clerk.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-86.  ANNUAL UPDATE REPORT.



   By July 1 of each year, for each active and idle surface mining
operation, the director shall submit to the State Department of Conservation
either of the following a copy of any amendments to the surface mining permit
and reclamation plan for such operation or a statement that there have been
no amendments during the previous year.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-87.  REGULATIONS NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to be exclusive and
compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other applicable
provisions of the code or other law.



(Ord. No. 2579)



SEC. 25-88.  FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   (A)   Upon determining that a surface mining operation is not in
compliance with SMARA, the SMARA Regulations, this chapter or other
applicable law, the director may notify the operator of the violation by
personal service or certified mail.



   (B)   If the violation extends beyond 30 days after the notification
given pursuant to subsection (A), the director may issue an order by personal
service or certified mail requiring compliance; provided, however, that such
order may require cessation of further mining activities if the operator does
not have an approved reclamation plan or financial assurances.  The order
shall specify the violations, a time for compliance and shall set a date for
a hearing before the commission. In setting a compliance date, the director
shall take into account the seriousness of the violation and any good faith
efforts to comply made by the operator.  The date of the commission hearing
shall not be sooner than 30 days after the date of the order.  The order
shall not take effect until the operator has been provided a hearing before
the commission.



   (C)   (1)   The director may impose an administrative penalty of
not more than $5,000 per day on any operator that violates or fails to comply
with an order issued under subsection (B) after the order's effective date. 
Such penalty shall be imposed by means of an order to the operator that is
served by personal service or certified mail.  The penalty shall be assessed
from the original date of noncompliance.  In determining the amount of the
administrative penalty, the director shall consider the following factors:



         (a)   The nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of
the violation;



         (b)   Any prior history of violations;



         (c)   The degree of culpability;



         (d)   Any economic savings resulting from the violation;
and



         (e)   Any other matters justice may require.



      (2)   Administrative penalty orders shall be effective upon
issuance.  The operator shall make payment for an administrative penalty
within 30 days unless a petition for review has been filed pursuant to
subsection (D).



   (D)   Within 30 days of the issuance an administrative penalty order
pursuant to subsection (C), the operator may petition the city council for
review of the order.  The operator shall be notified by personal service or
certified mail whether the city council will review the order setting
administrative penalties.  The city council may affirm, modify, or set
aside, in whole or in part, any order setting administrative penalties.  The
decision of the city council shall be by resolution, shall be effective upon
issuance and shall be served on the operator by personal service or certified
mail. The operator shall make payment for the administrative penalty ordered
by the city council within 30 days of service of the order.



   (E)   Any operator aggrieved by decision of the city council
pursuant to subsection (D) may obtain judicial review in accordance with Cal.
Pub. Res. Code, Section 2774.2(e).  Payment of the administrative penalty
shall be held in an interest bearing impound account pending the resolution
of a duly filed petition for judicial review.



(Ord. No. 2579)



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to California Codes





References to 1964 Code of Ordinances





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO CALIFORNIA CODES



BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONS CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section




Division 2
 
11-237


Division 3, Chapter 9 (commencing with 7000)
 
6-2


Division 3, Chapter 11.4 and 11.5
 
11-170, 11-185


Division 9 (commencing with 23000)
 
7-125


4601
 
11-233


4601, subdivision (b), paragraph (1)
 
11-232


4612, subdivision (b), paragraph (1)
 
11-234, 11-237, 11-238, 11-239, 11-242, 11-244, 11-245, 11-246


5641 et seq.
 
22-245


7574.1
 
7-260


7582.1(a)
 
7-260


7582.11
 
11-72


8762
 
15-11


8771
 
15-136, 15-151


Ch. 10.5, Division 2 (commencing with 4600)
 
11-237, 11-246


16001
 
11-9


16001.5
 
11-9


23396.5
 
7-125


25620
 
7-125


26001(f)
 
16-10


26010
 
11-394


26090
 
11-401


26160
 
11-401


 
 
 




 



CIVIL CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section




13
 
1-4


51.2
 
16-410P


51.3
 
16-410B, 16-410P, 16-410S


51.11
 
16-10


51.12
 
16-410B


714(c)(3)
 
14-81


714(d)(1)(A)-(B)
 
14-86


798.56
 
24-39


801.5(a)(1)-(2)
 
14-81


815–816
 
17-66


1351
 
15-96


1645
 
1-4


1722(b)(1)-(6)
 
23-14


1940 et seq.
 
14-97


1941 et seq.
 
14-110


2982
 
6-2


3480
 
7-151


4080
 
14-86, 14-93


4100
 
16-410B


9550
 
4-16


9554
 
4-16


 
 
 




 



CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section




–
 
1-46


Part 2, Title 5, Chapter 4, Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10)
 
7-92, 7-158


1094.5
 
1-45, 1-61, 4-14, 7-11, 7-39, 7-228, 7-251, 7-274, 10-18, 11-26, 11-70.4,
11-75.2, 11-228, 11-153, 11-154, 13-37, 14-100, 15-179, 15-180, 16-600,
19-59, 22-231


1094.6
 
1-45, 1-61, 4-14, 7-11, 7-39, 7-228, 7-251, 7-274, 10-18, 11-26, 11-70.4,
11-75.2, 11-153, 11-154, 11-228, 11-379, 13-37, 14-100, 15-179, 15-180,
16-600, 19-59, 22-231


1094.8
 
16-348, 16-600


1822.50 et seq.
 
14-106


6062
 
7-92, 7-158




 



CODE OF REGULATIONS



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section




–
 
16-10


Title 14, Division 5.5
 
17-3


Title 24
 
16-440


3500 et seq.
 
25.18


3500–3505
 
25-39


3700–3713
 
25-39


13110
 
17-57


13111
 
17-58


13240–13244
 
17-57


13250(b)(2)
 
17-57


13250(b)(3)
 
17-57


13250(b)(4)
 
17-57


13250(b)(6)
 
17-57


13569
 
17-58


13571(a)
 
17-57


13573
 
17-58


30512
 
17-58


30513
 
17-58


30603(a)
 
17-58


30624
 
17-58




 



CORPORATIONS CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section


Title 1, Division 2, Part 2 (commencing with 5110)
 
11-232



 



EDUCATION CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section


19910
 
7-272


19911
 
7-272


66025.9
 
16-410B, 16-410C


94739 (former)
 
11-232


100850
 
11-232


Part 10, Ch. 22 (commencing with Section 17700)
 
15-122



 



ELECTIONS CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section


1301(b)(1)
 
1-50


21606
 
2-3.5


 
 
 



 



GOVERNMENT CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section




–
 
2-181


Title 1, Division 9 (commencing with Section 7900)
 
2-179


Chapter 3, Division 4, Title 1
 
2-177


Chapter 3, Title 7
 
15-236


Article 3.5
 
15-63


Chapter 4, Part 2, Division 3, Title 4
 
2-176


Chapter 4.7 (commencing with Section 65970)
 
15-116


Chapter 4.7, Division 1, Title 7
 
15-130


Article 6.5 (commencing with Section 38780)
 
14-45


Title 7, Division 2 (commencing with Section 66410)
 
15-1


Chapter 16, Division 3, Title 23
 
19-200


Chapter 18, Division 3, Title 23
 
19-200


Title 23, Division 3, Chapters 16 and 18
 
19-200


935
 
2-183


3101
 
6-2


3500 et seq.
 
3-36, 3-51, 3-62


6061
 
15-177


6062a
 
15-170


6502
 
15-3


7260 et seq.
 
24-43


7597(a)
 
7-272


8558
 
4-20


8558(a)
 
6-2


8558(b)
 
6-2


8612
 
6-5


12900 et seq.
 
16-501


18541
 
16-410B, 16-410C


34004
 
2-176


34871
 
2-3


36937
 
13-91


36937(a)
 
13-90


37209
 
2-176


38773.1
 
7-64


38773.5
 
7-42, 7-64


40802 - 40805
 
2-176


40805.5
 
2-176


41004
 
2-176


50022.9
 
8-90


50030
 
23-43


51070–51097
 
17-66


51083.5
 
17-70


51200 et seq.
 
5-18


51201
 
17-3


53054 et seq.
 
23-14, 23-41


53055.1
 
23-41


53055.2
 
23-41


53056(b)
 
23-41


53066.3
 
23-11


53069.4
 
7-63, 7-148.12


53088 et seq.
 
23-14, 23-41


53088(q)
 
23-41


53088.2
 
23-14, 23-41


53311 et seq.
 
13-90


53317.3
 
13-90, 13-91


53340
 
13-90, 13-91


53756
 
19-133, 22-60


54950 et seq.
 
2-221


54952
 
2-221


54952.2
 
2-221


54956
 
2-223


54999 - 54999.6
 
22-61


60451.3
 
15-264


65090
 
16-589


65091
 
15-237, 16-434, 16-488, 16-537, 16-546, 16-589


65094
 
15-42


65103
 
2-95


65302
 
18-1


65400
 
2-95


65401
 
2-95


65402
 
2-95


65560
 
18-1


65583
 
16-501


65589.5(d)(1)
 
16-410B


65889.5(d)(2)
 
16-410O, 16-420H


65601 - 65607
 
22-177


65800
 
18-1


65850
 
16-579


65850.5
 
14-80


65850.55
 
14-84


65850.7
 
14-90--14-95


65852.2
 
16-466, 16-622


65854
 
16-580


65864 et seq.
 
15-166


65915 et seq.
 
16-410A


65915
 
16-410E


65915(b)
 
16-410E, 16-410F


65915(b)(1)
 
16-410E, 16-410L


65915(b)(1)(A)
 
16-410B


65915(b)(1)(B)
 
16-410B


65915(b)(1)(C)
 
16-410B, 16-410J


65915(b)(1)(D)
 
16-410B


65915(b)(1)(E)
 
16-410B, 16-410C


65915(b)(2)
 
16-410E


65915(b)(2)(d)( 1)
 
16-410F


65915(b)(3)
 
16-410B


65915(c)
 
16-410E, 16-410S


65915(c)(1)
 
16-410B, 16-410F, 16-410S


65915(c)(1)(c)(2 )
 
16-410B


65915(c)(2)
 
16-410B, 16-410S


65915(c)(2)(A)
 
16-410S


65915(c)(2)(B)
 
16-410S


65915(c)(2)(C)
 
16-410S


65915(d)
 
16-410L


65915(d)(1)
 
16-410L


65915(d)(1)(A)
 
16-410N


65915(d)(1)(B)
 
16-410N


65915(d)(1)(C)
 
16-410N


65915(d)(2)
 
16-410B


65915(d)(2)(A)
 
16-410M


65915(d)(2)(B)
 
16-410M


65915(d)(2)(C)
 
16-410M


65915(d)(3)
 
16-410N


65915(e)(1)
 
16-410O


65915(e)(2)
 
16-410G, 16-410O


65915(f)
 
16-410B, 16-410H


65915(f)(3)
 
16-410J


65915(f)(5)
 
16-410H


65915(g)
 
16-410K


65915(g)(2)
 
16-410F, 16-410K


65915(h)(1)
 
16-410I


65915(h)(1)(A)
 
16-410I


65915(h)(1)(B)
 
16-410M


65915(h)(2)
 
16-410F


65915(h)(2)(A)
 
16-410I


65915(h)(2)(B)
 
16-410I


65915(h)(3)
 
16-410I, 16-410N


65915(h)(4)
 
16-410B


65915(i)
 
16-410B, 16-410Q


65915(j)
 
16-410L


65915(k)
 
16-410B, 16-410L, 16-410N


65915(k)(1)
 
16-410L


65915(k)(2)
 
16-410L


65915(k)(3)
 
16-410L


65915(l)
 
16-410L


65915(o)(1)
 
16-410B


65915(p)
 
16-410F, 16-410P


65915(p)(1)
 
16-410P


65915(p)(2)
 
16-410P


65915(p)(3)
 
16-410P


65915(p)(3)(A)
 
16-410P


65915(p)(3)(B)
 
16-410P


65915(p)(3)(C)
 
16-410P


65915(p)(4)
 
16-410P


65915(p)(5)
 
16-410P


65915(p)(7)
 
16-410P


65915.5(a)
 
16-410B, 16-410T


65915.5(b)
 
16-410B, 16-410T


65915.5(c)
 
16-410B


65915.5(d)
 
16-410T


65915.5(e)
 
16-410T


65915.5(f)
 
16-410T


65915.5
 
16-425


65950–65957.1
 
17-57


65970 et seq.
 
15-121


66000 et seq.
 
15-179


66000
 
15-237


66007
 
21-30


66007(b)
 
15-173


66007(i)
 
15-173


66015
 
14-84


66016
 
14-84, 15-237


66020
 
15-180


66021
 
15-180


66022
 
15-180


66024
 
15-180


66410
 
15-235, 17-3


66411.1
 
15-45


66412
 
15-1


66412.1
 
15-1


66412.2
 
15-1


66412.5
 
15-1


66426
 
15-10


66426(1)
 
15-11


66426(2)
 
15-11


66427.1
 
16-387


66428
 
15-11


66428(a)(2)
 
15-11


66436
 
15-17, 15-26


66441
 
15-153


66451.11
 
15-13


66452.5
 
15-25


66463.5
 
17-57


66477
 
15-95, 15-166


66485
 
15-137


66486
 
15-137


66495
 
15-16


66496
 
15-153, 15-154


66499
 
15-280, 21-26


66499.20½
 
15-260


66499.36(B)
 
15-267


 
 
 




 



HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section




–
 
22-111


Chapter 1, Division 2
 
7-280


Chapter 2, Division 2
 
7-280


Chapter 3.01, Division 2
 
7-280


Chapter 3.2, Division 2
 
7-280


Chapter 6.5, Article 2, Division 20
 
11-301


Chapter 6.11, Division 20
 
11-301


Chapter 6.67, Division 20
 
11-301


Chapter 6.7, Division 20
 
11-301


Chapter 6.75, Division 20
 
19-200


Chapter 6.95, Division 20
 
11-301


Chapter 8, Division 2
 
7-280


Division 24, Part 1 (commencing with Section 33000)
 
15-166


113.700, Part 7 et seq.
 
8-47


1250
 
16-10, 17-3


1502
 
16-10, 17-3


1568.01
 
16-10, 17-3


1569.2
 
16-10, 17-3


1570.7
 
16-10


1596.78
 
16-10, 17-3


1760.2
 
16-10, 17-3


11018.5
 
7-280, 11-390


11054
 
11-46


11055
 
11-46


11057
 
11-46


11058
 
11-46


11362.2
 
7-282


11362.5
 
7-280, 11-390


11362.5 et seq.
 
7-280


11362.7
 
7-280, 11-390


11364(a)
 
7-272


11550   
 
7-272


11834.02
 
16-10, 17-3


12505
 
7-147.1


12511
 
7-147.1


13002
 
7-294


17008(a)
 
16-188, 16-256


17008(b)
 
16-188, 16-256


17920.3
 
14-110


17951
 
14-84


17958.1
 
16-467


17975
 
14-96


17975 et seq.
 
14-96, 14-98


17975.1
 
14-96


17975.2
 
14-96 , 14-99


17975.5
 
14-96


18008
 
6-2


18036.5
 
6-2


25280 et seq.
 
19-200


25283
 
19-200


25299.10 et seq.
 
19-200


25404.1
 
19-200


33000
 
2-95


33334
 
16-410S


33396
 
13-70


50052.5
 
15-102, 15-173, 16-410B, 16-410P


50053
 
15-102, 15-173, 16-410B


50079.5
 
15-102, 15-173


50093
 
16-410B


50105
 
16-410B


50675.2(h)
 
16-10


50801(i)
 
16-10


51312
 
16-410P


113923
 
11-45


500105
 
15-102, 15-173




 



LABOR CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section


1771
 
4-17, 4-58


3211.92
 
6-2



 



PENAL CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section




–
 
1-29, 7-91, 11-46, 11-265, 16-354


171b
 
7-272


184
 
11-46


290
 
11-46, 11-265, 11-395, 11-398, 11-399


313 et seq.
 
7-272


326.5
 
10-39


331 et seq.
 
7-272


374.4
 
7-294


415
 
7-272


484
 
11-46


484b
 
11-46


484e
 
11-46


490.5
 
7-272


496(a)
 
11-46


503
 
11-46


594
 
7-92, 7-93, 7-272


594.3
 
7-92, 7-93


594.4
 
7-93


602.1(b)
 
7-272


602q
 
7-272


637.5
 
23-14


640.5
 
7-92, 7-93


640.6
 
7-92, 7-93


640.7
 
7-92, 7-93


647
 
7-272


830 et seq.
 
7-260


830
 
3-37, 3-63, 7-132


836.5
 
5-93


853.1
 
1-36


1275
 
1-33


1463
 
1-33




 



PUBLIC CONTRACT CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section




22000 et seq.
 
4-10


22002(c)
 
4-1


22002(d)
 
4-1


22032(a)
 
4-11, 4-12


22032(b)
 
4-5, 4-13, 4-72


22032(c)
 
4-14


22034
 
4-13


22034(a)(2)
 
4-13


22034(d)
 
4-13


22037
 
4-13


22050
 
4-1, 4-20


 
 
 




 



PUBLIC RESOURCES CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section




Division 3 (commencing with Section 3000)
 
25-5


2207
 
25-2, 25-3


2207(b)
 
25-81


2710 et seq.
 
25-17


2772
 
25-35, 25-37, 25-39


2773
 
25-35, 25-37, 25-39


2774.2(e)
 
25-88


14500 et seq.
 
19-190


21000 et seq.
 
25-10


21080(b)(1)
 
16-420F


21155(b)
 
16-410P


30106
 
17-3


30107
 
17-3


30214
 
17-39


30514
 
17-57


30603(a)
 
17-57


30603(a)(5)
 
17-3


30603(2)
 
17-3


30610
 
17-57


30610(e)
 
17-3


30611
 
17-57


40000 et seq.
 
19-151


49520
 
19-180




 



PUBLIC UTILITIES CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section




234(a)
 
23-43


616
 
23-43


2902
 
23-43


5840(m)
 
23-44


5840(n)
 
23-44


5840(q)
 
23-44


5860(a)
 
23-44


5860(d)
 
23-44


5870
 
23-44


5870(g)(1)
 
23-44


5870(n)
 
23-44


5900
 
23-44


7901
 
23-43


7901.1
 
23-43




 



REVENUE AND TAX CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section




–
 
11-1


Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 23701)
 
11-9, 11-30


421-4322
 
17-70


23701(a)
 
10-2, 10-4


23701(b)
 
10-2, 10-4


23701(d)
 
10-2, 10-4, 10-28


23701(e)
 
10-2, 10-4


23701(f)
 
10-2, 10-4


23701(g)
 
10-2, 10-4


23701(1)
 
10-2, 10-4




 



STREETS AND HIGHWAYS CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section


–
 
13-81, 13-82


Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1
 
13-83


Division 4.5
 
13-90



 



VEHICLE CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section




–
 
8-25, 8-35, 8-70, 8-71, 8-77, 8-85, 19-151


630
 
8-41.1


670
 
8-41.1


1808.1
 
11-268


5004
 
7-40


5007
 
8-41.1


6853
 
8-56


13202.6
 
7-92


16500.5
 
19-243


21100(k)
 
8-13


22511
 
8-57


22511.55
 
8-41.1, 8-56


22511.59
 
8-41.1, 8-56


22512
 
8-56


22662
 
7-34


22851
 
8-40


22852
 
8-38


23115
 
19-166


27908
 
11-268


35550
 
19-245




 



WATER CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section


Division 7
 
22-215, 22-216


350 et seq.
 
22.161


13373
 
22-216


13550
 
22-177


13551
 
22-177



 



WELFARE AND INSTITUTIONS CODE



 

Cal. Code Cite
 
Code Section


602
 
7-93


742.10 et seq.
 
7-93


5116
 
16-10, 17-3



 



REFERENCES TO 1964 CODE OF ORDINANCES



 

1964 Code Section
 
2005 Code Section




1-1
 
1-1


1-2
 
1-2


1-3
 
1-3


1-4
 
1-4


1-4.1
 
1-5


1-5
 
1-6


1-6
 
1-7


1-8
 
1-8


1-9
 
1-9


1-10
 
1-10


1-11
 
1-11


1-12
 
1-20


1-12.1
 
1-21


1-12.2
 
1-22


1-12.3
 
1-23


1-12.4
 
1-24


1-12.5
 
1-25


1-13
 
1-26


1-14
 
1-27


1-15
 
1-28


1-16
 
1-29


1-17
 
1-30


1-18
 
1-31


1-19
 
1-32


1-20
 
1-33


1-21
 
1-34


1-22
 
1-35


1-23
 
1-36


1-24
 
1-37


1-25
 
1-38


1-26
 
1-12


1-27
 
1-13


1-28
 
1-45


1-29
 
1-46


1-40
 
1-50


1-41
 
1-51


2-1
 
2-1


2-3
 
2-145


2-3.1
 
2-146


2-3.2
 
2-147


2-3.3
 
2-148


2-3.4
 
2-149


2-4
 
2-165


2-4.1
 
2-166


2-4.2
 
2-167


2-4.3
 
2-168


2-4.4
 
2-169


2-5
 
2-135


2-6
 
2-136


2-7
 
2-137


2-8
 
2-138


2-9
 
2-155


2-10
 
2-156


2-11
 
2-157


2-12
 
3-1


2-16
 
3-2


2-17
 
3-3


2-18
 
3-3


2-19
 
3-3


2-26
 
3-4


2-42.1
 
3-35


2-42.2
 
3-36


2-42.3
 
3-37


2-42.4
 
3-38


2-42.5
 
3-39


2-42.6
 
3-40


2-42.7
 
3-41


2-42.8
 
3-42


2-42.9
 
3-43


2-42.10
 
3-44


2-42.10.1
 
3-45


2-42.11
 
3-46


2-42.12
 
3-47


2-42.13
 
3-48


2-42.14
 
3-49


2-42.15
 
3-50


2-42.16
 
3-51


2-42.20
 
3-60


2-42.21
 
3-61


2-42.22
 
3-62


2-42.23
 
3-63


2-42.24
 
3-64


2-42.25
 
3-65


2-42.26
 
3-66


2-42.27
 
3-67


2-42.28
 
3-68


2-42.29
 
3-69


2-42.30
 
3-70


2-42.31
 
3-71


2-42.31.1
 
3-72


2-42.32
 
3-73


2-42.33
 
3-74


2-42.34
 
3-75


2-42.35
 
3-76


2-42.36
 
3-77


2-87
 
2-181


2-87.1
 
2-182


2-87.2
 
2-183


2-88
 
2-184


2-89
 
2-185


2-90
 
2-186


2-91
 
2-205


2-92
 
2-210


2-92.1
 
2-211


2-93
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-94
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-95
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-96
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-97
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-98
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.1
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.2
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.3
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.4
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.5
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.6
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.8
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.9
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.10
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.11
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.12
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.13
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.14
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.16
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.17
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-99.19
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2-100
 
2-30


2-101
 
2-31


2-102
 
2-32


2-103
 
2-33


2-104
 
2-34


2-105
 
2-35


2-106
 
2-36


2-107
 
2-45


2-108
 
2-46


2-109
 
2-47


2-110
 
2-48


2-111
 
2-49


2-112
 
2-55


2-113
 
2-56


2-114
 
2-57


2-115
 
2-58


2-116
 
2-59


2-117
 
2-65


2-118
 
2-66


2-119
 
2-67


2-120
 
2-68


2-121
 
2-69


2-122
 
2-70


2-123
 
2-80


2-124
 
2-81


2-125
 
2-82


2-126
 
2-83


2-127
 
2-84


2-128
 
2-115


2-129
 
2-116


2-130
 
2-117


2-131
 
2-118


2-132
 
2-119


2-140
 
13-80


2-141
 
13-81


2-142
 
13-82


2-143
 
13-83


2-144
 
2-10


2-144.5
 
2-15


2-145
 
2-95


2-146
 
2-96


2-147
 
2-97


2-148
 
2-98


2-149
 
2-99


2-168
 
2-5


3-1
 
9-1


3-2
 
9-2


3-3
 
9-3


3-4
 
9-4


3-47
 
9-10


3-48
 
9-11


3-49
 
9-12


3-50
 
9-13


3-51
 
9-14


4.1-1
 
8-90


5-1
 
5-1


5-2
 
5-2


5-2.1
 
5-3


5-2.2
 
5-4


5-2.3
 
5-5


5-2.4
 
5-6


5-2.5
 
5-7


5-2.6
 
5-8


5-2.7
 
5-9


5-2.8
 
5-10


5-2.9
 
5-11


5-2.10
 
5-12


5-2.11
 
5-13


5-2.12
 
5-14


5-2.13
 
5-15


5-3
 
5-16


5-4
 
5-17


5-5
 
5-18


5-7
 
5-25


5-8
 
5-26


5-9
 
5-27


5-9.1
 
5-28


5-10
 
5-29


5-11
 
5-30


5-12
 
5-31


5-13
 
5-32


5-13.1
 
5-33


5-14
 
5-34


5-15
 
5-35


5-16
 
5-36


5-22
 
5-40


5-23
 
5-41


5-24
 
5-42


5-24.1
 
5-43


5-24.2
 
5-44


5-25
 
5-45


5-26
 
5-46


5-27
 
5-50


5-27.1
 
5-51


5-27.2
 
5-52


5-27.3
 
5-53


5-28
 
5-54


5-29
 
5-55


5-30
 
5-56


5-31
 
5-57


5-32
 
5-58


5-32.1
 
5-59


5-33
 
5-60


5-34
 
5-61


5-35
 
5-62


5-36
 
5-63


5-36.1
 
5-64


5-36.2
 
5-65


5-37
 
5-66


5-38
 
5-67


5-38.1
 
5-68


5-38.2
 
5-69


5-38.3
 
5-70


5-38.4
 
5-71


5-39
 
5-72


5-40
 
5-73


5-41
 
5-74


5-42
 
5-80


5-43
 
5-81


5-44
 
5-85


5-45
 
5-86


5-46
 
5-87


5-46.1
 
5-88


5-47
 
5-89


5-48
 
5-90


5-49
 
5-91


5-49.1
 
5-92


5-50
 
5-93


5-50.1
 
5-94


5-50.2
 
5-95


5-51
 
5-96


5-52
 
5-97


5-53
 
5-98


5-54
 
5-99


5-55
 
5-100


5-56
 
5-101


5-57
 
5-102


5-58
 
5-103


5-59
 
5-104


5-60
 
5-105


5-61
 
5-106


5-62
 
5-107


5-63
 
5-108


5-64
 
5-109


5-65
 
5-115


5-66
 
5-116


5-67
 
5-117


5-68
 
5-118


5-69
 
5-119


5-70
 
5-120


8.1-1
 
10-1


8.1-2
 
10-2


8.1-3
 
10-3


8.1-4
 
10-4


8.1-5
 
10-5


8.1-6
 
10-6


8.1-7
 
10-7


8.1-8
 
10-8


8.1-9
 
10-9


8.1-10
 
10-10


8.1-11
 
10-11


8.1-12
 
10-12


8.1-13
 
10-13


8.1-14
 
10-14


8.1-15
 
10-15


8.1-16
 
10-16


8.1-17
 
10-17


8.1-18
 
10-18


8.1-19
 
10-19


8.1-20
 
10-20


8.1-21
 
10-21


8.1-22
 
10-22


8.1-23
 
10-23


8.1-24
 
10-24


8.1-25
 
10-25


8.1-26
 
10-26


8.1-27
 
10-27


8.1-28
 
10-28


8.1-29
 
10-29


8.1-30
 
10-30


8.1-31
 
10-31


8.1-32
 
10-32


8.1-33
 
10-33


8.1-34
 
10-34


8.1-35
 
10-35


8.1-36
 
10-36


8.1-37
 
10-37


8.1-38
 
10-38


8.1-39
 
10-39


9-1
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-2
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-3
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-4
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-5
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-6
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-7
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-8
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-9
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-10
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-11
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-12
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-13
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-14
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-15
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-16
 
Repealed 11-27-07


9-17
 
14-55


9-18
 
14-56


9-19
 
14-57


9-20
 
14-58


9-21
 
14-59


9-22
 
14-60


9-23
 
14-61


9-24
 
14-62


9-25
 
14-63


9-26
 
14-64


9-27
 
14-65


9-28
 
14-66


9-29
 
14-67


9-29.1
 
14-67


9-30
 
14-45


9-31
 
14-46


9-32
 
14-47


9-33
 
14-48


9-34
 
14-49


9-35
 
14-50


9-36
 
14-51


9-37
 
14-70


9-38
 
14-71


9-39
 
14-75


9-40
 
14-76


10-1
 
6-1


10-2
 
6-2


10-3
 
6-3


10-4
 
6-4


10-5
 
6-5


10-6
 
6-6


10-7
 
6-7


10-8
 
6-8


10-9
 
6-9


12-1.1
 
11-140


12-1.2
 
11-141


12-1.3
 
11-142


12-1.4
 
11-143


12-1.5
 
11-144


12-1.6
 
11-145


12-1.7
 
11-146


12-1.8
 
11-147


12-1.9
 
11-148


12-1.10
 
11-149


12-1.11
 
11-150


12-1.12
 
11-151


12-1.13
 
11-152


12-1.14
 
11-153


12-1.15
 
11-154


12-1.16
 
11-155


12-1.17
 
11-156


12-1.18
 
11-157


12-1.19
 
11-158


12-1.20
 
11-159


12-2.1
 
11-170


12-2.2
 
11-171


12-2.3
 
11-172


12-2.4
 
11-173


12-2.5
 
11-174


12-2.6
 
11-175


12-2.7
 
11-176


12-2.8
 
11-177


12-2.9
 
11-178


12-3.1
 
Repealed 7-28-09


12-3.2
 
Repealed 7-28-09


12-3.3
 
Repealed 7-28-09


12-3.4
 
Repealed 7-28-09


12-3.5
 
Repealed 7-28-09


12-3.6
 
Repealed 7-28-09


12-3.7
 
Repealed 7-28-09


12-3.8
 
Repealed 7-28-09


12-3.9
 
Repealed 7-28-09


12-4.1
 
11-185


12-4.2
 
11-186


12-4.3
 
11-187


12-4.4
 
11-188


12-5.1
 
11-250


12-5.2
 
11-251


12-5.3
 
11-252


12-5.4
 
11-253


12-6.1
 
11-130


12-6.2
 
11-131


12-6.3
 
11-132


12-6.4
 
11-133


12-7.1
 
11-200


12-7.2
 
11-201


12-7.3
 
11-202


12-7.4
 
11-203


12-7.5
 
11-203


12-7.6
 
11-205


12-7.7
 
11-206


12-7.8
 
11-207


12-7.9
 
11-208


12-7.10
 
11-209


12-7.11
 
11-210


13-1
 
Repealed 11-27-07


13-2
 
Repealed 11-27-07


13-3
 
Repealed 11-27-07


13-4
 
Repealed 11-27-07


13-5
 
Repealed 11-27-07


13-6
 
Repealed 11-27-07


13-7
 
Repealed 11-27-07


13-8
 
Repealed 11-27-07


14-1
 
12-1


14-2
 
12-2


14-3
 
12-3


14-4
 
12-4


14-5
 
12-5


14-7
 
12-6


14-8
 
12-7


15-1
 
19-150


15-2
 
19-151


15-3
 
19-152


15-4
 
19-153


15-5
 
19-154


15-6
 
19-160


15-7
 
19-161


15-8
 
19-162


15-9
 
19-163


15-10
 
19-164


15-11
 
19-165


15-12
 
19-166


15-13
 
19-167


15-14
 
19-168


15-15
 
19-169


15-16
 
19-175


15-17
 
19-176


15-18
 
19-177


15-19
 
19-178


15-20
 
19-179


15-21
 
19-180


15-22
 
19-181


15-23
 
19-182


15-24
 
19-183


15-25
 
19-190


15-26
 
19-191


15-27
 
19-192


15-28
 
19-193


15-29
 
19-194


15-30
 
19-200


16-1
 
11-1


16-2
 
11-2


16-3
 
11-3


16-4
 
11-4


16-5
 
11-5


16-6
 
11-6


16-7
 
11-7


16-8
 
11-8


16-9
 
11-9


16-10
 
11-10


16-11
 
11-11


16-12
 
11-12


16-13
 
11-13


16-14
 
11-14


16-15
 
11-15


16-16
 
11-16


16-17
 
11-17


16-18
 
11-18


16-19
 
11-19


16-20
 
11-20


16-21
 
11-21


16-22
 
11-22


16-23
 
11-23


16-24
 
11-24


16-25
 
11-25


16-26
 
11-26


16-30
 
11-30


16-31
 
11-31


16-32
 
11-32


16-33
 
11-33


16-34
 
11-34


16-35
 
11-35


16-36
 
11-36


16-37
 
11-37


16-38
 
11-38


16-40
 
11-45


16-41
 
11-46


16-42
 
11-47


16-43
 
11-55


16-44
 
11-56


16-45
 
11-57


16-46
 
11-58


16-47
 
11-59


16-50
 
13-70


16-51
 
13-71


16-52
 
13-72


16-53
 
13-73


16.1-10
 
11-220


16.1-11
 
11-221


16.1-12
 
11-222


16.1-13
 
11-223


16.1-14
 
11-224


16.1-15
 
11-225


16.1-16
 
11-226


16.1-17
 
11-227


16.1-17.1
 
11-228


16.1-18
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-19
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-20
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-21
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-22
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-23
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-24
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-25
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-26
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-27
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-28
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-29
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-30
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-31
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-32
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-33
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-34
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-35
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-36
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-37
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-38
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-39
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-40
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-41
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-42
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-43
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-44
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-45
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-46
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-47
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-48
 
Repealed 1-8-19


16.1-49
 
Repealed 1-8-19


17.1-1
 
24-1


17.1-2
 
24-2


17.1-3
 
24-3


17.1-4
 
24-4


17.1-5
 
24-5


17.1-6
 
24-6


17.1-7
 
24-7


17.1-8
 
24-8


17.1-9
 
24-9


17.1-10
 
24-10


17.1-11
 
24-11


17.1-12
 
24-12


17.1-13
 
24-13


17.1-14
 
24-14


17.1-15
 
24-15


17.1-16
 
24-16


17.1-17
 
24-17


17.1-18
 
24-18


17.1-19
 
24-19


17.1-20
 
24-20


17.1-21
 
24-21


17.1-50
 
24-30


17.1-51
 
24-31


17.1-52
 
24-32


17.1-53
 
24-33


17.1-54
 
24-34


17.1-55
 
24-35


17.1-56
 
24-36


17.1-57
 
24-37


17.1-58
 
24-38


17.1-59
 
24-39


17.1-60
 
24-40


17.1-61
 
24-41


17.1-62
 
24-42


17.1-63
 
24-43


18-23
 
8-1


18-36
 
8-2


18-37
 
8-3


18-38
 
8-4


18-41
 
8-65


18-42
 
8-66


18-43
 
8-67


18-44
 
8-68


18-45
 
8-69


18-46
 
8-70


18-47
 
8-71


18-48
 
8-72


18-49
 
8-73


18-50
 
8-74


18-51
 
8-75


18-52
 
8-76


18-53
 
8-77


18-54
 
8-78


18-60
 
8-35


18-61
 
8-36


18-62
 
8-37


18-63
 
8-38


18-64
 
8-39


18-65
 
8-40


18-66
 
8-41


18-67
 
8-42


18-68
 
8-43


18-69
 
8-44


18-70
 
8-45


18-71
 
8-46


18-72
 
Repealed 1-8-19


18-73
 
8-48


18-74
 
8-49


18-75
 
8-50


18-76
 
8-51


18-77
 
8-52


18-78
 
8-53


18-79
 
8-54


18-80
 
8-60


18-117
 
8-85


18-118
 
8-86


18-123
 
8-25


18-124
 
8-26


18-125
 
8-27


18-131
 
8-10


18-132
 
8-11


18-133
 
8-12


18-134
 
8-13


18-135
 
8-14


18-136
 
8-15


18-137
 
8-16


18.1-1
 
7-200


18.1-2
 
7-201


18.1-3
 
7-202


18.1-4
 
7-203


18.1-5
 
7-204


18.1-6
 
7-205


18.1-7
 
7-206


18.1-8
 
7-210


18.1-9
 
7-211


18.1-10
 
7-212


18.1-11
 
7-213


18.1-12
 
7-214


18.1-13
 
7-220


18.1-14
 
7-221


18.1-15
 
7-222


18.1-16
 
7-223


18.1-17
 
7-224


18.1-18
 
7-225


18.1-19
 
7-226


18.1-20
 
7-227


18.1-21
 
7-228


18.1-22
 
7-229


18.1-23
 
7-230


18.1-25
 
7-231, 7-232


18.1-26
 
7-233


19-1
 
7-1


19-2
 
7-2


19-3
 
7-3


19-3.1
 
7-4


19-3.2
 
7-5


19-3.3
 
7-6


19-3.4
 
7-7


19-3.5
 
7-8


19-3.6
 
7-9


19-3.7
 
7-10


19-3.8
 
7-11


19-3.9
 
7-12


19-3.10
 
7-13


19-3.11
 
7-14


19-3.12
 
7-15


19-3.13
 
7-16


19-3.14
 
7-17


19-3.15
 
7-18


19-4.1
 
7-80


19-4.2
 
7-81


19-4.3
 
7-82


19-4.4
 
7-83


19-4.5
 
7-84


19-4.6
 
7-85


19-4.7
 
7-86


19-4.8
 
7-87


19-4.9
 
7-88


19-4.10
 
7-89


19-4.11
 
7-90


19-4.12
 
7-91


19-23
 
7-25


19-24
 
7-26


19-25
 
7-27


19-26
 
7-28


19-27
 
7-29


19-28
 
7-30


19-29
 
7-31


19-30
 
7-32


19-31
 
7-33


19-32
 
7-34


19-33
 
7-35


19-34
 
7-36


19-35
 
7-37


19-36
 
7-38


19-37
 
7-39


19-38
 
7-40


19-39
 
7-41


19-39.1
 
7-42


19-50.1
 
Repealed 11-16-10


19-50.2
 
Repealed 11-16-10


19-50.3
 
Repealed 11-16-10


19-50.4
 
Repealed 11-16-10


19-50.5
 
Repealed 11-16-10


19-60.1
 
7-180


19-60.2
 
7-181


19-60.3
 
7-182


19-60.4
 
7-183


19-60.5
 
7-184


19-60.6
 
7-185


19-60.7
 
7-186


19-60.8
 
7-187


19-60.9
 
7-188


19-60.10
 
7-189


19-60.10.5
 
7-190


19-60.11
 
7-191


19-60.12
 
7-192


19-60.13
 
7-193


19-60.14
 
7-194


19-61.1
 
7-110


19-61.2
 
7-111


19-61.3
 
7-112


19-61.4
 
7-113


19-61.5
 
7-114


19-61.6
 
7-115


19-61.7
 
7-116


19-61.8
 
7-117


19-62.1
 
7-150


19-62.2
 
7-151


19-62.3
 
7-152


19-62.4
 
7-153


19-62.5
 
7-154


19-62.6
 
7-155


19-62.7
 
7-159


19-70.1
 
7-165


19-70.2
 
7-166


19-70.3
 
7-167


19-70.4
 
7-168


19-70.5
 
7-169


19-70.6
 
7-170


19-70.7
 
7-171


19-70.8
 
7-172


19-70.9
 
7-173


20-1
 
7-125


20-2
 
7-126


20-3
 
7-127


20-4
 
7-128


20-5
 
7-129


20-6
 
7-130


20-7
 
7-131


20-8
 
7-132


20-9
 
7-70


20-10
 
7-71


20-11
 
7-72


20-12
 
7-73


20-13
 
7-133


20-14
 
7-134


20-15
 
7-135


20-16
 
7-136


20-17
 
7-137


20-18
 
7-138


20-19
 
7-139


20-20
 
7-140


20-21
 
7-141


20-22
 
7-142


20-23
 
7-143


21-1
 
7-50


21-2
 
7-51


21-3
 
7-52


21-4
 
7-53


21-5
 
7-54


21-6
 
7-55


21-7
 
7-56


21-8
 
7-57


21-9
 
7-58


21-10
 
7-59


21-11
 
7-60


21-12
 
7-61


21-13
 
7-62


21-14
 
7-63


21-15
 
7-64


25-1
 
19-1


25-2
 
19-2


25-3
 
19-3


25-4
 
19-4


25-5
 
19-10


25-6
 
19-11


25-7
 
19-12


25-8
 
19-13


25-9
 
19-14


25-10
 
19-15


25-11
 
19-16


25-12
 
19-17


25-13
 
19-25


25-14
 
19-26


25-15
 
19-27


25-16
 
19-28


25-17
 
19-29


25-18
 
19-30


25-19
 
19-31


25-20
 
19-32


25-21
 
19-35


25-22
 
19-36


25-23
 
19-37


25-24
 
19-38


25-25
 
19-39


25-26
 
19-40


25-27
 
19-41


25-28
 
19-42


25-29
 
19-43


25-30
 
19-44


25-31
 
19-45


25-32
 
19-50


25-33
 
19-51


25-34
 
19-52


25-35
 
19-53


25-36
 
19-54


25-37
 
19-55


25-38
 
19-56


25-39
 
19-57


25-40
 
19-58


25-41
 
19-59


25-42
 
19-60


25-43
 
19-61


25-44
 
19-62


25-45
 
19-63


25-46
 
19-64


25-47
 
19-65


25-48
 
19-70


25-49
 
19-71


25-50
 
19-72


25-51
 
19-73


25-52
 
19-74


25-53
 
19-75


25-54
 
19-76


25-55
 
19-77


25-56
 
19-78


25-57
 
19-79


25-58
 
19-80


25-59
 
19-81


25-60
 
19-82


25-61
 
19-83


25-62
 
19-90


25-63
 
19-91


25-64
 
19-92


25-65
 
19-93


25-66
 
19-100


25-67
 
19-101


25-68
 
19-102


25-69
 
19-103


25-70
 
19-104


25-71
 
19-105


25-72
 
19-106


25-73
 
19-107


25-74
 
19-115


25-75
 
19-116


25-76
 
19-117


25-77
 
19-118


25-78
 
19-125


25-79
 
19-126


25-80
 
19-127


25-81
 
19-128


25-82
 
19-135


25-83
 
19-136


25-84
 
19-137


25-85
 
19-138


25-86
 
19-139


25-87
 
19-140


25-88
 
19-141


25-89
 
19-142


25-90
 
19-143


26-1
 
19-205


26-2
 
19-206


26-3
 
19-207


26-4
 
19-208


26-5
 
19-209


26-6
 
19-210


26-7
 
19-211


26-8
 
19-212


26-9
 
19-213


26-10
 
19-214


26-11
 
19-215


26-12
 
19-216


26-13
 
19-217


26-14
 
19-218


26-15
 
19-219


26-16
 
19-220


26-17
 
19-221


26-18
 
19-222


26-19
 
19-223


26-20
 
19-230


26-21
 
19-231


27-1
 
15-1


27-2
 
15-2


27-3
 
15-3


27-4
 
15-4


27-10
 
15-10


27-11
 
15-11


27-12
 
15-12


27-13
 
15-13


27-15
 
15-15


27-16
 
15-16


27-17
 
15-17


27-18
 
15-18


27-19.00
 
15-19


27-19.01
 
15-19


27-19.02
 
15-19


27-19.03
 
15-19


27-19.04
 
15-19


27-19.05
 
15-19


27-19.06
 
15-19


27-20
 
15-25


27-21
 
15-26


27-22
 
15-27


27-23
 
15-28


27-25
 
15-35


27-26
 
15-36


27-27
 
15-37


27-28
 
15-38


27-29
 
15-39


27-30
 
15-40


27-31
 
15-41


27-31.5
 
15-42


27-32
 
15-43


27-33
 
15-44


27-34
 
15-45


27-35
 
15-46


27-36
 
15-47


27-40
 
15-50


27-41
 
15-51


27-42
 
15-52


27-43
 
15-53


27-44
 
15-54


27-45
 
15-55


27-46
 
15-56


27-50
 
15-60


27-51
 
15-61


27-52
 
15-62


27-53
 
15-63


27-54
 
15-64


27-55
 
15-65


27-57
 
15-66


27-58
 
15-67


27-59.1
 
15-75


27-59.2
 
15-76


27-59.3
 
15-77


27-59.4
 
15-78


27-59.5
 
15-79


27-59.6
 
15-80


27-60
 
15-85


27-61
 
15-86


27-62
 
15-87


27-63
 
15-88


27-65
 
15-95


27-66
 
15-96


27-67
 
15-97


27-68
 
15-98


27-69
 
15-99


27-70
 
15-100


27-71
 
15-101


27-71.5
 
15-102


27-72
 
15-103


27-73
 
15-105


27-74
 
15-106


27-75
 
15-107


27-76
 
15-108


27-77
 
15-109


27-77.1
 
15-109


27-77.2
 
15-116


27-77.3
 
15-117


27-77.4
 
15-118


27-77.5
 
15-119


27-77.6
 
15-120


27-77.7
 
15-121


27-77.8
 
15-122


27-77.9
 
15-123


27-77.10
 
15-124


27-77.11
 
15-125


27-77.12
 
15-126


27-77.13
 
15-127


27-77.14
 
15-128


27-77.15
 
15-129


27-77.16
 
15-130


27-77.17
 
15-131


27-78
 
15-135


27-79
 
15-136


27-79.1
 
15-137


27-80
 
15-145


27-81
 
15-146


27-82
 
15-147


27-83
 
15-148


27-84
 
15-149


27-85
 
15-150


27-87
 
15-151


27-87.2
 
15-152


27-87.5
 
15-153


27-88
 
15-165


27-88.1
 
15-166


27-88.2
 
15-167


27-88.3
 
15-168


27-88.4
 
15-169


27-88.5
 
15-170


27-88.6
 
15-171


27-88.7
 
15-172


27-88.8
 
15-173


27-88.9
 
15-174


27-88.10
 
15-175


27-88.11
 
15-176


27-88.12
 
15-177


27-88.13
 
15-178


27-88.14
 
15-179


27-88.16
 
15-180


27-88.17
 
15-181


27-88.18
 
15-182


27-89.22
 
15-185, 15-187


27-89.23
 
15-186, 15-188


27-89.24
 
15-189


27-89.30
 
15-195


27-89.31
 
15-196


27-89.32
 
15-197


27-89.33
 
15-198


27-89.34
 
15-199


27-89.35
 
15-200


27-89.40
 
15-205


27-89.41
 
15-206


27-89.42
 
15-207


27-89.43
 
15-208


27-89.44
 
15-209


27-89.50
 
15-215


27-89.51
 
15-216


27-89.52
 
15-217


27-89.53
 
15-218


27-89.54
 
15-219


27-89.60
 
15-225


27-89.61
 
15-226


27-89.62
 
15-227


27-89.63
 
15-228


27-89.64
 
15-229


27-89.70
 
15-235


27-89.71
 
15-236


27-89.72
 
15-237


27-89.73
 
15-238


27-89.74
 
15-239


27-89.75
 
15-240


27-89.76
 
15-241


27-90
 
15-250


27-91
 
15-251


27-92
 
15-252


27-93
 
15-253


27-100
 
15-260


27-101
 
15-261


27-102
 
15-262


27-103
 
15-263


27-104
 
15-264


27-105
 
15-265


27-106
 
15-266


27-107
 
15-267


27-110
 
15-275


27-111
 
15-280


27-112
 
15-281


27-115
 
15-285


27-116
 
15-286


27-117
 
15-287


29-1
 
13-60


29-2
 
13-61


29-3
 
13-62


29-5
 
13-15


29-6
 
13-16


29-7
 
13-17


29-8
 
13-18


29-9
 
13-19


29-10
 
13-20


29-11
 
13-21


29-12
 
13-22


29-13
 
13-23


29-14
 
13-24


29-15
 
13-25


29-16
 
13-26


29-17
 
13-27


29-18
 
13-28


29-19
 
13-29


29-20
 
13-30


29-21
 
13-31


29-22
 
13-32


29-23
 
13-33


29-24
 
13-34


29-25
 
13-35


29-26
 
13-36


29-27
 
13-37


29-28
 
13-38


29-29
 
13-39


29-30
 
13-40


29-31
 
13-41


29-32
 
13-42


29-33
 
13-43


29-34
 
13-44


29-35
 
13-45


29-36
 
13-46


29-37
 
13-47


29-38
 
13-48


29-39
 
13-49


29-40
 
13-50


30-1
 
11-260


30-2
 
11-261


30-3
 
11-262


30-4
 
11-263


30-5
 
11-264


30-6
 
11-265


30-7
 
11-266


30-8
 
11-267


30-9
 
11-268


30-10
 
11-269


30-11
 
11-270


30-12
 
11-271


32-1
 
20-1


32-2
 
20-2


32-3
 
20-3


32-4
 
20-4


32-5
 
20-5


32-6
 
20-6


32-7
 
20-7


32-8
 
20-8


32-9
 
20-9


32-10
 
20-10


32-11
 
20-11


32.5-4
 
21-5


32.5-5
 
21-6


32.5-6
 
21-7


32.5-7
 
21-8


32.5-8
 
21-9


32.5-9
 
21-10


32.5-10
 
21-11


32.5-11
 
21-12


32.5-12
 
21-13


32.5-13
 
21-14


32.5-14
 
21-15


32.5-15
 
21-16


32.5-16
 
21-17


32.5-30
 
21-25


32.5-31
 
21-26


32.5-32
 
21-27


32.5-33
 
21-28


32.5-34
 
21-29


32.5-35
 
21-30


32.5-36
 
21-31


33-1
 
22-1


33-2
 
22-2


33-3
 
22-3


33-4
 
22-4


33-5
 
22-5


33-6
 
22-6


33-7
 
22-7


33-8
 
22-8


33-9
 
22-15


33-10
 
22-16


33-11
 
22-17


33-12
 
22-18


33-13
 
22-19


33-14
 
22-20


33-15
 
22-21


33-16
 
22-22


33-17
 
22-23


33-18
 
22-24


33-19
 
22-25


33-20
 
22-26


33-21
 
22-27


33-22
 
22-28


33-23
 
22-29


33-24
 
22-30


33-25
 
22-31


33-26
 
22-32


33-26.1
 
22-33


33-26.2
 
22-34


33-26.3
 
22-35


33-26.4
 
22-36


33-27
 
22-37


33-28
 
22-38


33-29
 
22-39


33-30
 
22-40


33-31
 
22-41


33-32
 
22-42


33-33
 
22-43


33-34
 
22-44


33-35
 
22-45


33-36
 
22-46


33-37
 
22-47


33-38
 
22-48


33-39
 
22-49


33-40
 
22-50


33-41
 
22-51


33-42
 
22-60


33-43
 
22-61


33-44
 
22-62


33-45
 
22-63


33-46
 
22-64


33-47
 
22-66


33-51
 
22-70


33-52
 
22-71


33-53
 
22-72


33-54
 
22-73


33-55
 
22-74


33-56
 
22-75


33-57
 
22-76


33-58
 
22-77


33-59
 
22-78


33-60
 
22-85


33-61
 
22-86


33-62
 
22-87


33-63
 
22-88


33-64
 
22-89


33-65
 
22-90


33-66
 
22-91


33-67
 
22-100, 22-101


33-70
 
22-110


33-71
 
22-111


33-72
 
22-112


33-73
 
22-113


33-74
 
22-114


33-75
 
22-115


33-76
 
22-116


33-77
 
22-117


33-78
 
22-118


33-79
 
22-119


33-80
 
22-120


33-81
 
22-121


33-82
 
22-122


33-83
 
22-123


33-84
 
22-124


33-85
 
22-125


33-86
 
22-126


33-87
 
22-127


33-88
 
22-128


33-89
 
22-129


33-90
 
22-135


33-91
 
22-136


33-92
 
22-137


33-93
 
22-138


33-94
 
22-139


33-95
 
22-140


33-96
 
22-141


33-97
 
22-142


33-120
 
22-190


33-120.1
 
22-191


33-120.2
 
22-192


33-120.3
 
22-193


33-120.4
 
22-194


33-120.5
 
22-195


33-120.6
 
22-196


33-120.7
 
22-197


33-120.8
 
22-198


33-120.9
 
22-199


33-120.10
 
22-200


33-120.11
 
22-201


33-120.12
 
22-202


34-1
 
16-2


34-1.1
 
16-3


34-1.2
 
16-4


34-2
 
16-5


34-3
 
16-10


34-4
 
16-18


34-4.02
 
16-470


34-4.05
 
16-471


34-4.1
 
16-475


34-4.2
 
16-476


34-4.3
 
16-477


34-4.4
 
16-478


34-4.5
 
16-479


34-4.6
 
16-480


34-4.7
 
16-481


34-4.8
 
16-482


34-4.9
 
16-483


34-7
 
16-333


34-7.1
 
16-302


34-8
 
16-303


34-8.1
 
16-323


34-9
 
16-319


34-9.1
 
16-324


34-9.2
 
16-301


34-9.3
 
16-320


34-9.4
 
16-322


34-13
 
16-317


34-15
 
16-300


34-16
 
16-321


34-17
 
16-304


34-18
 
16-305


34-19
 
16-306


34-20
 
16-307


34-21
 
16-308


34-22
 
16-309


34-22.7
 
16-310


34-22.9
 
16-311


34-23
 
16-312


34-24
 
16-313


34-25
 
16-314


34-26
 
16-315


34-27
 
16-316


34-30
 
16-15


34-31
 
16-16


34-32
 
16-17


34-34
 
16-330


34-35
 
16-332


34-35.1
 
16-330


34-36
 
16-20


34-36.1
 
16-21


34-36.2
 
16-22


34-36.3
 
16-23


34-36.4
 
16-24


34-36.6
 
16-440


34-37
 
16-25


34-38
 
16-26


34-38.1
 
16-27


34-38.2
 
16-28


34-38.3
 
16-29


34-39
 
16-30


34-40
 
16-31


34-41
 
16-32


34-42
 
16-33


34-42.1
 
16-34


34-42.2
 
16-35


34-51
 
16-40


34-51.1
 
16-41


34-51.2
 
16-42


34-52
 
16-43


34-53
 
16-44


34-54
 
16-45


34-55
 
16-46


34-56
 
16-47


34-57
 
16-48


34-57.1
 
16-49


34-57.1.1
 
16-50


34-57.2
 
16-85


34-57.3
 
16-86


34-57.4
 
16-87


34-57.5
 
16-88


34-57.6
 
16-89


34-57.7
 
16-90


34-57.8
 
16-91


34-57.9
 
16-92


34-57.10
 
16-93


34-57.11
 
16-94


34-57.12
 
16-95


34-57.13
 
16-96


34-57.14
 
16-97


34-57.15
 
16-98


34-57.16
 
16-99


34-57.17
 
16-100


34-57.18
 
16-101


34-57.19
 
16-102


34-57.68
 
16-105


34-58
 
16-55


34-58.1
 
16-56


34-58.2
 
16-57


34-59
 
16-58


34-60
 
16-59


34-61
 
16-60


34-62
 
16-61


34-63
 
16-62


34-63.1
 
16-63


34-64
 
16-64


34-65
 
16-70


34-65.1
 
16-71


34-65.2
 
16-72


34-66
 
16-73


34-67
 
16-74


34-67.1
 
16-75


34-67.2
 
16-76


34-67.3
 
16-77


34-67.4
 
16-78


34-67.5
 
16-79


34-68.1
 
16-106


34-68.2
 
16-107


34-69
 
16-108


34-70
 
16-109


34-70.1
 
16-110


34-70.2
 
16-111


34-70.3
 
16-112


34-70.4
 
16-113


34-70.5
 
16-114


34-71
 
16-120


34-72
 
16-121


34-73
 
16-122


34-74
 
16-123


34-75
 
16-124


34-76
 
16-125


34-77
 
16-126


34-78
 
16-127


34-78.1
 
16-128


34-78.2
 
16-129


34-78.3
 
16-130


34-79
 
16-135


34-79.1
 
16-136


34-80
 
16-137


34-81
 
16-138


34-82
 
16-139


34-83
 
16-140


34-84
 
16-141


34-85
 
16-142


34-86
 
16-143


34-86.1
 
16-160


34-86.2
 
16-161


34-86.3
 
16-162


34-86.4
 
16-163


34-86.5
 
16-164


34-86.6
 
16-165


34-86.7
 
16-166


34-86.8
 
16-167


34-86.9
 
16-168


34-86.10
 
16-169


34-86.11
 
16-170


34-87
 
16-185


34-88
 
16-186


34-88.1
 
16-187


34-89
 
16-188


34-89.1
 
16-189


34-89.1.1
 
16-186.1


34-89.2
 
16-190


34-89.3
 
16-191


34-89.4
 
16-192


34-90
 
16-193


34-90.1
 
16-194


34-90.2
 
16-195


34-90.3
 
16-196


34-90.4
 
16-197


34-90.5
 
16-198


34-90.8
 
16-199


34-90.9
 
16-200


34-90.10
 
16-201


34-90.11
 
16-202


34-91
 
16-203


34-91.1
 
16-204


34-91.2
 
16-205


34-91.3
 
16-206


34-91.4
 
16-207


34-91.5
 
16-208


34-91.6
 
16-209


34-91.7
 
16-210


34-91.8
 
16-211


34-91.9
 
16-212


34-91.10
 
16-213


34-91.11
 
16-214


34-92
 
16-215


34-94
 
16-220


34-95
 
16-221


34-95.1
 
16-222


34-96
 
16-223


34-96.1
 
16-224


34-96.2
 
16-225


34-96.3
 
16-226


34-96.4
 
16-227


34-97
 
16-228


34-97.1
 
16-229


34-97.2
 
16-230


34-97.3
 
16-231


34-97.4
 
16-232


34-97.5
 
16-233


34-97.8
 
16-234


34-97.9
 
16-235


34-97.10
 
16-236


34-97.11
 
16-237


34-98
 
16-238


34-98.1
 
16-239


34-99
 
16-240


34-100
 
16-245


34-101
 
16-246


34-102
 
16-247


34-102.1
 
16-248


34-102.2
 
16-249


34-102.3
 
16-250


34-103
 
16-255


34-103.1
 
16-256


34-103.2
 
16-257


34-103.3
 
16-259


34-104
 
16-260


34-104.1
 
16-261


34-104.2
 
16-262


34-104.3
 
16-263


34-104.4
 
16-264


34-105.1
 
16-145


34-105.2
 
16-147


34-105.3
 
16-148


34-105.4
 
16-149


34-105.5
 
16-150


34-105.6
 
16-152


34-105.7
 
16-153, 16-525


34-105.8
 
16-154


34-107
 
16-270


34-109
 
16-272


34-110.2
 
16-561


34-110.4
 
16-277


34-111
 
16-278


34-111.01
 
16-285


34-111.04
 
16-286


34-111.06
 
16-287


34-111.08
 
16-288


34-111.2
 
16-273


34-111.3
 
16-271


34-111.6
 
16-275


34-112.1
 
16-445


34-112.2
 
16-395


34-113
 
16-505


34-114
 
16-506


34-115
 
16-507


34-116
 
16-508


34-117
 
16-509


34-118
 
16-510


34-119
 
16-511


34-120
 
16-512


34-121
 
16-513


34-122
 
16-514


34-123
 
16-575


34-124
 
16-576


34-125
 
16-577


34-126
 
16-578


34-127
 
16-579


34-128
 
16-580


34-132
 
16-581


34-136
 
16-582


34-139
 
16-583


34-140
 
16-584


34-141
 
16-585


34-142
 
16-586


34-143
 
16-587


34-144
 
16-588


34-144.1
 
16-589


34-144.2
 
16-590


34-146
 
16-530


34-147
 
16-531


34-148
 
16-532


34-149
 
16-533


34-150
 
16-534


34-151
 
16-535


34-152
 
16-536


34-152.1
 
16-537


34-152.2
 
16-538


34-152.3
 
16-539


34-153
 
16-540


34-153.1
 
16-541


34-154
 
16-542


34-154.1
 
16-543


34-154.2
 
16-544


34-155
 
16-545


34-155.1
 
16-546


34-155.2
 
16-547


34-155.3
 
16-548


34-156
 
16-549


34-156.1
 
16-550


34-156.2
 
16-551


34-157
 
16-552


34-157.1
 
16-553


34-158
 
16-565


34-158.1
 
16-566


34-158.3
 
16-567


34-158.4
 
16-568


34-158.5
 
16-569


34-179
 
16-595


34-180
 
16-596


34-181
 
16-600


34-181.1
 
16-601


34-182
 
16-602


34-183
 
16-605


34-184
 
16-606


34-185
 
16-607


34-186
 
16-608


34-187
 
16-610


34-188
 
16-611


34-189
 
16-612


34-200
 
16-335


34-201
 
16-336


34-202
 
16-337


34-203
 
16-338


34-204
 
16-339


34-205
 
16-340


34-206
 
16-341


34-207
 
16-342


34-208
 
16-343


34-209
 
16-344


34-210
 
16-345


34-211
 
16-346


34-212
 
16-347


34-213
 
16-348


34-214
 
16-349


34-215
 
16-350


34-216
 
16-351


34-217
 
16-352


34-218
 
16-353


34-219
 
16-354


34-219.1
 
16-355


34-220
 
16-380


34-221
 
16-381


34-222
 
16-382


34-223
 
16-383


34-224
 
16-384


34-225
 
16-385


34-226
 
16-386


34-227
 
16-387


34-228
 
16-388


34-229
 
16-389


34-230
 
16-485


34-231
 
16-486


34-232
 
16-487


34-233
 
16-488


34-234
 
16-489


34-235
 
16-490


34-236
 
16-491


34-237
 
16-492


34-238
 
16-493


34-239
 
16-494


34-240
 
16-495


34-241
 
16-496


34-242
 
16-497


34-243
 
16-498


34-244
 
16-499


35-1
 
18-1


35-2
 
18-2


35-3
 
18-3


35-4
 
18-4


35-5
 
18-5


35-6
 
18-6


35-7
 
18-7


35-8
 
18-8


35-9
 
18-9


35-10
 
18-10


35-11
 
18-11


35-12
 
18-12


35-13
 
18-13


35-15
 
18-20


35-16
 
18-21


35-17
 
18-25


35-19
 
18-26


35-20
 
18-27


35-21
 
18-35


35-22
 
18-36


35-23
 
18-37


35-25
 
18-38


35-26
 
18-39


36-1.2.1
 
16-1


36-5.3.1
 
16-175


36-5.3.2
 
16-176


36-5.3.3
 
16-177


36-5.3.4
 
16-178


36-5.3.5
 
16-179


36-5.3.6
 
16-180


36-5.3.7
 
16-181


36-5.3.8
 
16-182


36-5.13.1
 
16-290


36-5.13.2
 
16-291


36-5.13.3
 
16-292


36-5.13.4
 
16-293


36-5.13.5
 
16-294


36-5.13.6
 
16-295


36-5.13.7
 
16-296


36-7.1.1
 
16-615


36-7.1.3
 
16-616


36-7.1.5
 
16-618


36-7.1.7
 
16-616


36-7.1.8
 
16-621


36-7.1.12
 
16-625


36-7.1.13
 
16-626


36-7.1.16
 
16-635


36-7.1.17
 
16-636


36-7.1.18
 
16-637


36-7.1.19
 
16-638


36-7.1.20
 
16-639


36-7.1.22
 
16-640


36-7.1.23
 
16-641


36-7.1.24
 
16-642


36-7.1.25
 
16-643


36-7.1.26
 
16-644


36-7.1.27
 
16-645


36-7.1.28
 
16-646


36-7.1.29
 
16-647


36-7.1.30
 
16-650


36-7.1.31
 
16-651


36-7.8.1
 
16-370


36-7.8.2
 
16-371


36-7.8.3
 
16-372


36-7.8.4
 
16-373


36-7.8.5
 
16-374


36-7.8.6
 
16-375


36-7.9.1
 
16-360


36-7.9.2
 
16-361


36-7.9.3
 
16-362


36-7.9.4
 
16-363


36-7.13.1
 
16-450


36-7.13.2
 
16-451


36-7.13.3
 
16-452


36-7.13.4
 
16-453


36-7.13.5
 
16-454


36-7.13.6
 
16-455


36-7.13.7
 
16-456


36-7.13.8
 
16-457


36-7.13.9
 
16-458


36-7.13.10
 
16-459


36-7.14.1
 
Repealed 12-20-16


36-7.14.2
 
Repealed 12-20-16


36-7.14.3
 
16-630


36-7.14.4
 
16-631


36-7.14.5
 
16-632


36-7.14.6
 
Repealed 12-20-16


36-7.14.7
 
Repealed 12-20-16


36-7.14.8
 
Repealed 12-20-16


36-7.14.9
 
Repealed 12-20-16


36-7.14.10
 
Repealed 12-20-16


36-7.14.11
 
Repealed 12-20-16


36-7.14.12
 
Repealed 1-6-09


36-7.14.13
 
Repealed 12-20-16


36-7.14.14
 
Repealed 12-20-16


36-7.15.1
 
16-425


36-7.15.2
 
16-426


36-7.15.3
 
16-427


36-7.15.4
 
16-428


36-7.15.5
 
16-429


36-7.15.6
 
16-430


36-7.15.7
 
Repealed 1-6-09


36-7.15.8
 
16-431


36-7.15.9
 
16-432


36-7.15.10
 
16-433


36-7.15.11
 
16-434


36-7.15.12
 
16-435


36-8.13.1
 
16-400


36-8.13.3
 
16-401


36-8.13.4
 
16-403


36-8.13.5
 
16-404


36-8.13.6
 
16-405


37-1.0.0
 
17-1


37-1.0.1
 
17-2


37-1.2.0
 
17-3


37-1.3.0
 
17-4


37-1.3.1
 
17-4


37-1.3.2
 
17-4


37-1.4.0
 
17-4


37-1.4.1
 
17-4


37-1.4.2
 
17-4


37-1.4.3
 
17-4


37-1.4.4
 
17-4


37-1.4.5
 
17-4


37-1.4.6
 
17-4


37-1.4.7
 
17-4


37-1.4.8
 
17-4


37-1.4.9
 
17-4


37-1.4.10
 
17-4


37-1.4.11
 
17-4


37-1.4.12
 
17-4


37-1.4.14
 
17-4


37-2.1.1
 
17-10


37-2.1.2
 
17-10


37-2.1.3
 
17-10


37-2.1.4
 
17-10


37-2.1.5
 
17-10


37-2.1.6
 
17-10


37-2.2.1
 
17-11


37-2.2.2
 
17-11


37-2.2.3
 
17-11


37-2.2.4
 
17-11


37-2.2.5
 
17-11


37-2.3.1
 
17-12


37-2.3.2
 
17-12


37-2.3.3
 
17-12


37-2.3.4
 
17-12


37-2.3.5
 
17-12


37-2.3.6
 
17-12


37-2.4.1
 
17-13


37-2.4.2
 
17-13


37-2.4.3
 
17-13


37-2.4.4
 
17-13


37-2.4.5
 
17-13


37-2.4.6
 
17-13


37-2.5.1
 
17-14


37-2.5.2
 
17-14


37-2.5.3
 
17-14


37-2.5.4
 
17-14


37-2.5.5
 
17-14


37-2.5.6
 
17-14


37-2.6.1
 
17-15


37-2.6.2
 
17-15


37-2.6.3
 
17-15


37-2.6.4
 
17-15


37-2.6.5
 
17-15


37-2.6.6
 
17-15


37-2.6.7
 
17-15


37-2.6.8
 
17-15


37-2.6.9
 
17-15


37-2.6.10
 
17-15


37-2.7.1
 
17-16


37-2.7.2
 
17-16


37-2.7.3
 
17-16


37-2.7.4
 
17-16


37-2.7.5
 
17-16


37-2.7.6
 
17-16


37-2.8.1
 
17-17


37-2.8.2
 
17-17


37-2.8.3
 
17-17


37-2.8.4
 
17-17


37-2.8.5
 
17-17


37-2.9.1
 
17-18


37-2.9.2
 
17-18


37-2.9.3
 
17-18


37-2.9.4
 
17-18


37-2.9.5
 
17-18


37-2.10.1
 
17-19


37-2.10.2
 
17-19


37-2.10.3
 
17-19


37-2.10.4
 
17-19


37-2.10.5
 
17-19


37-2.11.1
 
17-20


37-2.11.2
 
17-20


37-2.11.3
 
17-20


37-2.12.1
 
17-21


37-2.12.2
 
17-21


37-2.12.3
 
17-21


37-2.13.1
 
17-22


37-2.13.2
 
17-22


37-2.13.3
 
17-22


37-2.13.4
 
17-22


37-2.14.1
 
17-23


37-2.14.2
 
17-23


37-2.14.3
 
17-23


37-2.14.4
 
17-23


37-2.15.1
 
17-24


37-2.15.2
 
17-24


37-2.15.3
 
17-24


37-2.15.4
 
17-24


37-2.15.5
 
17-24


37-2.15.6
 
17-24


37-2.16.1
 
17-25


37-2.16.2
 
17-25


37-2.16.3
 
17-25


37-2.16.4
 
17-25


37-2.16.5
 
17-25


37-2.16.6
 
17-25


37-3.0.0
 
17-30


37-3.0.1
 
17-30


37-3.1.1
 
17-31


37-3.1.2
 
17-31


37-3.2.1
 
17-32


37-3.2.2
 
17-32


37-3.3.1
 
17-33


37-3.3.2
 
17-33


37-3.3.3
 
17-34


37-3.4.1
 
17-35


37-3.4.2
 
17-35


37-3.5.1
 
17-36


37-3.5.2
 
17-36


37-3.6.1
 
17-37


37-3.6.2
 
17-37


37-3.7.1
 
17-38


37-3.7.2
 
17-38


37-3.8.1
 
17-39


37-3.8.2
 
17-39


37-3.8.3
 
17-39


37-3.8.4
 
17-39


37-3.8.5
 
17-39


37-3.8.6
 
17-39


37-3.8.7
 
17-39


37-3.8.8
 
17-39


37-3.9.1
 
17-40


37-3.9.2
 
17-40


37-3.10.1
 
17-41


37-3.10.2
 
17-41


37-4.1.1
 
17-45


37-4.1.2
 
17-45


37-4.2.1
 
17-46


37-4.2.2
 
17-46


37-4.2.3
 
17-46


37-4.2.4
 
17-46


37-4.2.5
 
17-46


37-4.2.6
 
17-46


37-4.3.1
 
17-47


37-4.3.2
 
17-47


37-4.4.1
 
17-48


37-4.4.2
 
17-48


37-4.5.1
 
17-49


37-4.5.2
 
17-49


37-4.6.1
 
17-50


37-4.6.2
 
17-50


37-4.6.3
 
17-50


37-4.6.4
 
17-50


37-4.6.5
 
17-50


37-4.6.6
 
17-50


37-4.7.1
 
17-51


37-4.7.2
 
17-51


37-5.1.1
 
17-55


37-5.1.2
 
17-55


37-5.1.3
 
17-55


37-5.1.5
 
17-55


37-5.2.1
 
17-56


37-5.2.2
 
17-56


37-5.2.3
 
17-56


37-5.2.4
 
17-56


37-5.2.5
 
17-56


37-5.2.6
 
17-56


37-5.3.1
 
17-57


37-5.3.2
 
17-57


37-5.3.3
 
17-57


37-5.3.4
 
17-57


37-5.3.5
 
17-57


37-5.3.6
 
17-57


37-5.3.7
 
17-57


37-5.3.8
 
17-57


37-5.3.9
 
17-57


37-5.3.10
 
17-57


37-5.3.11
 
17-57


37-5.4.1
 
17-58


37-5.4.2
 
17-58


37-5.4.3
 
17-58


37-5.4.4
 
17-58


37-5.4.5
 
17-58


37-5.4.6
 
17-58


37-5.4.7
 
17-58


37-5.4.8
 
17-58


37-5.4.9
 
17-58


37-5.4.10
 
17-58


37-5.4.11
 
17-58


37-5.4.12
 
17-58


37-5.5.1
 
17-59


37-5.5.2
 
17-59


37-5.5.3
 
17-59


37-5.5.4
 
17-59


37-5.5.5
 
17-59


37-5.6.1
 
17-60


37-5.6.2
 
17-60


37-5.7.1
 
17-61


37-5.7.2
 
17-61


37-5.7.3
 
17-61


37-6.1.0
 
17-65


37-6.2.0
 
17-66


37-6.3.0
 
17-67


37-6.4.0
 
17-68


37-6.4.1
 
17-69


37-6.5.0
 
17-70


37-6.6.0
 
17-71


 
 
 










REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Code Section




110
 
12-6


173
 
16-601


409
 
16-49


417
 
16-135


442
 
16-15, 16-64, 16-143


483
 
2-1


487
 
1-38


492
 
1-13


494
 
16-588


497
 
8-3, 8-4


517
 
12-1–12-7


530
 
16-332


555
 
16-308, 16-309, 16-312–16-315


587
 
1-29–1-37


617
 
16-10, 16-15, 16-275


704
 
13-80


725
 
16-10, 16-15, 16-271, 16-273


734
 
16-505–16-514


735
 
5-40, 5-42, 5-45, 5-46, 5-50, 5-55–5-58, 5-60–5-63, 5-81, 5-89, 5-93,
5-96–5-101, 5-103–5-109


745
 
5-41, 5-80


762
 
5-50, 5-55, 5-89, 5-98, 5-99


767
 
16-316, 16-511, 16-576


789
 
16-15–16-17


798
 
16-16


801
 
2-181, 2-184–2-186


811
 
5-58, 5-60, 5-81


814
 
5-60


893
 
16-10, 16-20, 16-21, 16-25, 16-26, 16-30–16-34


894
 
16-255, 16-256, 16-260–16-264


904
 
16-40, 16-41, 16-43–16-48


915
 
13-80


916
 
16-270, 16-272, 16-277, 16-278, 16-561


917
 
16-273, 16-530–16-553, 16-565–16-569


934
 
16-270


946
 
16-31


948
 
16-271, 16-273, 16-275


958
 
16-10, 16-135


970
 
16-55, 16-56, 16-59–16-64


976
 
16-18


1003
 
22-37, 22-38


1009
 
22-1–22-8, 22-15–22-31, 22-39–22-46, 22-48–22-51, 22-70–22-78,
22-85–22-91, 22-100, 22-101


1012
 
16-508


1019
 
16-20–16-22, 16-30–16-32, 16-34, 16-40–16-42, 16-44, 16-55–16-57,
16-59, 16-61, 16-63, 16-64


1036
 
16-105–16-114


1037
 
16-70–16-78


1039
 
16-10, 16-135


1043
 
5-51, 5-53, 5-115–5-120


1045
 
5-55


1046
 
16-445, 16-545, 16-552


1049
 
16-10, 16-135


1060
 
16-535, 16-545, 16-578


1078
 
16-541, 16-544


1081
 
8-2


1084
 
16-588, 16-589


1087
 
16-552


1099
 
16-10


1110
 
16-135


1115
 
16-10, 16-21, 16-41


1116
 
16-10


1126
 
16-21, 6-41, 16-56, 16-71, 16-106, 16-256


1131
 
16-10, 16-21, 16-41


1148
 
16-135


1149
 
16-106, 16-107


1150
 
16-10


1158
 
21-5–21-17


1170
 
16-304


1176
 
16-508


1197
 
1-5


1212
 
5-85, 5-101, 5-109


1217
 
16-10, 16-21, 16-42


1233
 
16-10


1237
 
16-48, 16-63


1253
 
16-544, 16-545


1270
 
16-256


1279
 
2-211


1294
 
16-10, 16-41, 16-42, 16-57


1295
 
16-508


1300
 
8-25


1316
 
16-538


1318
 
22-1


1319
 
22-37, 22-40, 22-49


1324
 
16-590


1326
 
8-90


1330
 
5-58, 5-60


1333
 
16-44


1367
 
16-535, 16-578


1373
 
16-23, 16-24


1376
 
16-320, 16-322, 16-324


1378
 
2-182


1379
 
2-1


1381
 
1-26


1393
 
1-10


1401
 
16-255, 16-256


1408
 
16-272


1409
 
16-10, 16-18, 16-25, 16-26, 16-31, 16-33, 16-35, 16-43, 16-48, 16-58, 16-60,
16-62, 16-63, 16-73, 16-77, 16-135, 16-141, 16-142, 16-277, 16-278, 16-307,
16-319, 16-476, 16-561


1413
 
16-136


1421
 
13-70–13-73


1424
 
16-10


1426
 
16-136


1427
 
16-135, 16-136


1433
 
3-35–3-44, 3-47–3-51


1446
 
16-545–16-549


1448
 
13-71


1458
 
16-135–16-137


1463
 
16-135, 16-136


1464
 
16-56


1477
 
16-10, 16-85–16-102


1483
 
3-46


1490
 
2-1


1491
 
16-530


1494
 
5-58


1496
 
16-57


1498
 
16-95, 16-97


1501
 
5-58, 5-60–5-63


1503
 
16-15, 16-160–16-170


1504
 
16-10, 16-317


1506
 
16-3


1513
 
16-530


1530
 
16-135, 16-136


1533
 
3-60–3-71, 3-73–3-77


1538
 
22-40, 22-49


1541
 
16-534, 16-576


1555
 
16-10


1564
 
16-10, 16-163


1565
 
16-121–16-130, 16-508


1566
 
16-120


1568
 
1-10


1570
 
15-1–15-4, 15-10–15-12, 15-15–15-18, 15-25–15-28, 15-35–15-41,
15-43–15-47, 15-50–15-56, 15-60–15-67, 15-85–15-87, 15-95–15-101,
15-103, 15-105–15-109, 15-135, 15-136, 15-145–15-150, 15-250–15-253,
15-275, 15-281, 15-281, 15-285–15-287


1571
 
5-1, 5-2, 5-17, 5-18, 5-25–5-27, 5-29, 5-30, 5-32,


1573
 
16-595, 16-596, 15-600, 16-602, 16-605–16-608, 16-610, 16-612


1574
 
16-25, 16-43, 16-58, 16-73


1611
 
16-31, 16-33, 16-34, 16-35, 16-45–16-47


1615
 
2-1


1616
 
1-10, 5-17, 5-28, 5-34–5-36, 5-51, 5-80, 5-93–5-95, 5-97


1623
 
16-18


1629
 
16-10, 16-21, 16-22, 16-42, 16-57, 16-72, 16-106, 16-107


1632
 
16-10, 16-308


1633
 
16-476–16-481, 16-610, 16-612


1650
 
15-11


1666
 
1-45


1668
 
2-210


1671
 
16-530, 16-535, 16-545


1673
 
16-611


1684
 
15-1, 15-11, 15-13, 15-45, 15-60, 15-62, 15-88


1696
 
13-71


1702
 
16-578


1705
 
16-10


1706
 
16-22, 16-42, 16-107, 16-135, 16-136, 16-395


1713
 
16-256, 16-257


1716
 
16-122, 16-123


1721
 
5-92


1726
 
22-87


1733
 
21-25–21-31


1758
 
15-280


1769
 
22-21


1771
 
22-15, 22-19, 22-37, 22-40, 2-44, 22-49, 22-50, 22-60, 22-66


1772
 
15-151–15-153


1777
 
16-34


1778
 
15-75–15-80


1779
 
15-40–15-42


1780
 
16-136


1781
 
15-109, 15-116–15-129, 15-131


1788
 
16-257


1789
 
16-21, 16-22, 16-42, 16-57


1791
 
15-95, 15-96, 15-98, 15-99, 15-101–15-103


1793
 
16-285–16-288


1795
 
15-51


1805
 
16-380–16-389


1811
 
5-45


1814
 
16-42, 16-395


1825
 
2-1


1826
 
15-280


1827
 
16-10, 16-27–16-29


1829
 
16-10


1836
 
16-475–16-483


1842
 
16-4


1843
 
16-18, 16-470, 16-471


1847
 
16-539


1861
 
16-596, 16-605–16-608, 16-610


1862
 
16-44, 16-48, 16-59, 16-63, 16-74, 16-75, 16-78


1866
 
16-44, 16-48, 16-59, 16-63, 16-74, 16-75, 16-78


1867
 
16-185–16-191, 16-193–16-215, 16-220–16-226, 16-228–16-240,
16-245–16-250, 16-608


1875
 
22-32–22-34


1878
 
16-21, 16-41


1886
 
2-136


1894
 
16-10


1898
 
7-1–7-3


1899
 
16-310–16-313, 16-315, 16-316


1900
 
16-314


1904
 
1-50, 1-51


1908
 
16-303


1911
 
2-1


1914
 
16-605, 16-606


1917
 
5-97


1920
 
22-42, 22-43


1922
 
16-192, 16-227, 16-259


1941
 
16-192, 16-227, 16-259


1945
 
16-610


1948
 
5-53, 5-55–5-58, 5-60–5-63, 5-85, 5-92, 5-95


1949
 
13-71, 15-102, 22-32


1959
 
16-10, 16-50, 16-64, 16-79, 16-107, 16-113, 16-136, 16-143, 16-395


1964
 
2-136


1967
 
16-10, 16-333


1968
 
1-46


1970
 
16-546


1979
 
16-136


1986
 
16-546


1992
 
15-11


1996
 
16-175–16-182


1998
 
15-152


2004
 
2-136


2006
 
17-65–17-68, 17-70, 17-71


2013
 
12-5


2021
 
16-10, 16-615, 16-616, 16-618,  16-620–16-626, 16-635–16-647, 16-650,
16-651


2023
 
12-5


2026
 
16-10, 16-20, 16-21, 16-42, 16-57, 16-440, 16-622


2028
 
3-45, 3-72


2030
 
22-21, 22-32, 22-35, 22-36, 22-87, 22-91


2031
 
13-71, 15-102


2034
 
17-1–17-5, 17-10–17-23, 17-30–17-41, 17-45–17-50, 17-55–17-57, 17-60


2052
 
3-3


2056
 
1-10


2061
 
7-2


2062
 
2-136


2063
 
1-31


2068
 
8-2


2071
 
16-302, 16-333


2077
 
15-19


2080
 
8-2


2090
 
15-11


2093
 
8-90


2095
 
17-19, 17-24, 17-33, 17-34, 17-49


2097
 
24-30–24-42


2101
 
16-145, 16-148–16-150, 16-152–16-154, 16-525


2102
 
16-147 


2104
 
8-2


2107
 
2-136


2110
 
8-2


2113
 
21-25–21-31


2122
 
17-3, 17-14


2123
 
17-69


2124
 
17-32–17-34


2128
 
16-148


2129
 
16-175


2130
 
16-1, 16-10, 16-400, 16-401, 16-403–16-405


2132
 
16-10, 16-136, 16-139–16-141, 16-290–16-296, 16-301, 16-450–16-459,
16-636


2135
 
21-26


2137
 
2-136


2138
 
8-2


2145
 
17-10, 17-13, 17-14, 17-49, 17-51


2152
 
16-48, 16-63, 16-78, 16-303, 16-323, 16-360–16-363, 16-596, 16-608


2154
 
8-3, 8-4


2163
 
15-136, 22-32


2165
 
16-10, 16-21, 16-57, 16-148, 16-370–16-375


2167
 
22-50


2169
 
17-10, 17-25


2186
 
8-2


2203
 
2-145–2-149, 2-165–2-169


2207
 
21-5, 21-25–21-31


2210
 
Repealed 11-16-10


2219
 
22-110–22-129


2226
 
8-2


2232
 
22-135–22-142


2233
 
Repealed 11-27-07


2239
 
5-1–5-15, 5-18


2243
 
15-11, 15-13, 15-260–15-267


2247
 
8-86


2251
 
5-2


2257
 
15-136, 15-137


2258
 
15-165–15-178, 15-180–15-182, 15-185–15-189, 15-196, 15-198–15-200,
15-205–15-209, 15-215–15-219, 15-225–15-229


2265
 
22-136


2268
 
15-179, 15-195, 15-197


2270
 
2-15


2282
 
16-177


2284
 
15-173


2292
 
7-180–7-189, 7-191–7-194


2293
 
8-10–8-16


2298
 
Repealed 11-27-07


2302
 
1-20–1-25


2306
 
22-60, 22-66


2312
 
15-46


2313
 
16-10, 16-106, 16-135, 16-147, 16-149, 16-162, 16-176, 16-185, 16-186,
16-188, 16-189, 16-191, 16-203, 16-215, 16-220, 16-221, 16-223, 16-224,
16-226, 16-240, 16-335–16-355


2314
 
17-25


2315
 
2-146, 2-166


2316
 
8-2, 9-13


2318
 
5-42–5-46


2327
 
16-650, 16-651


2330
 
7-80–7-91


2331
 
7-150–7-155


2332
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2334
 
16-630–16-632, 16-637


2335
 
16-10, 16-177, 16-188


2336
 
16-97, 16-130


2341
 
7-110–7-117


2347
 
16-10


2350
 
2-145, 2-146, 2-148, 2-149, 2-165–2-169


2356
 
2-1


2357
 
8-2


2358
 
2-5


2359
 
2-95–2-98


2361
 
9-10–9-12, 9-14


2367
 
2-99, 15-2, 15-11, 15-12, 15-19, 15-25, 15-36, 15-38–15-40, 15-42, 15-45,
15-46, 15-50–15-54, 51-62, 16-271, 16-273, 16-530–16-532, 16-534, 16-536,
16-537, 15-539–16-550, 16-552, 16-565–16-567, 16-569, 16-589


2368
 
2-1


2369
 
2-96


2372
 
16-322, 19-150–19-154, 19-160–19-169, 19-175–19-183, 19-190–19-192,
19-194


2373
 
22-61


2374
 
16-545


2375
 
5-3–5-15


2377
 
16-176


2378
 
22-190–22-202


2379
 
7-154–7-156


2380
 
7-165–7-173


2383
 
14-45–14-51


2384
 
8-85, 8-86


2386
 
Repealed 7-28-09


2387
 
15-235–15-241


2388
 
5-1–5-5, 5-14, 5-17, 5-18, 5-25–5-30, 5-32–5-36, 5-40, 5-41,
5-50–5-53, 5-55–5-74, 5-80, 5-81, 5-85–5-87, 5-89, 5-92, 5-94,
5-96–5-98, 5-100, 5-101, 5-103, 5-105–5-107, 5-109, 5-117–5-120


2394
 
1-10


2397
 
8-1–8-3


2399
 
7-1–7-18


2401
 
7-141


2402
 
2-94, 2-96


2405
 
8-26, 8-27


2408
 
16-608


2410
 
7-25–7-42


2411
 
11-220–11-228


2412
 
11-154


2413
 
7-182, 7-190


2421
 
8-86


2426
 
18-1–18-13, 18-20, 18-21, 18-25–18-27, 18-35–18-39


2429
 
6-1–6-9


2431
 
19-200


2435
 
10-1–10-39


2437
 
8-2


2438
 
Repealed 1-8-19


2440
 
2-182, 2-183


2444
 
19-205–19-223, 19-230, 19-231


2445
 
2-95–2-99, 15-2, 15-11, 15-19, 15-25, 15-36, 15-38–15-40, 15-42, 15-45,
15-46, 15-50, 15-52–15-55, 15-62, 16-271, 16-273, 16-530–16-532, 16-534,
16-536, 16-537, 16-539–16-541, 16-544–16-550, 16-552, 16-565–16-569,
16-589


2446
 
2-55–2-59


2447
 
14-55–14-68


2448
 
8-36–8-42, 8-44–8-46, 8-48–8-53, 8-60, 8-65–8-78


2449
 
16-485–16-499


2451
 
22-61


2452
 
7-70–7-73, 7-125–7-143


2454
 
20-1–20-11


2456
 
11-1–11-26, 11-30–11-38, 11-45–11-47, 11-55–11-59


2459
 
22-215 - 22-229


2460
 
16-135


2463
 
16-147–16-149


2466
 
16-10, 16-147, 16-148, 16-330


2467
 
2-30–2-36, 2-45–2-49, 2-55–2-59, 2-65–2-70, 2-80–2-84, 2-115–2-119


2468
 
11-260–11-271


2469
 
13-15–13-50


2475
 
24-1–24-21


2476
 
24-3


2482
 
16-549


2483
 
8-52–8-54


2484
 
7-200–7-206, 7-210–7-214, 7-220–7-233


2485
 
8-43, 8-60


2487
 
8-44


2488
 
7-50–7-64


2489
 
1-10


2490
 
22-60


2491
 
14-70, 14-71, 14-75, 14-76


2492
 
24-43


2493
 
7-11, 7-39, 11-26, 11-153, 11-154, 11-228, 11-265, 11-271, 21-26


2494
 
19-1–19-4, 19-10–19-17, 19-25–19-32, 19-35–19-45, 19-50–19-65,
19-70–19-83, 19-90–19-93, 19-100–19-107, 19-115–19-118,
19-125–19-128, 19-135–19-143


2501
 
5-56


2502
 
22-100


2505
 
16-425–16-436


2508
 
16-545


2513
 
16-622, 16-638, 16-639, 16-651


2515
 
16-483


2517
 
13-23


2519
 
11-46


2520
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2521
 
7-91


2522
 
7-131


2529
 
16-106


2533
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2539
 
16-303, 16-323, 16-488, 16-492, 16-497


2543
 
11-271, 11-281–11-285


2553
 
2-30, 2-125–2-129


2554
 
15-12


2561
 
16-10, 16-136, 16-257


2565
 
16-122, 16-123


2569
 
Repealed 7-28-09


2571
 
8-55


2572
 
7-240–7-256


2576
 
22-61


2579
 
25-1–25-6, 25-10–25-17, 25-25–25-28, 25-35–25-40, 25-50–25-59,
25-65–25-70, 25-80–25-88


2580
 
16-221–16-246


2584
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2587
 
16-145–16-155


2588
 
1-47


2590
 
15-102, 15-173


2595
 
11-237


2596
 
Repealed 3-18-08


2598
 
17-10, 17-22, 17-23


2601
 
Repealed 1-8-19


2603
 
11-9


2609
 
7-145


2610
 
Repealed 11-27-07


2624
 
22-61


2625
 
16-545


2626
 
16-10, 16-136, 16-144, 16-149


2627
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2628
 
11-268


2629
 
11-9


2630
 
Repealed 12-20-16


2635
 
Repealed 1-8-19


2636
 
7-145


2637
 
16-475


2639
 
5-1–5-15


2640
 
18-1 - 18-13, 18-20, 18-21, 18-25 - 18-27, 18-35 -18-40


2642
 
16-636


2643
 
2-175 - 2-180


2644
 
16-221, 16-225


2649
 
17-52


2650
 
23-1, 23-2, 23-10 - 23-14, 23-25 - 23-28, 23-40 - 23-43, 23-55, 23-65, 23-66


2651
 
Repealed 12-20-16


2654
 
19-209


2657
 
2-30, 2-45 - 2-49


2658
 
7-130


2659
 
7-146


2660
 
11-185


2661
 
22-28, 22-30, 22-31, 22-36, 22-61, 22-70 - 22-75, 22-77, 22-78


2665
 
11-9


2666
 
Repealed 11-27-07


2671
 
16-10, 16-21, 16-22, 16-42, 16-57, 16-86, 16-87, 16-107, 16-135, 16-136,
16-147, 16-148, 16-256, 16-257, 16-440, 17-3, 17-10 - 17-14, 17-16, 17-25


2673
 
17-52


2680
 
16-221


2681
 
16-155


2683
 
15-96, 15-98 - 15-100


2687
 
16-595 - 16-597, 16-600, 16-602, 16-605, 16-608


2691
 
14-76


2692
 
Repealed 11-27-07


2693
 
8-41.1


2694
 
Adopting ordinance, 16-505


2695
 
16-317, 16-508, 16-622


2698
 
7-91


2701
 
13-90


2702
 
8-56


2704
 
7-147


2705
 
Repealed 12-20-16


2708
 
7-80–7-92


2710
 
15-227


2711
 
7-132


2713
 
16-10, 16-21, 16-622


2714
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2715
 
8-41.1


2716
 
17-1–17-5, 17-10–17-25, 17-30–17-41, 17-45–17-52, 17-55–17-61,
17-65–17-71


2717
 
13-91


2718
 
16-186.1, 16-188, 16-651


2723
 
8-56


2724
 
16-440


2726
 
Repealed 7-24-18


2727
 
16-10, 16-190, 16-226


2728
 
22-1, 22-175–22-184


2729
 
22-150–22-162


2730
 
8-41.1


2731
 
11-30, 11-47, 11-48


2734
 
7-148 - 7-148.13


2736
 
13-18, 13-20, 13-46, 13-47


2742
 
16-331


2746
 
Repealed 5-4-10


2747
 
7-110, 7-113


2750
 
Repealed 11-3-09


2757
 
7-141.1


2760
 
Repealed 12-20-16


2761
 
19-3, 19-4, 19-26, 19-39, 19-58, 19-71, 19-74, 19-76, 19-78, 19-80, 19-83,
19-93


2762
 
Not codified


2763
 
Not codified


2764
 
7-51, 7-53, 7-54, 7-57 - 7-61, 7-63, 7-64


2765
 
15-19


2766
 
Not codified


2767
 
7-144


2768
 
7-156 - 7-159


2769
 
Not codified


2770
 
16-515


2771
 
Not codified


2772
 
2-175.5


2773
 
7-147.1


2774
 
7-125


2775
 
11-300 - 11-309, 11-315 - 11-317, 11-325, 11-326, 11-335 - 11-340, 11-345 -
11-348, 11-355 - 11-358


2776
 
Not codified


2777
 
Not codified


2778
 
Not codified


2779
 
Not codified


2780
 
Repealed 1-8-19


2781
 
Not codified


2782
 
23-44, 23-55


2783
 
18-2, 18-14, 18-37.1, 18-37.2


2784
 
Not codified


2785
 
Not codified


2786
 
Not codified


2787
 
Not codified


2788
 
Not codified


2789
 
16-425–16-435


2790
 
Not codified


2791
 
Not codified


2792
 
Not codified


2793
 
Not codified


2794
 
Not codified


2795
 
Not codified


2796
 
Not codified


2797
 
Not codified


2798
 
Not codified


2799
 
Not codified


2800
 
Not codified


2801
 
Not codified


2802
 
Not codified


2803
 
Not codified


2804
 
2-176, 11-1, 11-261, 22-42


2805
 
10-23


2806
 
22-218, 22-226


2807
 
16-135


2808
 
Not codified


2809
 
Not codified


2810
 
22-136, 22-137, 22-142, 22-153, 22-154, 22-157, 22-179, 22-182


2811
 
11-140, 11-141, 11-143, 11-154, 11-157, 11-232 - 11-247


2813
 
7-260 - 7-262


2814
 
Not codified


2815
 
6-2


2816
 
17-15


2817
 
Not codified


2818
 
Not codified


2819
 
22-33, 22-40, 22-61, 22-74.1


2820
 
11-46, 11-49, 11-50


2821
 
Not codified


2822
 
22-240 - 22-247


2823
 
11-157, 11-232, 11-234, 11-235, 11-236, 11-238, 11-239, 11-242, 11-243,
11-244, 11-246, 11-248


2824
 
7-55, 7-61, 7-62


2825
 
7-149


2826
 
22-136, 22-142


2827
 
7-81, 7-82, 7-85 - 7-89, 7-91, 7-92, Repealed 7-93


2828
 
Not codified


2829
 
16-400–16-406, 16-520–16-520.6


2830
 
Not codified


2831
 
Not codified


2832
 
Not codified


2833
 
Not codified


2834
 
7-100–7-106


2835
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2836
 
14-1, 14-45–14-51, 14-55–14-68, 14-70, 14-71, 14-76, 14-76


2837
 
Not codified


2838
 
11-1–11-26, 11-30–11-38, 11-45–11-47, 11-56, 11-57, 11-59, 11-131,
11-200, 11-208, 11-220, 11-237, 11-251, 11-263, 11-283


2839
 
Not codified


2840
 
1-55–1-61


2841
 
Not Codified


2842
 
Not Codified


2843
 
Not Codified


2844
 
8-2


2845
 
Not Codified


2846
 
Not Codified


2847
 
16-10, 16-136, 16-163


2848
 
16-501–16-501.6, 16-502, 16-502.3–16-502.5, 16-503


2849
 
Not Codified


2850
 
11-170, 11-174, 11-185, 11-187


2851
 
11-140, 11-141, 11-143, 11-157, 11-232–11-236, 11-241, 11-242, 11-244,
11-246, 11-247


2852
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2853
 
2-55–2-59


2854
 
11-370–11-380


2855
 
Not codified


2856
 
Not codified


2857
 
Not codified


2858
 
Not codified


2859
 
22-61


2860
 
Not codified


2861
 
Not codified


2862
 
2-67


2863
 
2-80–2-84


2864
 
16-10, 16-21, 16-40, 16-42, 16-55, 16-56, 16-64, 16-70, 16-85, 16-86, 16-135,
16-136, 16-143, 16-149, 16-160, 16-162–16-164, 16-185, 16-188, 16-245,
16-257, 16-504


2865
 
Repealed 1-8-19


2866
 
Not codified


2867
 
Not codified


2868
 
17-15


2869
 
Not codified


2870
 
Not codified


2871
 
19-240–19-250


2872
 
Not codified


2873
 
16-257, 16-260–16-263


2874
 
8-57


2875
 
19-4, 19-71, 19-75, 19-80, 19-92, 19-93, 19-118


2876
 
22-215–22-231


2877
 
Not codified


2878
 
16-177


2879
 
Repealed 12-20-16


2880
 
Not codified


2881
 
Not codified


2882
 
Not codified


2883
 
Not codified


2884
 
Not codified


2885
 
Not codified


2886
 
2-30, 2-130–2-134


2887
 
Not codified


2888
 
7-270–7-275


2889
 
2-125, 2-126, 2-128


2890
 
16-10, 16-301


2891
 
Not codified


2892
 
14-80–14-86


2893
 
Not codified


2894
 
Not codified


2895
 
Not codified


2896
 
16-10, 16-42, 16-107, 16-148, 16-177, 16-178


2897
 
7-93


2898
 
7-280–7-283, 7-285


2899
 
Not codified


2901
 
Not codified


2903
 
Not codified


2904
 
Not codified


2905
 
Not codified


2906
 
7-300–7-303


2907
 
Not codified


2908
 
7-290–7-294


2909
 
14-90–14-95


2910
 
15-52–15-56, 15-60, 15-62, 15-67


2911
 
7-282


2912
 
16-410A–16-410V


2913
 
16-420A–16-420H


2914
 
16-10, 16-21


2915
 
14-2–14-6, 14-8–14-11, 14-13–14-17, 14-24–14-26


2916
 
6-1–6-9


2917
 
19-133, 19-134


2918
 
19-136, 19-184, 22-50


2919
 
7-160, 7-310–7-317


2920
 
Repealed 6-19-18


2921
 
22-60–22-66


2922
 
Not codified


2923
 
16-362


2924
 
16-41


2925
 
16-10, 16-465–16-469.5, 16-622


2926
 
16-501.2, 16-501.5


2927
 
16-420G


2928
 
16-10, 16-188, 16-256, 16-622


2929
 
16-10, 16-115, 16-124, 16-143, 16-149, 16-164, 16-178, 16-191, 16-226,
16-251, 16-258, 16-330


2930
 
2-183


2933
 
Not codified


2934
 
2-2–2-3.5, Ch. 2 Art. 1 Div. 1 Appendix A


2935
 
Not codified


2936
 
Not codified


2937
 
7-280–7-285, 11-390–11-403


2938
 
7-147.1


2939
 
23-44


2940
 
23-44


2941
 
8-2


2942
 
6-1–6-3, 6-5–6-9


2943
 
4-1–4-6, 4-10–4-20, 4-30–4-41, 4-50–4-61, 4-70–4-77, 4-80


2944
 
7-125


2945
 
14-102–14-107


2946
 
14-96–14-101


2947
 
14-110, 14-111


2948
 
2-220-2-232


2949
 
2-1, 2-1.1


2950
 
Not codified


2951
 
11-63–11-91


2952
 
8-47


2953
 
Not codified


2954
 
11-260–11-271


2955
 
7-270–7-275


2956
 
Not codified


 
 
 




 


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.



